NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FORBIDDEN FRUITS:
THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF SCIENCE, RELIGION, AND GROWTH
Roland Bénabou
Davide Ticchi
Andrea Vindigni
Working Paper 21105
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21105

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We are grateful for valuable discussions and suggestions to Alberto Alesina, Eric Chaney, Will Dobbie,
Massimo Firpo, Luigi Guiso, John Klopfer, Rachel Kranton, Gilat Levy, Marco Marini, Joel Mokyr,
Alireza Naghavi, Ronny Razin, Paul Romer, Julio Rotemberg, Mohamed Saleh, Moses Shayo, Ken
Scheve, Simone Scotti, Andrei Shleifer, Guido Tabellini and Joachim Voth; and for helpful comments
to seminar and conference participants at Bocconi University, CalTech, CIFAR, Columbia University,
EIEF (Rome), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Sciences Po., Stanford University, Chicago Booth, the University
of Zurich, the Workshop on Political Economy, Economic History, and Religion at WZB (Berlin),
the Berlekey-HAAS Conference on Political Economy, the NBER Political Economy Meeting, the
NBER Economic Growth and Fluctuations Meeting and the Wallis Conference on Political Economy
at Rochester University. Alessandro Belmonte, Carlo Dal Maso and Doron Ravid provided outstanding
research assistance. Bénabou gratefully acknowledges financial support from CIFAR, Ticchi from
the MIUR (PRIN 2009) and Vindigni from CRISIS LAB and Collegio Carlo Alberto, as well as hospitality
from MIT and EIEF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Roland Bénabou, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Forbidden Fruits: The Political Economy of Science, Religion, and Growth
Roland Bénabou, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni
NBER Working Paper No. 21105
April 2015
JEL No. E02,H11,H41,N0,O3,O43,P16,Z1,Z12
ABSTRACT
We analyze the joint dynamics of religious beliefs, scientific progress and coalitional politics along
both religious and economic lines. History offers many examples of the recurring tensions between
science and organized religion, but as part of the paper's motivating evidence we also uncover a new
fact: in both international and cross-state U.S. data, there is a significant and robust negative relationship
between religiosity and patents per capita. The political-economy model we develop has three main
features: (i) the recurrent arrival of scientific discoveries that generate productivity gains but sometimes
erode religious beliefs; (ii) a government, endogenously in power, that can allow such innovations
to spread or instead censor them; (iii) a religious organization or sector that may invest in adapting
the doctrine to new knowledge. Three long-term outcomes emerge. First, a "Secularization" or "Western-European"
regime with declining religiosity, unimpeded science, a passive Church and high levels of taxes and
transfers. Second, a "Theocratic" regime with knowledge stagnation, extreme religiosity with no modernization
effort, and high public spending on religious public goods. In-between is a third, "American" regime
that generally (not always) combines scientific progress and stable religiosity within a range where
religious institutions engage in doctrinal adaptation. It features low overall taxes, together with fiscal
advantages or societal laws benefiting religious citizens. Rising income inequality can, however, lead
some of the rich to form a successful Religious-Right alliance with the religious poor and start blocking
belief-eroding discoveries and ideas.

Roland Bénabou
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rbenabou@princeton.edu
Davide Ticchi
IMT Institute for Advanced Studies Lucca
Piazza San Ponziano, 6
55100 Lucca-Italy
davide.ticchi@imtlucca.it

Andrea Vindigni
IMT Institute for Advanced Studies Lucca
Piazza San Ponziano, 6
55100 Lucca-Italy
andrea.vindigni@imtlucca.it

1

Introduction
“For an economy to create the technical advances that enabled it to make the huge leap of modern

growth, it needed a culture of innovation, one in which new and sometimes radical ideas were respected
and encouraged, heterodoxy and contestability were valued, and novelty tested, compared, and di¤ used
if found to be superior by some criteria to what was there before.” (Mokyr, 2012, p. 39).
“To keep ourselves right in all things, we ought to hold fast to this principle: What I see as white I
will believe to be black if the hierarchical church thus determines it.” (Ignatius de Loyola, founder of

the Jesuit order –Spiritual Exercises (1522-1524), 13th Rule).
Throughout history there have been periodic clashes between scienti…c discoveries and
religious doctrines, and even today such con‡icts remain important in a number of countries.
In such cases the arbiter is often the state, which can allow the di¤usion of the new knowledge,
or on the contrary try to repress and contain it in order to protect religious beliefs. Its choice
depends in particular on whether its power base and class interests lie more with the secular
or religious segments of the population, and thus on the general level of religiosity as well as
the distribution of productive abilities among agents. There is therefore a two-way interaction
between the dynamics of scienti…c knowledge and those of religious beliefs, which evidence
suggests can lead to very di¤erent long-term outcomes across countries.
History and contemporary events o¤er many examples of the recurring tensions between
science and organized religion, and we discuss a number of them. As further motivating
evidence for the economic importance of the issue we also carry out a simple empirical exercise,
with rather striking results: across countries as well as across U.S. states, there is a clear
negative relationship between religiosity and innovation (patents per capita). This …nding is
quite robust, and in particular una¤ected by controlling for the standard variables used in the
literature to explain patenting and technological innovation.
The aim of this paper is to shed light on the workings of the science-religion-politics nexus,
as well as its growth and distributional implications. To this end, we develop a model with
three key features: (i) the recurrent arrival of scienti…c discoveries which, if widely di¤used and
implemented, generate productivity gains but sometimes also erode existing religious beliefs (a
signi…cant source of utility for some agents) by contradicting important aspects of the doctrine;
(ii) a government that can allow such ideas and innovations to spread, or spend resources to
censor them and impede their di¤usion. Through …scal policy or laws regulating conduct, it
also arbitrates between secular public goods and religious (belief-complementary) ones. (iii)
a religious organization (Church) or sector that can, at a cost, undertake an adaptation of
the doctrine –new interpretation, reformation, entry of new cults, etc.– that renders it more
compatible with the new knowledge, thereby also alleviating the need for ex-ante blocking by
the state.
1

The game then unfolds as follows. Each generation of agents, living for two periods, is
composed of (up to) four social classes, corresponding to the religious/secular and rich/poor
divides. At both stages of life they compete for power, which may involve forming strategic
(coalition-proof) alliances with others. The candidate or leader of the group that emerges
victorious from the political competition governs the state, implementing his preferred policy.
In the …rst period (youth), policy choice is over the control of knowledge, namely whether or
not to set up a repressive and propaganda apparatus that will block belief-eroding discoveries or
innovations emanating from the sciences. This decision is forward-looking, taking into account
the Church’s optimal repairing behavior as well as how an erosion of religious agents’beliefs
would a¤ect subsequent political outcomes. In the second period (old age), more short-run
policies are chosen: these may be …scal, such as the level of public spending and its allocation
between secular public goods (or transfers) and subsidies (or tax exemptions) for religious
activities, or purely social, such as the conformity of society’s laws to religious precepts and
proscriptions. After each generation dies, a new one inherits its predecessor’s …nal stocks of
scienti…c and (for non-secular agents) religious capital.
We characterize the outcome of these strategic interactions and the resulting dynamics
of scienti…c knowledge, TFP, and religious beliefs. We show in particular the emergence of
three basins of attraction: (i) a “Western-European” or “Secularization” regime, with unimpeded scienti…c progress, declining religiosity, a passive Church and high levels of taxes and
secular spending; (ii) a “Theocratic” regime with knowledge stagnation, persistently extreme
religiosity, a Church that makes no e¤ort to adapt since beliefs are protected by the state, and
also high taxes but now used to subsidize the religious sector; (iii) in-between these two, an
“American” regime that generally (not always) combines unimpeded scienti…c progress with
stable religiosity within an intermediate range, where the state does not block new knowledge
and religious institutions …nd it worthwhile to invest in doctrinal repair. This regime features
lower taxes than the other two, but with tax exemptions or societal laws bene…ting religious
activities.
We …nally examine how income inequality interacts, through coalition formation, with
the religious/secular divide, and how this in turn a¤ects equilibrium dynamics. We show in
particular how, in the “American” regime, a rise in income inequality can lead the religious
rich to form a Religious-Right alliance with the religious poor and start blocking belief-eroding
discoveries and ideas. Inequality can thus be harmful to knowledge and growth, by inducing
obscurantist, anti-science attitudes and polices.
As the above should make clear, our paper’s point is not that religion necessarily impedes
economic growth, or vice-versa. We focus on one key determinant of growth –science and
innovation–but religion also ties into many others: general literacy, thrift, social norms, civil
peace or strife, etc. Moreover, our model highlights how con‡icts between new scienti…c knowl2

edge and prevailing religious beliefs can lead not only to repression of the former or erosion of
the latter, but also to their coexistence through endogenous doctrinal adaptations.

1.1

Related Literature

Our paper relates to three lines of work. First, within the large literature on the political
economy of growth, the most closely related papers are those in which governments sometime
resist the adoption of productivity-enhancing technological innovations, due to pressure by
vested economic interests that would lose from them (Krusell and Ríos-Rull (1996), Parente and
Prescott (1999), Restuccia (2004), Bellettini and Ottaviano (2005), Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006) and Bridgman et al. (2007)). Through the “adaptation”work of the Church, the paper
also relates to those in which new technologies di¤use only slowly because they require costly
learning (e.g., Chari and Hopenhayn (1991), Caselli (1999)). Unlike previous models we focus
on fundamental science rather than speci…c technological devices, and on religious beliefs as a
coevolving form of (social) capital occasionally threatened by new discoveries. Such con‡icts,
moreover, can lead here to either blocking by the state or to doctrinal revisions by the Church.
Our study thereby relates to and draws on historical work on scienti…c-economic progress and
religion, such as Koyré (1957), Mokyr (1992, 1998, 2004), Landes (1998), Greif (2005), Chaney
(2008, 2011, 2013), Deming (2010) and Saleh (2012).
Second, our paper contributes to the literature on the persistence of power, policies and
institutions in a context of distributional con‡ict (e.g., Bénabou (1996, 2000), Acemoglu and
Robinson (2008), Persson and Tabellini (2009), Acemoglu et al. (2011)). We focus on a very
di¤erent source of persistence, however, namely the (endogenous) religiosity of the population.
In this respect, the paper also relates to work on the dynamics of political beliefs and culture
(e.g., North (1990), Greif (1994), Piketty (1995), Bisin and Verdier (2000), Alesina and Angeletos (2005), Bénabou and Tirole (2006), Tabellini (2008, 2010), Bénabou (2008), Saint-Paul
(2010), Gorodnichenko and Roland (2011), Aghion et al. (2011), Ticchi et al. (2013), Guiso et
al. (2013), Alesina and Giuliano (2013)).
Finally, the paper contributes to the literature on the economic determinants and consequences of religiosity pioneered by Weber (1905). Modern contributions include Barro and
McCleary (2003, 2005) and Guiso et al. (2003), both linking religious beliefs to grow-enhancing
attitudes, at the country and individual levels respectively; on the theoretical side, see also
Levy and Razin (2012, 2014). Cavalcanti et al. (2007), Glaeser and Sacerdote (2008), Becker
and Woessmann (2009), Kuran (2011) and Botticini and Eckstein (2012) examine the relationships between religion and human or physical capital accumulation. Swatos and Christiano
(1999) focus on the “secularization hypothesis”, while Roemer (1998), Scheve and Stasavage
(2006) and Huber and Stanig (2011) emphasize the interplay of religiosity and redistribution.

3

The paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 present motivating evidence, including
our empirical …ndings. Section 4 develops a basic model of religion, science and politics,
which is solved in Section 5 for equilibrium policies and the resulting coevolution of religiosity
and knowledge. Section 6 brings in the interplay of belief and income di¤erences, studying
how inequality shapes political coalitions and their science policies. Section 7 concludes with
directions for further work, including applications to other forms of ideology. Appendix A
makes the second-period policy issue the conformity of society’s laws to religious views. Main
proofs are gathered in Appendix B, additional ones in online Appendix C.

2

Historical and Contemporary Examples

This section discusses important instances, from the Middle Ages to modern times, of con‡icts
between religion and scienti…c discoveries, initially arbitrated (often in favor of dogma) by the
ruling powers, and sometimes later resolved through doctrinal revisions and adaptations.1

2.1

Science and Religion in the Muslim World

The Muslim expansion in the Middle East, North Africa and Southern Europe occurred during
the period 632-732 C.E. The resulting confrontation with the “rational sciences” such as philosophy, mathematics and astronomy cultivated in the newly conquered areas posed a di¢ cult
challenge for Muslim religious authorities. On the one hand, they viewed “foreign” or “rational” science as an “unnecessary addition to the Islamic and ‘Arab’science and a potential
danger to their faith” (Chaney (2008), p. 3). On the other hand, being discouraged by the
Koran and early teachings of Muhammad from implementing forceful conversions, they felt
compelled to engaged in “logical” debates with non-Muslims in the process of proselytizing
Islam.2 Scienti…c progress ‡ourished in this environment of religious and intellectual pluralism and confrontation, with major developments in algebra, trigonometry, the introduction of
Indian numerals and the essentials of decimal reckoning. Progress also occurred in chemistry
and medicine, as the use of the experimental method became widespread.3
The initial willingness of Muslim rulers to engage with logic and rational sciences rapidly
declined between the 11th and the 12th centuries, however, and was followed by centuries of
1

The persecution of scientists and philosophers who challenged prevailing religious views, for instance on
astronomy and cosmology, dates back much further. Thus, Anaxagoras (c. 500-428 B.C.), who gave the …rst
correct accounts of eclipses and hail, was tried and forced into exile (where he eventually committed suicide)
for claiming that the sun was a mass of …ery material, rather than a divine being. (Grant (2004), pp. 15-16).
2
According to Lewis (2003, p. 33-34), the degree of tolerance for non-Muslim populations at that time was
“without precedent or parallel in Christian Europe.”
3
Other important innovations include the double-acting action pump and many navigational instruments. In
addition, translations of Greek and Indian works in philosophy and science were …nanced by the Caliphs, who
also created libraries, observatories and other centers of learning, especially in Baghdad.

4

active opposition to the generation and di¤usion of new knowledge.4 “In the eleventh century
A.D., Hellenistic studies in the Islamic civilization were on the wane, and by the end of the
twelfth century A.D. they were essentially extinct.” (Deming (2010), p. 105). Greek science
and philosophy were excluded from the subjects taught in the madrasas, and “any private
institution that might teach the ‘foreign’ sciences was starved out of existence by the laws
governing waqfs [charitable endowments]”. Remarkably, this follows the very same path taken
by the Roman Church in the late 4th century: as Christianity became the o¢ cial and dominant
religion of the late Empire, the tolerant Greek scienti…c and philosophical traditions were
increasingly repressed, and reason made subservient to faith (Freeman (2005)).
The most striking and long-lasting case of knowledge blocking in the Muslim world is
undoubtedly that of the printing press. The high quality and relatively low price of Johannes
Gutenberg’s …rst printed Bible (1455) established the superiority of his movable-type technique,
and printing presses spread very rapidly across Europe.5 Little opposition initially came from
the Catholic Church (at that time still largely hegemonic as a spiritual authority), which
saw it printing as a useful device to standardize, reproduce and disseminate at low cost the
Holy Scriptures and religious manuals, as well as pro…t from the sale of letters of indulgence
(Childress (2008), ch. 6). Ironically, half a century later printing also proved to be a decisive
factor in the rapid di¤usion of the Protestant Reformation that radically undermined the
Church’s hegemony and power in much of Europe.6 Later on, printing also played a key role
in spreading the ideas that ‡ourished during the Scienti…c Revolution and the Enlightenment
(e.g., Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopedie of 1751) and which set the West on a widely
di¤erent path from the rest of the world.
In Muslim lands, by contrast, printing –especially in Arabic and Turkish– was strongly
opposed throughout the early-modern and modern periods. In 1515, Sultan Selim I issued
a decree under which the practice of printing would be punishable by death. Printing only
started in the Islamic World at the beginning of the 19th century, partly due to the need for
defensive modernization against the West.
4
According to Chaney (2008), as most people in the conquered lands eventually converted to Islam, science
and rational debate lost their religious-competition purpose, leaving no need for authorities to tolerate them.
McClellan III and Dorn (2006, p. 114) write that, “Islam began as a colonial power, and especially at the
edges of the Islamic imperium multicultural societies ‡ourished at the outset, mingling diverse cultures and
religions— Persian, Indian, Arab, African, Greek, Chinese, Jewish, and Christian. As time went on, conversions
increased, and Islam became religiously more rigid and culturally less heterogeneous.”
5
“By 1500, more than 1,000 printing shops had sprung up in Europe. Printers were turning out an average
of 500 books per week” (Vander Hook, 2010, p. 12). It is estimated that just during 1436-1500 approximately
15,000 di¤erent texts were printed in 20 million copies, and over the 16th century 150,000 to 200,000 di¤erent
books and book editions, totaling more than 200 million copies (Kertcher and Margalit, 2005).
6
Martin Luther, whose 95 Theses (1517) were widely reprinted and circulated, called printing “God’s highest
and most extreme gift, by which the business of the Gospel is driven forward” (Childress, 2008, ch. 6). The
use of ecclesiastical censure against printers, purchasers and readers of heretical books was …rst authorized by
Pope Sixtus IV in 1479, but its reach geographically limited due to Europe’s political fragmentation.

5

What accounts for the divergent paths of di¤usion of printing in Europe and the Muslim
world? In Catholic Europe, where various minor schisms and heretical movements had been
fairly easily suppressed, there was –overoptimistically– little fear that innovations such as
printed books could undermine religious unity. In contrast, as suggested by McClellan III and
Dorn (2006) and by Chaney (2008), starting in the 12th century Muslim authorities became
increasingly suspicious of innovations, perceiving them as potential threats to their relatively
recent success at converting the conquered populations. By this time Muslims were also already
split between Sunni, Shi’ite and Su… branches, whereas Catholics were still essentially united.
Printing was also less pro…table in the Ottoman Empire, due to lower wages and literacy rates
that reduced the demand for books.7
The persistence and legacy of the anti-printing, anti-scienti…c attitudes and policies that
took hold in the Muslim world eight centuries ago are still easily discernible today. The United
Nations’ 2002 Arab Human Development Report (see, e.g., Diner (2009), p. 19) thus found
that during the 1970’s, the total number of books translated into Arabic was about one-…fth
of the equivalent …gure for books translated into modern Greek. In the 1980’s, over a …ve-year
period, only 4.4 books per million inhabitants were translated in the Arab world, versus 519
for Hungary and 920 for Spain. Focusing on science, the Pakistani nuclear physicist Pervez
Hoodbhoy (2007) reports that the top 46 Muslim countries combined produced 1.17% of world
scienti…c literature, versus 1.48% for Spain; half of the 28 lowest producers of scienti…c articles
in 2008 were members of the Organization of Islamic States. At the major University in
Islamabad where he taught at the time, there were three mosques and a fourth one planned,
but no bookstore.8

2.2

The Discovery of Aristotle’s Natural Philosophy in 12th Century

Part of Aristotle’s (384-322 B.C.) works, namely two books of the Organon: Categories and
Interpretation, were …rst translated into Latin in the early 6th century and became widely read
in Europe. In particular, these works “had been regularly taught in the Church’s schools since
the time of Charles the Great [742-818]” (Deming, ch. 4, p. 135). When the other books of
the Organon (Prior Analytics, Posterior Analytics, Topics, Sophistical Refutations) were later
translated into Latin, they were also readily incorporated into the Church’s school curriculum
and become known as the New Logic.
7

Al-Khalili (2010, p. 235) also reports that potential misspelling in the printing of the Koran was regarded
as sacrilegious by the Muslim religious authorities, as was “compressing” the word of God.
8
More recently, The Economist (2013) reports that “The 57 countries in the Organization of the Islamic
Conference spend a puny 0.81% of GDP on research and development, about a third of the world average.
Investment in areas at the interface between pure and applied science is about 5% of GDP in developed countries,
versus a very meager 0.2% in the Arab world”. The article also points to recent prospects for a possible comeback
of science in certain (mostly oil-rich) parts of the Islamic world.

6

During the 12th century, Aristotle’s previously lost works in “natural philosophy” such
as Physics, On the Soul, On Generation and Corruption, Metaphysics, Meteorology, and On
the Heavens, were rediscovered and translated. Unlike the books on logic, which dealt with
abstract principles and rules of thought, these contained doctrines regarding the physical world,
human life and the universe, many of which seemed incompatible with crucial statements in
the Bible. For instance, in Meteorology it is written that “there will be no end to time and
the world is eternal,” a conclusion that follows out of logical necessity from Aristotle’s system
but directly contradicts the description of Creation in the book of Genesis. Similarly, in On
the Heavens, Aristotle declared that “the world must be unique.” In Aristotelian physics, this
follows from the principle that all natural motions of elements are directed toward the center
of the universe, corresponding with the center of the Earth. However, “limiting the possible
worlds to one was seen as heretical, because it implied that God was not omnipotent”(Deming
(2010), pp. 138-139). Aristotle’s writings also denied other fundamental pillars of the Christian
faith, such as the possibility of salvation and the immortality of the soul. He further claimed
that it was possible to know God on rational grounds only, whereas the Christian faith rested
upon the principle of divine revelation.
The di¤usion of these “heretical” writings was quickly opposed by the Church; in 1210
the Synod of Paris (the main center of learning of Aristotle’s philosophy at the time) issued a
declaration that “nor shall the books of Aristotle on natural philosophy, and the commentaries
[of Averroes] be read in Paris in public or secret; and this we enjoin under pain of excommunication,” (Deming (2010), p. 137). In 1277 the Bishop of Paris issued a list of 219 heretical
propositions, also backed by threat of excommunication. His in‡uence waned over time and his
decree was overturned in 1325, thanks to the work of Thomas Aquinas, whose Summa Theologica successfully merged Aristotelianism with the doctrine of the Church. Aquinas’ingenuous
intellectual construction represents a perfect example of theological “repair and adaptation”
following a belief-eroding discovery (or re-rediscovery), namely that of Aristotelian natural
philosophy.9 It allowed the Aristotelian corpus to be accepted and taught by the Church,
temporarily ending the con‡ict that had emerged between science and religion.10 The con‡ict
resurfaced three centuries later, however, when Copernicus’ (1473-1543) work upended the
whole Aquinian synthesis, which the Church had by then become heavily vested in.
9
Aquinas introduced a fundamental distinction between the domain of reason and the domain of faith. All
ultimate truths are elements of faith, but human reason can play an ancillary role. For instance, the doctrine
of Divine Revelation is not acceptable unless it is preceded by a demonstration of the existence of God, an
accomplishment of human reason.
10
According to Freeman (2005), Aquinas’work marks the end of the West’s “long sleep of reason”that begun
in the 4th century, when Christianity was established as the o¢ cial religion of the Roman Empire by Theodosius
I. His Edict of Thessalonica (380) was soon followed by persecutions of both pagan (Greek and Roman) religions
and “heretical” (non-Catholic) Christian sects.

7

2.3

Copernicus, Galilei, Newton and the Roman Inquisition

“The indivisible atoms could be imagined as moving in a continuum with knowable trajectories. In
the seventeenth century, in the worlds celestial and terrestrial, everything seemed up for grabs; none
of the old certainties about the land masses of our planet, or about the way space and bodies should be
described, could be taken as given.” (Jacob and Stewart, 2004, pp. 2-3).
“We consider this proposition [that a line is composed of indivisible, in…nitesimal points] to be
not only repugnant to the common doctrine of Aristotle, but that it is by itself improbable, and... is
disapproved and forbidden in our Society” (Revisors General of the Collegio Romano, 1632).11

Nicolaus Copernicus’On the Revolution of Celestial Spheres (1543) was important not only
in its own sake, but also because it provided one of the pillars for the forthcoming Scienti…c
Revolution of the 17th century. While Copernicus (prudently) presented his heliocentric model
of the universe as a pure mathematical hypothesis, for which he “could provide no empirical support”, it stood in sharp contrast with the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmological model
endorsed by the Church as a cornerstone of its own world view. Due to its mathematical simplicity and power, Copernicanism quickly attracted the attention of many astronomers, among
them Galileo Galilei (1564-1642).
In 1632 Galilei published the Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems, which “made the
clearest, fullest and most persuasive yet of arguments in favor of Copernicanism and against
traditional Aristotelian-Ptolemaic astronomy and natural philosophy,”(McClellan III and Dorn
(2006), p. 230). On April 12, 1633, he was forced to stand trial before the Holy Inquisition
in Rome, which found him guilty of “vehemently suspected heresy,” forced him to “abjure,
curse and detest” his opinions and placed all his works, past and future, in the Index of Prohibited Books. The trials of Galileo and other “heretical” scientists like the mathematician
and astronomer Giordano Bruno, burnt at the stake in 1600, and the Church’s lasting prohibitions of fundamental concepts such as atomism and in…nitesimals (Alexander, 2014), had
wide-ranging consequences. While scienti…c inquiry did not entirely die in 1633, the Inquisition and –more generally, the Counter-Reformation– was an important cause of the waning
of innovation in Italy and the displacement of the center of the Scienti…c Revolution toward
Central and Northern Europe –Holland, France and, most importantly, England (Trevor-Roper
(1967), Gusdorf (1969), Landes (1998), Young (2009)). For Spain, in particular, Vidal-Robert
(2011) provides region- and municipality-level evidence consistent with this argument (and our
model), showing that the Inquisition had signi…cant and long-lasting negative e¤ects on local
economic development, through the delayed adoption of new technologies.12
11

Cited by Alexander (2014). The Collegio Romano was the Jesuits’supreme teaching and doctrinal body.
Inquisition tribunals persisted in Spain until 1834 (in Portugal, until 1821) The last execution took place
in 1826, in Valenzia; it was that of a school teacher, Cayetano Ripoll, hanged for teaching Deism in his classes.
12

8

In England, by contrast, The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge
accepted Galileo’s work with enthusiasm, not long after his condemnation by the Inquisition
(Boas Hall, 1982). As Goldstone (2000, p. 184) writes, “Only in Protestant Europe was the
entire corpus of classical thinking called into question; Catholic regions under the CounterReformations preferred to hold to the mix of Aristotelian and Christian cosmologies received
from Augustine, Ptolemy, and Aquinas. And only in England, for at least a generation ahead
of any other nation in Europe, did a Newtonian culture –featuring a mechanistic world-view,
belief in fundamental, discoverable laws of nature, and the ability of man to reshape his world
by using those laws–take hold. The spread of such set of beliefs to a wide variety of engineers,
merchants, ministers, and craftsmen reshaped the entire nation’s approach to knowledge and
technology.”
Newton’s Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy …rst appeared in 1687. By demonstrating that the same universal laws of gravitation could explain the elliptical motion of
the celestial bodies and those of falling bodies on the earth, it again completely subverted
the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology. Newton’s theories were nonetheless quickly adopted in
Britain, and the Church of England eventually accepted his scienti…c world-view as compatible
with the “spirit” of the Biblical account of the origin and workings of the universe. In 1727
Newton was given a state funeral and buried at Westminster Abbey among great statesmen
and poets. Newton’s work was also very well received in most areas of Europe outside the
reach of the Inquisition (Jacob and Stewart (2004), pp. 14-15).
There are two complementary explanations why the new scienti…c ideas encountered much
less opposition in England than in countries such as Italy and Spain. First, England already
experienced signi…cant economic growth during the 16th century, due to the expansion of trade
and industry, while these other countries stagnated under the Inquisition. The opportunity
costs (foregone income) as well as the direct costs (censorship, repression, etc.) of limiting the
circulation of new productivity-enhancing ideas are naturally higher in a more dynamic and
mobile economy; this will also be a key feature of our model.13 Second, as argued by Merton
(1938), Protestant values encouraged scienti…c inquiry by allowing scientists to identify and
celebrate the in‡uence of God on the world.14 The use of Newtonian laws of mechanics and
other scienti…c principles in many craftwork industries, which until then had relied on ruleof-thumb formulas and trial-and-error methods, allowed England to become the world’s …rst
industrialized nation (Jacob and Stewart (2004), p. 15).
13

On the role of the Atlantic trade in shaping the institutions of European powers, see Acemoglu et al. (2005).
Merton (1938, p. 495) thus writes: “The formal organization of values constituted by Puritanism led to the
largely unwitting furtherance of modern science. The Puritan complex of a scarcely disguished utilitarianism;
of intramundane interests; methodical, unremitting action; thoroughgoing empiricism; of the right and even the
duty of libre examen; of anti-traditionalism –all this was congenial to the same values in science.”
14

9

2.4

Creationism, Stem Cell Research and the Politics of Science in the U.S.

“All that stu¤ I was taught about evolution and embryology and the big bang theory, all that is lies
straight from the pit of Hell... It’s lies to try to keep me and all the folks who were taught that from
understanding that they need a savior... You see, there are a lot of scienti…c data that I’ve found out as
a scientist that actually show that this is really a young Earth. I don’t believe that the earth’s but about
9,000 years old. I believe it was created in six days as we know them. That’s what the Bible says.”
Rep. Paul Broun (R-Ga.), als o an M.D., June 2012.15

Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species (1859) initially met some opposition, but within
a few decades became widely accepted by the scienti…c community and in many Western
countries, especially more secularized ones where a literal reading of Genesis had already
been undermined by developments in geology and natural sciences. In more religious parts
of the world, human evolution was and remains highly controversial, and a minority view. A
recent survey (Hameed (2008)) found that fewer than 20% of adults in Indonesia, Malaysia
and Pakistan believed Darwin’s theory to be “true or possibly true”, and only 8% in Egypt.
In Europe, the Vatican kept silent on the issue for nearly a century, until Pope Pius XII’s 1950
encyclical Humani Generis. While still not accepting evolution as an established fact, it allowed
important doctrinal adaptation (in our model, “repair”) by introducing a distinction between
the possibly material origins of the human body and the necessarily divine and immediate
imparting of the soul.16
The United States is a striking case of a rich and technologically highly advanced country in
which signi…cant opposition to evolution still persists, and interacts importantly with politics.
Less than 90 years ago, Tennessee’s Butler Act (1925) prohibited the teaching in schools of
any theory of the origins of humans contradicting the teachings of the Bible, and John Scopes
was tried and convicted for violating it. The law remained on the books until 1967. As noted
by Ruse (2006, p. 249) “A 2001 Gallup poll reported that 45% of Americans thought that
God created humans as they are now, 37% let some kind of guided evolution do the job, and
12% put us down to unguided natural forces... A 2001 National Science Foundation survey
on science literacy similarly found that 47% of Americans think that humans were created
instantaneously, and 52% believe that humans and dinosaurs coexisted.”A well organized and
well-funded movement has successfully pushed for the teaching and dissemination of “creation
science”, and today creationism is taught in 15 to 20% of American schools.17
15

Representative Broun is a member of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology.
“The Teaching Authority of the Church does not forbid that... research and discussions, on the part of men
experienced in both [human sciences and sacred theology], take place with regard to the doctrine of evolution,
in as far as it inquires into the origin of the human body as coming from pre-existent and living matter –for the
Catholic faith [only] obliges us to hold that souls are immediately created by God.”
17
The 2006 General Social Survey included a 13-item test of basic scienti…c knowledge and reasoning. Con16

10

Does this matter in practice? Indeed it does, through the political process –the coalitions it
gives rise to and their consequences for science policy, innovation and informed decision-making.
Over the last few decades, a powerful coalition of religious conservatives and antigovernment
activists –the “Religious Right” – has arisen and exerted considerable power in American
politics, both at the local and at the national levels, imposing constraints on education and
research in certain areas of the life sciences, biotechnology and climatology. Its in‡uence can
be seen, for instance, in the science policies of President George W. Bush, whose election
and reelection relied in great part on this constituency. Almost immediately after coming to
o¢ ce, President Bush severely restricted federal funding for research on embryonic stem cells,
invoking in explicitly religious terms the sacrality and inviolability of all human life. During
his second term, in July 2006, he used his …rst Presidential veto on the Stem Cell Research
Enhancement Act. Only after eight years –a long time given the pace of modern research–
were most of these restrictions lifted, as President Barack Obama came to power.
It is worth noting that the rise of the Religious Right coalition between religious conservatives and small-government, anti-tax interests groups (starting with President Reagan but
really culminating with the 2000 election of President Bush) coincided with a sharp and lasting
rise in US income inequality, especially since the 90’s. Explaining this “coincidence”is another
motivation of our paper. The model will indeed show that greater inequality can cause some of
the richer classes, whose productive interests normally lead them to favor technical progress,
to form a science-unfriendly alliance with the religious poor in order to prevent a secular-left
coalition from gaining power and implementing substantial redistribution.18
Religion-politics-science dynamics are perhaps most powerful at the local level. Eight states
(Arkansas, Iowa, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota and Virginia)
still ban or limit human stem-cell research; all but Michigan are so-called “red states,” voting
reliably for conservative Republicans. In 2011 Kentucky allocated over $40 million in tax
incentives for an expansion of the Creation Museum, which will add a theme park designed to
demonstrate the literal truth of the story of Noah’s ark. Following evolution and biotechnology,
the latest front in the push-back against science by religious-conservative alliances is climate
change. In 2012, for instance, North Carolina passed a law banning its state agencies from
basing coastal policies on the latest scienti…c predictions concerning the rise in sea level. The
next section will show that such policies, or more precisely the high levels of religiosity that
bring them about, are systematically associated with lower innovation.
trolling for all standard sociodemographic variables, Sherkat (2011) found greater religiosity to be signi…cantly
associated with lower scienti…c literacy.
18
On the rise and in‡uence on American politic of the alliance between religious-fundamentalist and antigovernment forces, see Mooney (2005) Phillips (2006), Gelman (2008) and Wuthnow (2012).

11

3

Innovation and Religiosity Across Countries and States

3.1

Cross-Country Patterns

We use international data to analyze the relationship between religiosity and innovativeness,
both in raw form and controlling for the standard determinants of technological innovation
used in the literature. To our knowledge, these are entirely new analyses and …ndings.
We use two main measures of religiosity, corresponding respectively to the answers to the
World Values Survey (WVS) questions: (i) “Independently of whether you go to church or not,
would you say you are: a religious person, not a religious person, a convinced atheist, don’t
know”, and: (ii) “Do you believe in God? –Yes, No, Don’t Know”. These variables are scaled
to [0,1], corresponding to the shares of people who consider themselves religious, or believe in
God; their sample correlation is 0.8.19
To measure innovation, we use (log-) patents per capita. The patent counts, taken from the
World Intellectual Policy Organization (WIPO), are total patent applications …led in a country
by its residents. They are measured in the same years as the religion data, corresponding to
all …ve available waves of the WVS (1980, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005), and so are the control
variables described further below.20

Figure 1a

Figure 1b

Figures 1a and 1b display the basic scatterplot between national measures of religiosity and
innovation: a strong negative relationship is clearly apparent in both cases. Columns 1 and 2
of Table 1 report the regression estimates of these relationships.
19

Using as alternative measures the WVS questions “Importance of religion in your life”, “Importance of God
in your life” and “Church attendance” leads to essentially identical results.
20
For some countries, the WVS religion data for 1980, 1990 and 2000 are integrated with the European Values
Survey data.

12

Figure 2a

Figure 2b

We next include as controls a religious-freedom index (Norris and Inglehart (2011)) as well
as the main variables typically used in empirical work on innovation: (i) the level of economic
development, measured by (log) GDP per capita, from the World Development Indicators
(WDI); (ii) log-population (also from the WDI), to take into account possible scale e¤ects in
the process of innovation; (iii) the protection of intellectual property, as measured by Park’s
(2008) index of patent rights; (iv) years of tertiary schooling, from Barro and Lee (2013);
(v) the net in‡ow of foreign direct investment as a percentage of GDP, taken from the WDI.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 report the regressions and Figures 2a-2b visually display the main
results, by plotting the residuals of innovation versus religiosity from regressions of each one
on all the control variables. The strong negative relationship found in the raw data is clearly
con…rmed.21
Columns 5-6 add in year …xed e¤ects and Columns 7-8 dummy variables for a country’s
predominant religion, namely that (if any) professed by more than half of the religious population. A number of further robustness checks also leave the key …ndings unchanged, such
as: (i) using alternative measures of religiosity from the WVS, namely the country averages
of Importance of Religion, Importance of God, and Church Attendance; (ii) controlling for
the population shares of major religions, rather than which one is dominant; (iii) using total
patents per capita, namely those …led in a country by both residents and foreigners.22 In all
cases, religiosity is signi…cantly and negatively associated with innovation per capita.
21
The control variables have the expected sign and most of them are generally signi…cant. GDP per capita,
tertiary education and intellectual property protection are all negatively correlated with religiosity, explaining
why its coe¢ cient falls (though remaining highly signi…cant) when they are included. These e¤ects can also be
seen as intervening mechanisms fully consistent with our model: high religiosity and the associated restrictions
on free inquiry and knowledge ‡ows discourage investment in both human and physical inputs into innovation.
22
These additional results are not reported here due to space constraints but are available upon request.

13

3.2

The United States

We now carry out a similar investigation across U.S. states. This is instructive for several
reasons. First, it keeps constant a host of political, historical and institutional factors that
vary signi…cantly across countries. Second, the United States is a scienti…c leader in many
domains, but also the advanced country with a recurrent history of clashes between politicized
religious interests and science. We mentioned earlier several important cases of “blocking”
a¤ecting scienti…c education, research and public policy at the national and, especially, local
levels. It is therefore important to understand whether and how religiosity and innovation
covary across the major political decision units within the country, namely the States. Finally,
like the cross-country patterns identi…ed above, this question and the …ndings it leads to are
novel to both the innovation and religion literatures.

14

Figure 3a

Figure 3b

The measures of religiosity are constructed from the 2008 Religious Landscape Survey, conducted by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life.23 The questions asked were: (i) “How
important is religion in your life –very important, somewhat important, not too important,
or not at all important?”; (ii) “Do you believe in God or a universal spirit –yes, no, other,
don’t know/refused?” Our …rst index, which we call Importance of Religion, is the share of
individuals who answered “very important” to question (i). Our second measure, Belief in
God, is the share who answered “Yes” to question (ii). The correlation between them is 0.82.
Innovation is again measured by (log) patents per capita, de…ned as the ratio between the total
number of patents submitted by State residents to the U.S. Patent and Trademark O¢ ce and
the State’s population, both taken in 2007.

Figure 4a

Figure 4b

23

A representative sample of 35,556 adults living in the continental states was surveyed in the summer of
2007, and supplemental samples of 200 adults living in Alaska and 201 living in Hawaii in the spring of 2008.

15

A strong negative relationship between religiosity and innovation is again evident on Figures
3a-3b, as well as from the estimates reported in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2.
As in the cross-country analysis, we next control for: (i) the (log) Gross State Product per
capita; (ii) the (log) population of the State; (iii) the level of tertiary education, measured here
by the share of population over 25 with at least a Bachelor’s degree; (iv) FDI in‡ows as a share
of GSP. All variables refer to 2007 and are taken from the Indiana Business Research Center,
except for population (from the Census Bureau) and FDI (from the BEA). The regressions
results are reported in Columns 3 to 6 of Table 2, with the main …ndings illustrated in Figures
4a-4b by scatterplots of the components of innovation and religiosity that are orthogonal to all
four control variables. In both cases, the strong negative relationship displayed in the raw data
is con…rmed. Innovation, unconditional or conditional, is especially low in the “Bible Belt”
states, but the negative association holds throughout the sample.
Naturally, neither the cross-country nor the cross-state regressions allow de…nite causal
inferences to be drawn. The controls used eliminate some …rst-order sources of potential
misspeci…cation, but only instrumental variables or natural experiments would allow for proper
identi…cation. While this may be a route worth pursuing in future work, the purpose of the
empirical exercises carried out here is di¤erent: to bring to light a striking “new” fact that
makes even clearer the need for a formal analysis of the coevolution of science and religiosity.
In the framework we develop, causality actually goes both ways, leading societies to di¤erent
long-term regimes (depending on initial conditions and historical accidents), which is consistent
with the stable cross-sectional patterns found in the data.

16

4

The Model

4.1

Agents

Preferences and endowments. We consider an economy in discrete time, populated by nonoverlapping generations of agents living for two periods: youth (t even) and old age (t + 1
odd). There is no population growth. Each generation is formed by a continuum of riskneutral individuals i 2 [0; 1] with preferences
Uti = Et [cit + cit+1 +

i

bt+1 Gt+1 ];

(1)

where (cit ; cit+1 ) denote agent i’s post-tax-and-transfer consumption levels while

i

bt+1 Gt+1

is the utility which he derives (in old age only, for simplicity) from organized religion, as
follows. A fraction 1
i

r of agents are non-religious or “secular”and thus have

i

= 0; whereas

= 1 for “religious” individuals, who are in the majority: r > 1=2: While the distribution of

types is …xed, the intensity of religious agents’beliefs during their lifetimes, (bt ; bt+1 ); will be
endogenous. In old age, beliefs are complementary with a “religious public good”Gt+1 such as
sanctuaries (churches, temples, mosques) and priests who perform rituals, o¤er spiritual help,
etc. The uncertainty at date t concerns next period’s levels of TFP and religiosity, which will
depend on the occurrence, nature and implementation of scienti…c discoveries.
For both simplicity and realism, we shall model faith not as a probability distribution over
some state of the (after)world that is updated in a Bayesian manner, but as a durable stock
of “religious capital”bt that may be eroded by certain shocks –especially, scienti…c news–and
augmented by others, as detailed in the next subsection.24
For the moment we take agents to di¤er only in their attitudes or propensities toward
religion,

i

= 0; 1: Thus all have the same income, normalized to the economy’s total fac-

tor productivity, denoted (at ; at+1 ) in each period of their life. All real magnitudes such as
cit ; cit+1 ; Gt+1 ; etc., will be measured in units of contemporary TFP.
Taxes and public expenditures. Given a linear income tax rate ; government revenues (per
unit of TFP) are equal to R( ); with the following properties:
Assumption 1 R ( ) is C 3 and strictly concave, with R(0) = 0, R0 (0) = 1 and R0 (^) = 0;
where ^ < 1 is the revenue-maximizing tax rate. Furthermore R000 ( )

0 for all

2 [0; ^]:

Religious agents are the most numerous and thus always control the state (whether through
the sword or the ballot box), choosing the tax rates ( t ;
24

t+1 )

levied on agents’incomes as well

For explicit models of religious beliefs as subjective probability distributions responding (or not) to new
information, see Bénabou and Tirole (2006, 2011) and Levy and Razin (2012, 2014).

17

as how to allocate spending.25 In the second period of life, agents potentially value two types
of public expenditures. The …rst one is the religious public good Gt+1 ; which can be provided
either directly (state religion) or through tax exemptions, subsidies and other advantages
conceded to the religious sector to help sustain its activities. For expositional clarity we shall
treat Gt+1 as directly …nanced from government revenues, but other channels of subsidization
are equivalent. It may even be, as we show in Appendix A, that the policy issue is not a …scal
one but the conformity of society’s laws to religious precepts: mandatory prayers and rituals,
restrictions on working on a certain day of the week or on women’s activities, on contraception,
prohibited types of behaviors and consumptions, etc.26 By contrast, the second type of public
good, denoted Tt+1 ; is valued equally by those with

i

i

= 1 and

= 0: These are standard

public goods and services such as infrastructure, safety, basic education, etc. Alternatively,
Tt+1 may correspond to lump-sum transfers, and we shall also refer to it as such in anticipation
of Section 6, where it will be demanded by the poor but not by the rich, thus introducing a
second dimension of political con‡ict. A unit of Tt+1 is worth

> 1 units of numeraire-good

consumption to old agents, so that the net consumption levels of generation t are
cit = 1

t

and cit+1 = 1

t+1

+ Tt+1 :

During youth (period t) there is no public-goods consumption. Instead, the state’s only decision,

t

2 f0; 1g; is whether or not to invest resources in a control and repression appa-

ratus designed to block the di¤usion of any new ideas deemed sacrilegious or dangerous to
the faith. The technology and incentives for blocking are described below; denoting by 't
the direct resource cost required to set up a repressive apparatus, we can already write the
(TFP-normalized) government’s budget constraints as
t 't

4.2

R ( t)

and Tt+1 + Gt+1

R(

t+1 ) :

(2)

Discoveries, Productivity Growth, and Blocking

Innovations. Scienti…c discoveries occur, with some exogenous Poisson arrival rate ; during
the …rst subperiod in the life-cycle of each generation.27 If allowed to di¤use widely they will
25
This will no longer be the case when there are also income di¤erences between agents. Note also that the
political system need not be democratic: group sizes are to be understood as power-weighted, and outcomes may
be determined through violent con‡ict (e.g., the larger military force wins) rather than voting.
26
All that mattersRis that secular and religious agents have divergent preferences over Gt+1 : Religious behaviors
(e.g., Gt+1 or Gt+1 bit+1 di) could even generate positive spillovers for everyone, as long as there are net losers
and gainers. On intergroup con‡ict over the mix of public goods see Alesina et al. (1999), Luttmer (2001) and
Alesina and La Ferrara (2005); on religious restrictions to individual choices, see Esteban et al. (2014).
27
It would be easy to endogenize . The risk of having their discoveries blocked would then reduce scientists’
and innovators’incentives for research, reinforcing the adverse impact of blocking on knowledge and TFP growth.

18

produce, at the start of the second subperiod, advances in practical knowledge and technology
that raise TFP from at to at+1 = (1+ )at : Besides shifting out the production possibility
frontier, scienti…c advances can also have major e¤ects on religious beliefs, as discussed earlier.
In particular, new scienti…c …ndings that contradict the professed doctrine and sacred texts’
statements about the natural world (from the origins of the universe or mankind to the determinants of moral behavior or the cognitive abilities of women) tend to shake and weaken the
faith of religious agents. Not all discoveries have such e¤ects, of course, and we accordingly
distinguish between two main types:
- A fraction pN of them are belief-neutral (BN ), meaning that they have no impact on b:
- A fraction pR = 1

pN are belief-eroding (BR): if they di¤use widely in the population,

they reduce the stock of religious capital from bt to bt+1 = (1

)bt :

While religiosity occasionally bene…ts from certain technological innovations (e.g., televised
evangelism, videotapes), one is hard-pressed to think of cases where a discovery in basic science
had such an e¤ect. Increases in religiosity generally arise instead from very di¤erent sources:
immigration, colonization and, especially, major disasters: Great Plague, earthquakes, ‡oods,
famines, wars, etc.28 We shall therefore introduce belief-enhancing shocks only later on, as
events raising b that may occur between rather than within generations, independently of
scienti…c discoveries and political developments.29 For the moment, we abstract from them.
Blocking. If allowed to disseminate, a BR discovery will reduce the utility bt+1 Gt+1 of
religious agents, through both its direct erosion of their faith and the ensuing reduction in
Gt+1 : If this loss more than o¤sets the gains to be reaped from higher TFP, the government,
representing here the religious majority, may want to block –censor, deny, restrict access to,
etc.– the new knowledge. We assume that blocking can be targeted at BR innovations and
that it is then fully e¤ective, so that the beliefs of religious citizens (and of the government
representing them) remain unchanged, as does TFP: at+1 = at and bt+1 = bt :30
Censoring “dangerous ideas” emanating from scienti…c inquiry and methodology involves
two types of costs. First are the foregone TFP gains that could be reaped from applications of
that knowledge. Second is the direct cost required to set up, in advance, a repressive apparatus
28

Chaney (2013) documents how, in ancient Egypt, exceptionally low or high Nile ‡oods led to an increased
demand for religious goods and services provided by the priesthood, with a concomitant strengthening of their
political power. In a study covering 900 subnational districts across the world, Sinding Bentzen (2014) shows that
religiosity increases signi…cantly with the frequency, proximity, and recency of earthquakes and other natural
disasters –both in cross-section and in event studies with district …xed e¤ects.
29
This also serves to rule out the case of a secular government blocking religiosity-enhancing ideas. While
this clearly occurred under Communism (and could be incorporated), it lies outside our main focus.
30
This also means that innovations that are blocked at date t are lost forever, unless independently rediscovered
or reinvented at some future date. In practice there will be some “leakage”, so that blocking only slows down
di¤usion –but possibly for a long time, as with the Inquisition, the printing press and stem cell research.

19

that will stand ready to quash such ideas, or more generally impede their di¤usion. Examples include functionaries devoted to monitoring and repressing “heretical” or “blasphemous”
notions and their proponents (Inquisition, religious police); enforcing the censorship of school
lessons and textbooks, if not banning printing outright; and subsidizing an o¢ cial or parallel
doctrine-friendly “science” (creationism, climate change denial, etc.).31
Since resources must be committed before knowing what type of discovery (if any) will
occur, setting up or maintaining a repressive apparatus is a form of investment under uncertainty, paying o¤ (for religious agents) with probability pR : The normalized resource cost 't
required is assumed to depend only on society’s current level of knowledge and TFP, at :
't = ' (at ) ;
where ' : R+ ! R+ is a smooth and strictly increasing function with '

(3)
lima!+1 '(a) <

R(^): The fact that a'(a) rises more than proportionately with a captures the idea that
new knowledge is, on net, more di¢ cult to contain, repress or counteract in a society that
is intellectually and technologically more sophisticated. For instance, the dissemination of
information becomes faster and less controllable with the availability of media such as the
printing press, radio, TV, fax, the internet, etc. The upper bound on ' ensures that repression
nonetheless remains a feasible strategy for the government at any level of a:
In contrast to the role of the stock of knowledge a, 't is independent of the stock of
religious capital, b: Indeed the costs (per unit of GDP) of impeding the ‡ow of free information
–censoring, threatening scientists, controlling the press, etc.– seem fairly independent of the
content of that information and of the strength of the beliefs it might impact.32

4.3

The Church or Religious Sector

In addition to regular citizens and the government, there is also a small (zero-measure) set
of agents, drawn from among the religious, who produce no income in either period but may
engage in another type of work. Whenever a BR scienti…c discovery occurs and is allowed to
di¤use through society, this player, referred to as the Church or religious sector, can attempt to
“repair”the damage done to the faith by the new knowledge that invalidates or con‡icts with
its doctrine. This may occur through internal reform, such as working out and proclaiming a
31
We assume that the repressive apparatus (or the privately operated but state-subsidized informationgarbling, pseudo-science sector) insulates not only religious citizens, but also the government in o¢ ce, from
learning or properly assimilating BR discoveries. There is thus never any divergence of interest between the
religious majority and the government representing them.
32
More generally, the assumption serves as a neutral benchmark in which two o¤setting e¤ects cancel out: (i)
more “explosive” and belief-damaging information may be harder to block per se; (ii) more intensely religious
citizens and functionaries may be more willing to believe and cooperate with politico-religious authorities.

20

reinterpretation of the sacred texts more compatible with scienti…c facts. It could also take
the form of a major schism or con‡ictual Reformation, or even the creation of new sects and
religions by competing faith entrepreneurs. For simplicity we shall treat organized religion as
a single actor, with preferences given by
Et [bt+1 Gt+1

t

bt ] :

(4)

The Church thus cares primarily about the strength of beliefs bt+1 in the religious population
and the provision of complementary goods and services, Gt+1 ; which together generate bene…ts
bt+1 Gt+1 for the faithful.33 The second term in (4) re‡ects the e¤ort costs involved if, following
the di¤usion of a BR innovation, it undertakes the work required to prevent religious capital
from eroding. This decision is denoted by
attempting repair is bt ; where

t

2 f0; 1g ; and the cost (per unit of TFP) of

is a constant parameter and bt re‡ects the fact that a larger

stock of religious capital (e.g., more devout beliefs) is more expensive to adapt and reform.34
Consistent with the empirical results of Section 3.1, a key determinant of

is religious freedom,

namely the ease with which heterodox interpretations, new sects or cults are allowed to develop,
and people allowed to switch a¢ liation. A strictly enforced state religion thus corresponds to
high ; a vibrantly competitive religious sector to a low one.35
Repairing can only be attempted after the new discovery di¤uses, as the revision in the
doctrine must be appropriately tailored to it. It succeeds with probability q 2 [0; 1]; in which
case the damage done by the innovation to the beliefs of the faithful is completely undone (for
simplicity), so that bt+1 = bt : If repairing fails, on the other hand, religious capital is eroded
as much as if there had been no attempt to preserve it: bt+1 = (1

)bt : The expectation in

(4) re‡ects the uncertain e¤ectiveness of theological repair work.

4.4

Timeline

The timing of events and moves in each generation is illustrated in Figure 5:
First period (t even):
1. The (religious) majority decides whether or not to invest in the capacity to block possible
BR innovations:
at the level

t

t

2 f0; 1g; with corresponding cost

such that R( t ) =

t '(at );

requiring taxes to be set

t '(at ):

33
For our purposes, it does not matter whether the Church altruistically internalizes the spiritual welfare of
its brethren or sel…shly appropriates rents from it, e.g. by being the main conduit for the delivery of Gt+1 :
34
The cost is borne only by the Church in the form of costly e¤ort (by priests, monks, etc.). Thus, unlike the
cost of blocking, it does not enter into the government’s budget constraint.
35
Other factors include speci…c “adaptability” features of the dominant religion: whether there are multiple
sacred texts or a single one, whether it is / they are said to be written by men or dictated verbatim by God,
how speci…c are the statements they make about the natural world, etc.

21

Figure 5: timing of events in each generation
2. With probability

; a new discovery is made. If it is belief-neutral or if there is no

blocking of belief-eroding ideas, it di¤uses and becomes embodied in new technologies,
so that at+1 = (1 + )at : If it is repressed, at+1 = at :
3. If a BR discovery occurred and the state allowed it to di¤use, the Church decides whether
to repair the resulting damage to religious capital. Such attempts involve a cost of bt
and succeed with probability q; in which case bt+1 = bt : If there is no attempt or if it
fails, beliefs erode to bt+1 = (1

)bt :

Second period (t + 1 odd ):
1. Given the realized values of (at+1 ; bt+1 ); the religious majority chooses …scal and publicspending policy, (

t+1 ; Tt+1 ; Gt+1 );

subject to the government budget constraint.

2. The political stage game ends, a new generation is born at the beginning of (even)
period t + 2 and the same game is played again with the inherited stocks of knowledge
and religiosity (at+2 ; bt+2 ) = (at+1 ; bt+1 ):
Equilibrium. We focus on pure strategy subgame-perfect equilibria (SPE). Because there are
no individual-level links across generations such as altruism or asset values, each cohort’s timehorizon is limited to its two-period lifespan. The SPE’s of the whole dynamic game therefore
correspond to sequences of SPE’s of the basic three-stage game played within each generation,
linked through the evolution of the aggregate state variables (at ; bt ):

22

τ

τ * (ν )

0

ν

1

Figure 6: equilibrium tax rate as a function of religiosity

5

Political Equilibrium

5.1

Fiscal Policy (Second Subperiod)

The religious majority sets taxes and spending as follows:
max f1

+ [R( )

^

G] + bG j 0

^; G

R( )]:

(5)

When beliefs are weak, b < , secular public goods are valued more than religious ones, so
G = 0 and all revenue is spent on T: Furthermore, given the properties of R( ); the …rst-order
condition uniquely yields

=

( ), where
(x)

de…nes a strictly increasing function

(R0 )

1

(1=x)

(6)

: R+ 7 ! [0; ^]: When beliefs are strong enough, b

all revenues are spent instead on G : T = 0 and

=

(b); see Figure

,

6.36

Proposition 1 The …scal policy implemented in the second period is the following:
(1) If b < , then ( ; T; G) = ( ( ); R( ( )); 0); with
(2) If b

, then ( ; T; G) = ( (b); 0; R( (b))); with

( ) and R( ( )) increasing in :
(b) and R( (b)) increasing in b until

(b) reaches ^; then constant afterwards.
For any b and ; we shall denote second-period equilibrium provision of G as
G (b; )

0
R ( (b))

36

if b <
if b

:

(7)

When b = we break the indi¤erence in favor of G; without loss of generality. Note also that when < b
religious agents are indistinguishable from secular ones, so one can interprets b as a¤ecting both the extensive
and intensive margins of (e¤ective) religiosity.

23

Figure 7: Church’s expected value of repairing beliefs

5.2

Church’s Belief-Repairing Strategy

Since working to repair the damage done to b by a BR innovation succeeds with probability
q, the Church attempts it if and only if
qbG (b; ) + (1
or equivalently

(b; )

q) (1

) bG ((1

) b; )

b

(1

) bG ((1

) b; ) :

=q; where
(b; )

G (b; )

(1

) G ((1

) b; )

(8)

denotes the payo¤ from successful repair, normalized by both TFP a and religiosity b: It is
clear from Figure 6 that the value of repairing religious capital is highest in the intermediate
range where b strongly a¤ects public policy. In contrast, it is zero for b

; and small when

b is high enough that some depreciation can occur without much impact on G: Formally, we
show in Appendix B (Lemma 3) that

( ; ) is single-peaked and varies as depicted in Figure

7. The following condition then ensures that the repairing region is non-empty.
Assumption 2 R(^) < =q < R( ( =(1

)))

(1

)R( ( )):37

We can now fully characterize the optimal (best-response) behavior of the religious sector.

37
The interval in which =q must lie is always nonempty, as the function R( (b)) (1
)R( ((1
)b))
is decreasing (see Lemma 3 in Appendix B). Although q will be constrained (see Assumption 3), is not, and
therefore =q is unconstrained.

24

Proposition 2 There exist a unique b and b, with
b<

1

< b;

(9)

such that the Church attempts to repair belief-eroding innovations (not blocked by the state) if
and only if b lies in b; b :

5.3

State Policy Toward Science (First Subperiod)

The only decision taken during period t is whether to invest in blocking potential BR discoveries, trading o¤ the option value of preserving religious capital against the foregone TFP gains
and the cost of setting up a repressive apparatus.
There are two cases in which the government clearly does not …nd it optimal to invest in
blocking. First, when b <

even religious agents prefer secular public goods (or transfers)

to religious ones: they set G = 0 and derive no utility from organized religion (bG = 0); so
nothing will change if b falls to (1

)b: Second, if the state expects the Church to engage

in doctrinal adaptation, and if it has su¢ cient con…dence that it will succeed, it prefers to
strategically “take a pass” on blocking and let the religious sector do the work.
Assumption 3 : q

1= (1 + ) :

This condition, in which both q and the opportunity cost of blocking (foregone productivity
gains) enter in an intuitive manner, ensures that the government never …nds it optimal to block
when b lies in b; b (see Lemma 4 in Appendix B).
We now analyze knowledge policy in the remaining two no-repair regions, b > b and
b < b: As illustrated in Figure 8, in each case blocking will occur when (at ; bt ) lies above an
upward-sloping locus in the state space, meaning that society is su¢ ciently religious, relative
to its state of scienti…c and technical development. It will be useful to de…ne, for all u
V (u)

1

(u) + uR ( (u)) ;

0;
(10)

corresponding to religious agents’old-age utility when the government provides a public good
which they value at u per unit relative to the numeraire, and does so by setting the tax rate
at the corresponding optimal level
5.3.1

(u): In equilibrium, u = maxfb; g by Proposition 1.

Region 1: b > b: No repairing, continued provision of religious public goods

Recall that blocking BR discoveries requires an ex-ante investment of ' (a) ; which must be
…nanced by a tax rate of

=R

1 (' (a))

on …rst-period consumption. Beliefs are then fully

protected from erosion, so the expected intertemporal utility of the religious majority is
25

Figure 8: the repairing and blocking regions.

V B (a; b) = 1

R

1

(' (a)) + [1

+ pR + (1

pR ) (1 + )] V (b) ;

(11)

where V (b) is their second-period utility when no new idea is implemented, either because
none occurred (probability 1

) or it was of the BR type and thus blocked (probability pR ).

If a BN innovation occurs, however, it is implemented, raising second-period TFP and utility
by a factor of 1 + ; as re‡ected in (11).
Suppose now that the government foregoes blocking; BR innovations will then also di¤use
and raise standards of living, but at the same time erode religious beliefs to b0
in this range Church does not repair. Since b > b > =(1
remains high enough that

G(b0 )

(1

) b; and

); religious capital nonetheless

> 0 is chosen over secular spending, so the intertemporal

expected utility of religious agents is
V N B (a; b) = 1 + [1

+ (1

pR ) (1 + )] V (b) + pR (1 + ) V b0 :

The government opts for blocking when V B
R

1

(' (a))

(12)

V N B ; namely
(1 + ) V b0

pR V (b)

1

(b) :

(13)

The left-hand side is the direct cost of the repressive investment, which is increasing in current
TFP a: The right-hand side is the net expected return: with probability pR a BR innovation
occurs, in which case beliefs are protected from erosion but the productivity gains are foregone.
Using (10), this expected return can be rewritten as
1

(b) = pR 1

(b) + bR ( (b))
26

(1 + ) 1

(b0 ) + b0 R( (b0 ))

:

(14)

In Appendix B we show that where
function

B1

1

1

1

R

1 (b)

0; it is strictly increasing in b: De…ning the

'; it follows that:

Proposition 3 For b > b; the state implements the blocking of BR discoveries if and only if
(a; b) lies above the upward-sloping locus b = B 1 (a):
The assumption that '

' implies that B 1 (a) reaches an upper bound and subsequently

becomes ‡at at a …nite level of a; as illustrated in Figure 8.
5.3.2

b <b. No repairing, no provision of religious public goods

Region 2:

In this case b0 = (1

)b <

so an unblocked, unrepaired BR discovery damages beliefs

su¢ ciently that religious agents now prefer secular public spending: G = 0 and T = R ( ( )) :
Thus, while the value of blocking remains given by (11), the value of not blocking is
V N B (a; b) = 1 + [1
The condition V N B

+ (1

pR ) (1 + )] V (b) + pR (1 + ) V ( ) :

(15)

V B therefore becomes
R

1

(' (a))

pR [V (b)

2

(1 + ) V ( )]

(b) :

(16)

Using (10), the right-hand side can be rewritten as
2

(b) = pR f1

(b) + bR ( (b))

In Appendix B we show that where
Proposition 4 For

2 (b)

(1 + ) [1

( ) + R ( ( ))]g :

0 it is increasing, hence so is B 2

2

(17)
1

R

1

':

b < b; the state implements the blocking of BR discoveries if and only

if (a; b) lies above the upward-sloping locus b = B 2 (a):
Figure 8 illustrates the two blocking loci, B i (a) for i = 1; 2; as well as the repairing and
non-repairing regions.

5.4

Dynamics of Scienti…c Progress and Religiosity

We have now fully characterized the law of motion of (at ; bt ) within a generation. Between
generations, the simplest case is where the young inherit, without change, the …nals stocks
of knowledge and religiosity of the old: (at+2 ; bt+2 ) = (at+1 ; bt+1 ); as shown in Figure 5. In
this benchmark case, religiosity can only decrease or, at best, remain constant. In practice
there are also periodic events than enhance religiosity, as discussed earlier: natural disasters,
migrations, etc. Because they are unrelated to scienti…c discoveries, we shall take them as
27

exogenous: at the start of each new generation at+2 = at+1 ; but bt+2 = bt+1 with probability
1

pE and bt+2 = (1 + )bt+1 with probability pE ; where

> 0:

Figures 9a-9b show the model’s phase dynamics of (at ; bt ) without and with belief-enhancing
shocks, in each of the key regions identi…ed by the within-generation equilibrium analysis.
While the underlying system of switching stochastic di¤erence equations is too complicated to
solve analytically, its key qualitative features are apparent from the graphs and from computing,
inside each region, the expected trajectory of the state variables, which is governed by a simple
linear di¤erence equation. We focus on the three main regions of interest.
1. Non-blocking, non-repair “secularization” region: Western Europe, or the United States
when bt =at is relatively low:
Et (at+1 ) =at = 1 +
Et (bt+1 ) =bt = (1

;

(18)

pR )(1 + pE ):

(19)

2. Non-blocking with repair region: United States when bt =at is moderately high:
Et (at+1 ) =at = 1 +

;

(20)

Et (bt+1 ) =bt = [1

pR (1

q) ](1 + pE ):

(21)

3. Blocking region: Theocratic regimes (Medieval Europe, Ottoman Empire, Ancient China,
Pakistan), United States when or where bt =at is very high:38
Et (at+1 ) =at = 1 + (1

pR ) ;

(22)

Et (bt+1 ) =bt = 1 + pE :

(23)

The Secularization Hypothesis. Consider the case where
EU
gR

(1

pR )(1 + pE ) < 1

[1

pR (1

q) ](1 + pE )

“Western Europe”and the “United States”then grow at the same rate 1 +

US
gR
:

(neither blocks),

but in the former there is a downward trend in religiosity (with periodic upward shocks preventing a degenerate long-distribution), whereas in the latter it is mostly o¤set by the adaptation of
the religious sector, resulting in trendless ‡uctuations or very slow-moving shifts in religiosity
U S 6= 1). Provided a society is not excessively religious (b < b); economic growth can thus
(if gR

occur both with and without secularization, as a result of (endogenously) di¤erent responses of
the religious sector. In the “theocratic” region b > b; meanwhile, religiosity trends up while
38

There is also a blocking region where b is relatively low but a is even lower, corresponding to a poor society
with relatively little organized religion. This state is transient, as the system will always escape it, evolving into
either the “modern-European” or the “American” regime.

28

knowledge and T F P stagnate, particularly if pR

Figure 9a: dynamics without BE shocks

1:

Figure 9b: dynamics with BE shocks

For societies that are close to a boundary between two regimes, …nally, a variety of economic
and political shocks can precipitate a phase transition, with changes in both …scal and science
policy. We investigate below a particularly important channel for such shifts.

6

Inequality, Religion and the Politics of Science

We now enrich the model to study the interplay of religious and class di¤erences. In each
generation, n < 1=2 agents are rich, while the majority 1
pretax incomes are

H

Assumption 4 : Let

and
L

<

L

n > 1=2 are poor: their respective

in both youth and old age (per unit of contemporary TFP).
<

H;

with n

H

+ (1

n)

L

1:

Income and religiosity are distributed independently, so the four social groups in the
economy and their respective sizes are: secular poor, SP = (1
RP = (1

n)r; secular rich, SR = n(1

n)(1

r); religious poor,

r); and religious rich, RR = nr: To limit the number

of cases to be considered, we assume:
Assumption 5 : Let 1=3 < n < 1=2 < r and 2r(1

n) < 1 < r(1 + n):

Thus no group constitutes a majority on its own, but all religious agents, as well as all poor
agents, do. Furthermore, the di¤erent groups can be ranked in size as follows:39
SR < SP < SR + SP < RR < RP < 1=2 < 1
39

n < r:

(24)

Recall that group sizes should be seen as adjusted by strength (military force, political in‡uence, wealth).

29

By Assumption 4 the rich, whether secular or religious, have zero demand for public spending on T; as its value

is less than the tax price

H

they face. We can thus equivalently interpret

T as pure transfers, to which only the poor, secular or religious, attach a positive net value.

6.1

The Political Process

At both t and t + 1 there are now four groups vying for power, and furthermore the policy
space in the latter period is two-dimensional (level and nature of public spending). Standard
majority voting is thus not applicable. Instead, in each period political competition takes place
–at the ballot box or as open con‡ict–according to the following sequential game:
1. In each group, one member is randomly selected as leader. The four leaders then simultaneously decide whether to make a bid for power, at no personal cost, or to stay out.
Their choices are fully strategic and forward-looking, both within and across periods.40
2. Citizens independently choose which of the contenders for power to support –e.g., whom
to vote or …ght for. Since no individual has a measurable impact on the overall outcome
each one just chooses, sincerely, his preferred candidate.
3. If a leader gains support from more than half of the population, he wins (is victorious
in battle, elected, etc.). If not, a second round of competition takes place between the
two candidates who received the most support in the …rst round; the one who receives
support from a majority of citizens wins.41
4. The victorious leader implements the policy that maximizes his own utility: as in the
citizen-candidate models on which we build (Osborne and Slivinsky (1996), Besley and
Coate (1997)), there is no way for politicians to credibly commit ex ante to following
a given course of action once in power. Importantly, the leader’s choices coincide here
exactly with what his core constituency (socioreligious group of origin) wants him to do:
their interests and his, summarized by b and ; are aligned at both t and t + 1:42
As before, in any even period t the government in power only chooses a blocking policy
t

2 f0; 1g and the implied level of taxes

t

= R

1(

t ' (at )) :

In any odd period t + 1 the

40
As there are neither personal entry costs nor private bene…ts from holding power, simple coordination among
members su¢ ces to ensure that a single leader is chosen. We thus abstract from potential free-rider problems
within each group, in order to focus on con‡ict and coalitions across groups.
41
When indi¤erent between several candidates, a group’s members split their support equally. The assumptions of sincere voting (or allegiance) and a runo¤ stage are similar to those in Osborne and Slivinsky (1996).
42
At date t; the leader clearly has the same information on the empirical (in)adequacy of religious dogma as
his own constituency, and the same preferences. This remains true at t + 1; because when a BR innovation
is blocked by the state’s repressive apparatus, no citizen, including the leader, learns of it. There is also no
asymmetry of beliefs between groups and their leader in any other state of the world. It would be easy to allow
for o¢ ce rents, in which case religiously-backed leaders’incentive to block would be even greater.

30

(possibly di¤erent) government holding o¢ ce chooses the nature and level of public spending,
together with the required taxes:

Tt+1 ; Gt+1 ;

t+1

=R

1 (T
t+1

+ Gt+1 ) :

Equilibrium concept. With no single group a majority, coalitions will need to form in order
to gain power. Because citizen-candidate-type models typically feature multiple Nash equilibria in which di¤erent coalitions arise to support di¤erent entry pro…les, we impose a stronger
requirement. We thus look, in the two-period (t and t + 1) stage game played by each generation, for a pure-strategy Perfectly Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibrium (PCPNE, Bernheim
et al. (1987)). Unlike the standard Nash concept, CPNE for normal-form games takes into
account joint deviations by coalitions; however, only self-enforcing deviations are considered to
be credible threats.43 In extensive-form games, the additional subgame-perfection requirement
further restricts admissible coalitional agreements and deviations to be dynamically consistent.

6.2

Equilibrium Fiscal Policy (Second Subperiod)

Given state variables (a; b) at t + 1; we …rst characterize the preferred …scal policies of each of
the four groups, then the equilibrium outcome that emerges from their competition.
i

An agent with (normalized) income
maxf(1

)

; G

Recalling that

L

<

<

H

i

+ [R( )

2f

L; H g

and religiosity index

i

^ and G

G] +

bG j

)

( =

( ; T; G) = (

L ):

2 f0; 1g solves

R( )g:

(25)

(x) denotes the solution to xR0 ( ) = 1; this yields:

and that

Lemma 1 (1) The ideal policy of the secular poor is ( ; T; G) = (
L(

i

L(

); R(

L(

)); 0); where

That of the religious poor is the same for b < ; whereas for b

L (b); 0; R( L (b)));

where

L (b)

(b=

L)

increases with b=

it is

L:

(2) The ideal policy of the secular rich is ( ; T; G) = (0; 0; 0): That of the religious rich is the
same for b <
(b=

H)

<

H;

L (b)

whereas for b
increases with b=

H

it is ( ; T; G) = (

H (b); 0; R( H (b)));

where

H (b)

H:

Whom do the religious poor side with? When in power, the secular poor provide a lot of T
and no G; the religious rich no T and a positive G; but (due to their distaste for taxes) less
than what the religious poor desire. The …rst policy is thus preferred by the RP when beliefs
b; which are complements to G; are relatively low compared to the value

of secular spending

or transfers. Formally, using the above properties of the four groups’preferences, we establish
the existence and uniqueness of a CPNE in the political subgame of period t + 1:
43
The de…nition is recursive: a deviation by n players is self-enforcing if no subcoalition of size n0 < n has a
strict incentive to initiate a new deviation from it that is itself self-enforcing.

31

Figure 10: e¤ects of greater income inequality on the equilibrium tax rate
Proposition 5 The equilibrium …scal policy in the second period is unique and characterized
by a religiosity threshold b ( ;

H ; L)

>

H

> , or b ( ) for short, such that:

(1) If b < b ( ), the religious poor back the secular poor, who thus come to power and implement
their preferred policy ( ; T; G) = (
(2) If b

L(

); R(

L(

)); 0):44

b ( ), the religious poor back the religious rich, who thus come to power and imple-

ment their preferred policy, ( ; T; G) = (

H (b); 0; R( H (b))):

(3) The threshold b is strictly increasing in

and

H;

and strictly decreasing in

L:

Religion as a “wedge”issue. The equilibrium tax rate is illustrated in Figure 10. In countries
with low religiosity, secular governments come to power and implement welfare-state-like policies that (mostly) bene…t the poor. Such countries tax more and have a larger public sector
than somewhat more religious ones, which provide not only a di¤erent set of public goods
but also at a lower level. In those latter countries, such as the United States, religion splits
the standard pro-redistribution coalition of the poor; the decisive class is then not only more
religious, but also richer. This result echoes that in Roemer (1998), although the political
mechanism involved is quite di¤erent.45
E¤ ects of rising income inequality. The above results also imply (see again the …gure) that
greater income inequality leads to the usual e¤ect of higher taxes and government spending in
44

For b < the preferred policy of the SP and RP coincide, so there is also an equilibrium in which it is the
latter who enter, supported by the former. As both yield the same outcome this multiplicity is inconsequential,
so without loss of generality, we select the one with the SP in power. This seems most natural, as it is their
policy that is implemented in all cases, and it is also the unique equilibrium for b < < b ( ).
45
In Roemer’s model of intra-party competition (with two parties), strong enough religious preferences in the
population force the otherwise pro-redistribution “Labour” party to adopt a binding electoral platform that
caters to voters with (close to) median religious preferences. If median-religiosity voters have above-average
wealth, this means that even Labour will commit to a low tax rate. In our case there are four parties, no
credible commitment, and the median-religiosity voter is poor rather than rich (as income is uncorrelated with
religiosity). High religiosity leads the religious poor to support the religious rich, who gain power as a result.

32

Figure 11: value of doctrinal adaptation (solid) and impact of increasing inequality (dashed)
low-religiosity countries such as those of Western Europe, but to lower levels of both (as well
as a di¤erent mix of public goods) in more religious countries, such as the United States.

6.3

Equilibrium Behavior of the Religious Sector

The Church’s problem is similar to that in Section 5.2, except that it takes into account
that allowing religious beliefs to erode below b ( ) will now lead to a drastic reallocation of
power towards secular (poor) agents. The latter will then cut G not just in relation to the
decline in b, but all the way to zero. The decision to repair the doctrine is thus still given by
(b; )

G (b; )

(1

) G ((1

) b; )

if b < b ( )
:
if b b ( )

(26)

( ; ) also remain unchanged, except that b ( ) replaces

and

G (b; )
The properties of the function
H

(b) replaces

0
R(

=q; but now with

H (b))

(b): This is illustrated by the solid black curve in Figure 11, while the dashed

red curve shows how small to moderate increases in
right.46

H

or decreases in

L

shift

( ; ) to the

Similarly, the relevant version of Assumption 2 is now:

Assumption 6 : R(^) < =q < R (

H (b

( )=(1

)))

(1

)R (

H (b

( ))) :

We can now fully characterize the behavior of the religious sector (thus generalizing Proposition 2), including how it responds to income inequality.

46

See Lemmas 7 and 8 in Appendix B for formal statements and proofs.

33

Proposition 6 (1) There exist a unique b and b, with
b ( )

b<

b ( )
< b;
1

(27)

such that the Church attempts repair of a belief-eroding innovation (not blocked by the government) if and only if b lies in b; b
(2) Both b and b are increasing in

H

and weakly decreasing in

L,

hence strictly increasing

with income inequality (a marginal or moderate mean-preserving change in ):
The results embody clear intuitions. At b; power reallocation is not an issue: the RR will
be in control at t + 1 no matter what, but if their faith erodes they will provide a lower level of
Gt+1 : As they become richer and thus face a higher tax price for G this e¤ect is ampli…ed, so
the Church, which cares about bt+1 Gt+1 ; has a greater incentive to preserve bt+1 : At b; on the
other hand, repairing or not determines whether the RR or the SP come to power at t + 1: The
SP always set G = 0; while the level provided by the RR declines with their relative income,
reducing the Church’s incentive to preserve bt+1 in order to ensure their victory.

6.4

State’s Policy Toward Science (First Subperiod)

While the aggregate costs of blocking are the same as before (lower consumption at t to …nance
the repressive apparatus and foregone TFP gains at t + 1), their incidence is di¤erent for rich
and poor. As to the bene…ts, they now di¤er not only between secular and religious but also by
income, since an erosion of beliefs can trigger a reallocation of political power from (religious)
rich to (secular) poor agents at t + 1:
We start with three intuitive points, formally proved in Appendix B.6. First, the SP are
always against blocking. Not only does a BR innovation raise productivity, but the erosion
of beliefs it generates is always bene…cial for them, for two reasons: (i) it reduces taxation
and spending on G (which they do not care about) if the RR are in power at t + 1; namely
if bt+1 remains above b ( ); (ii) it (weakly) increases the chance that the SP themselves will
gain power at t + 1; which occurs if bt+1 falls below b ( ): Second, we impose a simplifying
assumption, ensuring that the SR also never want to block.
Assumption 7 : (1 + ) [1

L(

)]

1

H (b

( )):

In words, the productivity gains from implementing new (BR) discoveries are large enough
that, even if the erosion of beliefs brings the secular poor to power, aftertax incomes at t + 1
are higher than if blocking had occurred and the (lower-taxing) religious rich held power as a
result. A simple su¢ cient condition for this to be the case is (1 + ) [1

34

L(

)]

1:

Third, as before there are two regions in which even a religious government never blocks.
When b < b ( ) the SP will be in power at t + 1 and set Gt+1 = 0; so there is no point
in blocking. When b 2 b; b , the Church will attempt to repair unblocked BR discoveries;
provided it is likely enough to succeed (Assumption 3), any …rst-period government will let
repair be attempted rather than make a costly investment in blocking.
We therefore now concentrate on the two remaining no-repairing regions, b > b and b ( )
b < b; in which we characterize the ideal blocking policy of the RR –who, as we shall see, always
end up being pivotal at date t: Those of the RP and SR classes are then obtained through
simple parameter substitutions.
6.4.1

Region 1: b > b > b ( )=(1

Since (1

)b

): No repairing nor power reallocation

b ( ); the religious rich will be in power at t + 1 even if beliefs are eroded by

a new discovery. Their expected value at date t of setting up a blocking apparatus is therefore
B
VRR
(a; b) = 1

R

1

(' (a))

where, for all b; VRR (RRjb)

H

[1

+ [1
H

+ pR + (1

(b)]

+ bR (

H

H

pR ) (1 + )] VRR (RRjb) ;

(28)

(b)) represents their utility in old age.

As to their expected value of not blocking, it is
NB
VRR
=

where b0

H

+ [1

pR ) (1 + )] VRR (RRjb) + pR (1 + ) VRR (RRjb0 );

+ (1

NB
) b: The RR’s blocking condition, VRR

(1
R

1

(' (a))

B ; thus takes the form
VRR

(1 + ) VRR (RRjb0 )]

pR [VRR (RRjb)

H

(29)

1
RR (b) :

(30)

Substituting in old-age utilities, the right-hand side can be rewritten as
1
RR (b)

= pR [1

H

(b)]

H

+ bR (

H

(b))

(1 + ) (1

0
H (b )) H

+ b0 R(

0
H (b ))

:
(31)

6.4.2

Region 2: b ( )

b < b < b ( )=(1

): No repairing, power reallocation

The RR hold power at t + 1 if beliefs remain intact, while the SP take over if a BR innovation
occurs and is not blocked, as there is no repairing in this range. Replacing VRR (RRjb0 ) in
(29)-(30) by VRR (SP )
R

1

(' (a))

[1
H

L(

)]

H

+ R(

L(

pR fVRR (RRjb)

where the right-hand side can be rewritten as

35

)) ; the blocking condition becomes
(1 + ) VRR (SP )g

2
RR (b);

(32)

2
RR (b)

6.4.3

= pR f[1

H

(b)]

H

+ bR (

H

(b))

(1 + ) [(1

L(

))

+ R(

H

L(

))]g : (33)

Equilibrium Blocking Policy

The blocking preferences of the religious poor are obtained, in each region, by simply replacing
H

with

L,

and those of secular agents by replacing bR(

H (b))

and bR(

H (b))

with zero. The

resulting analogues to (31) and (33) are given in Appendix B (preceding Lemma 9). Studying
the four groups’blocking loci, we then show that they are all increasing and that their relative
rankings remain invariant throughout the state space:
(i) The SR never want to block, as is the case for the SP:
(ii) Whenever the RR block, then so do the RP:
These properties imply that the RR are always pivotal in the date-t political competition
that determines science policy. Intuitively, when they are against blocking the SP and the SR
agree with them, resulting in an absolute majority by (24). When the RR do want to block,
the RP agree with them, again adding up to an absolute majority. Formally, we prove the
following results, illustrated by the solid lines in Figure 12.
Proposition 7 The unique Perfectly Coalition-Proof Nash Equilibrium (PCPNE) of the twoperiod game always implements the preferred science policy of the religious rich. The corresponding blocking boundary is an upward-sloping line b = B(a) in the state space.
The resulting phase diagram for the evolution of (at ; bt ) is qualitatively identical to that in
Figure 9, so we do not replicate the laws of motion and sample paths on Figure 12.
6.4.4

Income Inequality, Science Policy and the Religious Right

Keeping the sizes (n; 1

n) of the rich and poor classes constant, consider a relatively small

mean-preserving change in their income levels: (d

H ; d L );

with nd

H

+ (1

n)d

L

= 0: We

assume that, initially, there is already a certain degree of inequality in society (recall that
average income is normalized to 1) :
Assumption 8

H

1

(1 n)2
n

[ R00 (^)] 1 +

R 1 (')
pR (1+ )

:

Proposition 8 A marginal increase in income inequality (mean-preserving spread) causes the
equilibrium blocking locus to:
1. Shift up in the high-religiosity region b > b; where there is neither repairing nor power
reallocation.
2. Shift down in the moderate-religiosity region b ( )

b < b; where there is no repairing

and BR discoveries potentially trigger a reallocation of power toward the secular poor.
36

Figure 12: blocking and repairing loci (solid), with the shifts resulting from higher inequality (dashed)
3. These shifts lead, ceteris paribus (i.e., if there is no simultaneous change in the Church’s
repairing behavior), to less blocking in the …rst case and more the second.
Figure 12 summarizes, as a shift from solid to dashed lines, the combined e¤ ects of an
increase in income inequality on science policy by the state, doctrinal repairing by the Church
and public spending, leading in turn lead to Proposition 9 below. We see that:
(i) The second-period …scal-policy threshold b ( ) shifts up. When their income rises, the
RR face a higher tax price for provision of the religious public good G and consequently want
to reduce its supply. The RP; on the other hand, want to increase redistributive transfers,
T: For the RP to still prefer allying themselves with the RR rather than the SP therefore
requires a higher level of religiosity; their indi¤erence threshold b ( ) thus increases.
(ii) The Church’s repairing region shifts up. The lower demand for G by the RR as they
become relatively richer gives the Church, which cares about bt+1 Gt+1 ; a greater incentive to
preserve beliefs near b (where the RR will be in power no matter what), but a lower one near
b; where the purpose of repairing is to prevent the SP from gaining power and setting G = 0:
(iii) The State’s blocking locus B(a) shifts upwards at high levels of religiosity ( b > b) and
downward at low levels of b ( b < b). Blocking is most costly to the rich as they must forego
more income, but it can also prevent a shift of power to the SP at t + 1: When the RR become
richer, the …rst e¤ect dominates at high levels of b; as even with eroded beliefs the RP will
not switch allegiance (Region 1). The second e¤ect prevails when religiosity is intermediate,
as power is now at stake if beliefs come to be eroded (Region 2).

37

Proposition 9 In the “American”regime, corresponding to intermediate values of b=a; greater
income inequality leads to more blocking of “threatening” scienti…c …ndings, and to (weakly)
greater doctrinal rigidity (less adaptation) of the religious sector. At high enough levels of
religiosity, corresponding to “theocratic” regimes, it has the opposite (“Arab Spring”) e¤ ects.
Rising inequality and the Religious Right. While each potential coalition at t must envision
all possible coalitions at t + 1 that its actions can empower or defeat, the main intuition for
how greater inequality leads to the formation of an anti-redistribution and anti-science alliance
in (the appropriate region of) the “American” regime is simple. At t + 1; if the RP ’s faith
has eroded they will ally themselves with the SP and implement a high level of redistribution
– clearly the worst possible outcome for the RR: If they remain su¢ ciently pious, on the
other hand, they will support instead the RR’s “compromise” policy of moderate taxes but
religion-favoring spending (or laws), which then wins. Looking forward at t; the RR realize
that in order to hold power at date t + 1 they must preserve the religiosity of the RP; which
may require blocking certain economically valuable innovations. When the stakes of who will
control taxes at t + 1 are high enough –i.e., when there is a lot of inequality– this concern
dominates over the fact that rich agents bene…t most from productivity gains. Consequently,
the RR strategically give priority to religion over science, and in so doing they have the support
of the RP; who are always those with the greatest incentive to block. The dynamic outcome
is that the RR gain power at date t, and thanks to blocking they keep it at date t + 1:

7

Concluding Comments

Several extensions of our framework can be envisioned. Besides being a source utility for
some agents, religiosity could also have a direct e¤ect on growth, e.g. by promoting greater
trust and trustworthiness among individuals (up to the point where it may become a source
of civil strife), or by legitimizing the authority of the ruler and state, thereby reducing agency
problems. The key tradeo¤ with allowing belief-eroding ideas to di¤use would then remain,
and a hill-shaped relationship between religiosity and growth would likely emerge. Interstate
con‡ict o¤ers another interesting direction for research: an intensely religious population and
strong state-church links are valuable assets in the short to medium run (increasing people’s
willingness to …ght and die for the cause), but in the long run the associated drag on scienti…c
knowledge and technological innovation leads to military backwardness –as was the case for
the Ottoman Empire.
The leading examples of “forbidden fruits”discussed in the paper involved the hard sciences
on the one hand, religion stricto sensu (belief in gods and spirits, creation, afterlife, etc.) on
the other. It should be clear from the model, however, that both concepts should be taken in

38

a much more general sense. Two concrete cases perhaps best demonstrate this point.
The …rst is that of Lysenkoism in the Soviet Union between 1935 and 1964. During three
decades, Inquisition-like methods (forced denunciations, imprisonments, executions) were used
to repress “bourgeois”scienti…c knowledge and methodology in evolutionary biology and agronomy, with adverse spillovers onto many other areas. Meanwhile, the Stalinist regime also promoted and enforced a pseudoscience which it saw as more compatible with its dogma of Man’s
and society’s malleability to rapid social change.
The second case is modern contraception, a very applied innovation though directly derived
from fundamental advances in human biology. Here again we …nd the four key characteristics
of BR innovations in our model: (i) a large positive impact on long-term productivity, by
allowing greater participation of women in the labor force and increasing their return to human
capital investment; (ii) a con‡ict with several of the world’s major religious doctrines and
their teachings about the divinely ordered role of women, purpose of sexuality and sacrality
of the human body; (iii) as a result, its condemnation by religious authorities and initial
proscription by the state; (iv) over time (and not in all places), as society becomes more secular
or/and religious doctrine is “modernized”, the innovation is allowed to di¤use, a¤ecting both
productivity and mentalities.
Other examples could be drawn from medicine or the social sciences. As much as individual
discoveries and ideas, it is to a large extent the scienti…c method itself, with its emphasis on
systematic doubt, contradictory debate and empirical falsi…ability, that inevitably runs afoul of
preestablished dogmas. The model could thus also be used to study the interactions between
many types of new ideas (scienti…c, social, political) and other vested beliefs such as cultural,
corporate or ideological ones.
On the empirical side, the robust inverse relationship between religiosity and innovation
uncovered by our simple analysis, across both countries and US states, deserves further investigation. One obvious but challenging direction is to …nd plausible instruments or natural
experiments to assess causality –potentially in both directions, as emphasized in the model.
A complementary one is individual-level analysis. In Bénabou et al. (2014) we use again the
World Values Survey to relate eleven indicators of personal openness to innovation, broadly
de…ned (e.g., attitudes toward science and technology, new versus old ideas, general change,
risk-taking, agency versus fate, imagination and independence in children) and …ve di¤erent
measures of religiosity, covering both beliefs and attendance. A clear and robust negative
relationship emerges in nearly all cases.

39

Appendix A: Religious Conformity of Societal Laws
We extend here our framework to the case where the policies that religious agents value are
not …scal ones (subsidies, tax exemptions) but the conformity of society’s laws to religious
precepts and proscriptions. Let ~

1 measure how strictly these are enforced, resulting in an

income loss of ~ for any individual with productivity

(per unit of contemporary TFP). These

losses may re‡ect the reduced time and talent available for production, the costs of unplanned
pregnancies, the resources consumed by rituals or spent on circumventing the restrictions (black
market, bribes, trips abroad, etc.), or all of the above. For religious agents and the Church,
these societal strictures also represent a public good which they value at bG, where G is now
~ ) and the technology R
~ for producing it has the following properties.
equal to G = R(~
~ is C 3 , strictly increasing and strictly concave, with R(0)
~
= 0,
Assumption 9 The function R
0
0
000
~
~
~
R (0) = 1 and R (1) > 0. Furthermore, R (~) 0 for all ~ 2 [0; 1].
These properties are very similar to those of the tax revenue function R( ); except that
~ ) is maximized above 1. The only …scal public
the latter is maximized at ^ < 1 whereas R(~
good provided by the government during agents’old age is now T , and the budget constraint
(2) is replaced by T = (1
and religious type

~)R( ). The preferred policy of an agent with relative productivity

2 f0; 1g is consequently given by
max
;~

n
(1

~) [(1

o
~ (~) :
) + R( )] + bR

(A.1)

Clearly, secular agents always want ~ = 0 and their …scal preferences are unchanged. Religious
agents are examined below.

A.1

Economy without income di¤erences

Second-period policy outcome. The unique distinction is between secular and religious agents
so the latter, being in the majority, maximize (A.1) with

where we de…ne

=

= 1; leading to:

( ) = (R0 ) 1 (1= );
8
>
0
for
b<~
>
<
0
1
~
~ 0 (1)
~ (b) =
(R ) (~=b) for ~ b 1=R
>
>
:
~ 0 (1) < b;
1
for
1=R
~

1

( ) + R( ( )):

(A.2)
(A.3)

(A.4)

There are three di¤erences with respect to the baseline model. First, G is now provided for all
40

b

~ rather than for b

: Second, T is always provided (funded by the same tax rate

( )

as before), whereas before it was equal to zero for b < : Third, agents’lower incomes due to
the religious restrictions ~ > 0 imposed when b

~ reduce the tax base, so that for any given

value of ; T is also lower. Proposition 1 thus becomes:
Proposition 10 The …scal and legal policies implemented in the second period are:
(1) If b < ~, then ( ; ~; T; G) = ( ( ); 0; R( ( )); 0);
(2) If b

( )); so that and T increase in .
~ (~ (b))); so that so that ~
~ (b))R( ( )); R

~, then ( ; ~; T; G) = ( ( ); ~ (b); (1

and G increase in b:
For any b and , we denote again the second-period equilibrium level of G as
G (b; )

0
~
R (~ (b))

if b < ~
if b ~:

(A.5)

Doctrinal repair. With similar substitutions, the analysis is unchanged from that of Section
5.2. Indeed, the value of repairing, ~ (b; ); has the same single-peaked shape as (b; ), due to
~ has similar properties to those of R (see Lemma 10 in online Appendix C.2.3).
the fact that R
The analogue to Assumption 2 is obtained similarly:
~
~ (~ (~= (1
Assumption 10 R(1)
< =q < R

)))

We thus obtain a parallel to Proposition 2, with

~ (~ (~)) :
)R

(1

simply replaced by ~ in (9).

Science policy. The analysis in Section 5.3 is also essentially unchanged: the blocking loci
remain R

1 ('(a))

1 (b)

in Region 1 (b > b > ~= (1

)); and R

1 ('(a))

2 (b)

in Region

b < b), but now with

2 (~
1

(b) =

2

(b) =

n
pR [1
n
pR [1

~ (~ (b))
~ (b)]~ + bR

(1 + ) [ 1 ~
o
(1 + ) ~ :

~ (~ (b))
~ (b)]~ + bR

b0

~ ~
~ + b0 R

o
b0 ] (A.6)

(A.7)

Both functions are again increasing wherever they are non-negative (see online Appendix
C.2.3), therefore Propositions 3-4 still apply.

A.2
A.2.1

Economy with unequal incomes
Preferred societal and …scal policies

As observed earlier, the …scal preferences of secular agents remain unchanged. For the religious
poor, maximizing (A.1) yields = L ( = L ) as in the original speci…cation, while ~ = ~L (b)
~ (b=~L ), where ~ ( ) is given by (A.2) and we de…ne
~L

[1

L(

)]
41

L

+ R(

L(

)):

(A.8)

The problem for the religious rich is similar, except that H ( )
0; hence ~H
H and
~H (b) = ~ (b= H ): The reason why ~L exceeds L ; and increases in , is that the RP face an
additional tradeo¤: the tax-base losses generated by religious restrictions imply that the same
optimal tax rate

L(

and ~ only when b

) yields a lower level of T; leading them to choose positive levels of G
~L > L : For further reference, let us also de…ne
~j =R
~ 0 (1); for j = L; H:

bj
Thus ~j (b) = 0 for b

~j ; solves bR
~ 0 (~) = ~j for ~L < b

(A.9)

bj ; and ~j (b) = 1 for b > bj :

Lemma 2 (1) The ideal policies of the SP and the SR are the same as in Proposition 1.
(2) The ideal policy of the RR coincides with that of the SR (i.e., T = G = 0) for b < H ;
~
while for b
~ (b= H ) > 0:
H it is ( ; ~ ; T; G) = (0; ~ H (b); 0; R(~ H (b))); where ~ H (b)
~ L (b))):
(3) The ideal policy of the RP is ( ; ~; T; G) = ( L ( ); ~L (b); (1 ~L (b))R( L ( )); R(~
They always tax income at the same rate L ( ) as the SP , but legislate the religious public
good G only when b ~L , setting L (b) ~ (b=~L ) > 0:
A.2.2

Political coalitions at t + 1

In the benchmark model, Lemma 1 showed the existence of a belief threshold b above which
the religious poor abandoned their “class interests”, siding with the religious rich rather than
the secular poor. It also showed b ( ;
L:

H ; L)

to be increasing in

and

H;

and decreasing in

~ is everywhere less concave
The very same intuition and results obtain here provided that R

than R0 , or more generally has the following property.
Assumption 11 For any s

~ 0 (s)
1; R

R0 (s). Consequently,

(x)

~ (x), for all x.

The (rede…ned) b ( ) tells us how the RP rank the RR versus the SP , but a CPNE at
date t + 1 involves more than that: all possible coalitions, deviating subcoalitions, etc., must
be checked for deviation-proofness. In particular, since the RP now implement redistribution
T > 0 even when they impose G > 0, the SP might prefer such a policy to that of the RR
(who set a lower G, but T = 0). This, in turn, could lead to winning coalitions di¤erent from
those of the baseline model, with the RP emerging as victor. To rule out this case and ensure
that the political outcome remains unchanged, additional assumptions are required.
Assumption 12
~ 00 (1)
R
~ 0 (1)
R

min

(

(1

)
i
0 (1) ~ h
~
^) ( H
)
R
L
L
~ 00 (0) :
R
;
~
R(1)
L + R(^ )
L

42

This is of the same nature as Assumption 8, in that it requires the presence of enough
income inequality in society, as both terms on the right-hand side are easily seen to increase
with

H

and decrease with

Assumption 13

L:

~
R(1)
< (1
~ 0 (1)
R

L(

)) +

R(

L(

))

:

H

~
~ 0 (1) makes Assumptions 12 and 13 both more likely to hold.47
A smaller value of R(1)=
R
The unique CPNE outcome at date t + 1, paralleling that in Proposition 5, is then characterized below (see Online Appendix C for proofs).
Proposition 11 Under Assumptions 11-12, and if ~L (b ( )) is relatively high, the equilibrium societal and …scal policy in the second period is unique and characterized by a religiosity
threshold b ( ;

H ; L)

>

H

> , or b ( ) for short, such that:

(1) If b < b ( ), the religious poor back the secular poor, who thus come to power and implement
their preferred policy, ( ; ~; T; G) = (

L(

); 0; R(

L(

)); 0):

(2) If b

b ( ); the religious poor back the religious rich, who thus come to power and imple~
ment their preferred policy, ( ; ~; T; G) = (0; ~H (b); 0; R(~
H (b))):
(3) The threshold b is strictly increasing in
A.2.3

and

H;

and strictly decreasing in

L:

Church’s Behavior, Blocking Equilibrium, and Comparative Statics

The remaining analysis is essentially unchanged from that of the benchmark model, since:
(i) The policy outcome at t+1 hinges in the same manner on whether the SP or the RR are
in power, namely on b being below or above (the rede…ned) b ( ;

H ; L ):

(ii) The SP and the RR’s policies are the same as in the baseline, except that for the latter
~
H (b) and R( H (b)) are replaced by the similarly-behaved ~ (b) and R(~ (b)):
H

H

(iii) The same is therefore true for the Church’s repairing decision, with Assumption 6
becoming:
Assumption 14 :

~
~ (~H (b ( )=(1
R(1)
< =q < R

)))

(1

~ (~H (b ( ))) :
)R

(iv) Continuing the backward induction, the four groups’preferences with respect to blocking (value functions and resulting coalition formation) are also unchanged, up to the same
substitutions, resulting in the same monotonicities and comparative statics.
47

Since the right-hand side of Assumption 13 is bounded below by 1 n^; su¢ cient (and
h simpler)
io conditions
~
~ 00 (1)
~L
L
~ 00 (0) .
;
R
1 ^ and R~R0 (1)
min LH
+ R(^ )
L

for both assumptions to hold are that RR(1)
~ 0 (1)

43

Appendix B: Main Proofs
B.1

Proof of Proposition 2

Lemma 3 The function

(b; ) equals 0 for b < ; then jumps up to

is continuous and strictly increasing on [ ; =(1
R ( ( =(1

))) (1

( ; ) = R( ( )): It

)); then jumps down to

( =(1

); ) =

) R ( ( )) : Finally, it is continuous and strictly decreasing on [ =(1

); +1), with limb!+1 (b; ) = R(^) > 0:
Proof. (1) For b < , G (b; ) = G ((1

) b; ) = 0; hence

(b; ) = 0: For

b < =(1

),

the religious switch to the provision of the secular public good when religiosity is eroded from
b to b0

(1

)b: Therefore, over this range

and continuous in b; at b = , the function
(2) For =(1

)

(b; ) = R ( (b)), which is strictly increasing

(b; ) thus has an upward jump of R ( ( )) :

b, the religious provide G even when b falls to (1
(b; ) = R ( (b))

(1

) R ( ((1

From the …rst-order condition bR0 ( (b)) = 1 follows that
@ (b; )
@b

= R0 ( (b))
1
b2

=

This expression is negative if

0

(b)

R0 ( (b))
R00 ( (b))

…nally, both

((1

Lemma 3 implies that, for all y in ( R(^);
2, setting b

B.2

b ( ; =q) and b

) b))

1=[b2 R00 ( (b))] > 0; so
0

((1

) b)
(B.2)

(b) is increasing), which is

(b; ) in (B.1) is therefore decreasing on [ =(1
(1

) b) tend to ^, so by (B.1)

is an interval [b ( ; y); b+ ( ; y)]; with

=

(B.1)

R0 ( (b0 ))
:
R00 ( (b0 ))

) it has a downward jump of

(b) and

0 (b)

R0 ( )=R00 ( ) is decreasing (as

implied by Assumption 1. The function
); +1); at b = =(1

) b)) :

)2 R0 ( ((1

(1

) b; so

( =(1

) R ( ( )). As b tends to +1,
(b; ) tends to R(^) > 0: k

); )); the set of b’s where

b ( ; y) < =(1

(b; )

y

) < b+ ( ; y): Given Assumption

b+ ( ; =q) concludes.

Proof of No Blocking When Repairing, i.e. When b 2 [b; b]

(1) When b 2 [ = (1

) ; b], the Church’s attempts at doctrinal repairing following a BR

innovation are successful with probability q, in which case b and G remain unchanged. With

probability 1

q repairing fails and b drops to b0

; so that the religious public good is still

provided but at a lower level. The value of not blocking is therefore
V N B = 1 + [1

+ (1

pR ) (1 + ) + pR q (1 + )] V (b) + pR (1

44

q) (1 + ) V b0 ; (B.3)

where V (b0 ) is given by (10). Combining (B.3) and (11), V N B < V B takes the form:
R

1

(' (a))

pR [1

q (1 + )] V (b)

q) (1 + ) V b0

(1

3I

(b) :

(B.4)

)) and repair fails, religiosity falls to b0 < , so Gt+1 = 0 and the

(2) When b 2 [b; =(1

value of not blocking becomes
V N B = 1 + [1

+ (1

pR ) (1 + ) + pR q (1 + )] V (b) + pR (1

q) (1 + ) V ( ) ; (B.5)

which is equivalent to (B.3) with V ( ) replacing V (b0 ). Hence, the blocking condition becomes
R

1

(' (a))

pR f[1

q (1 + )] V (b)

(1

3II

q) (1 + ) V ( )g

(b) :

(B.6)

Lemma 4 There exists a q = q < 1= (1 + ) such that, for any q > q , the religious majority
prefers not to block (V N B > V B ) for any (a; b) 2 R+

b; b : Consequently, under Assumption

3, the State does not block in this region.
Proof. Consider (B.4) and note that
3I

is increasing in b; so @

(b) =@q =

a qI < 1= (1 + ) such that
3I

b> ; @
that

3II

(b) =@q =

3I

pR (1 + ) [V (b)

pR (1 + ) [V (b)

(b) has the sign of qII

Proof that the

i

(b) < 0 for all q

(b) has the sign of qI

no blocking for b 2 b; b :

B.3

3I

V

1= (1 + ) : Moreover V (b)
(b0 )]

< 0: Hence, there exists

q: Similarly, (B.6) implies, for all

V ( )] < 0; so there exists a qII < 1= (1 + ) such

q: Under Assumption 3, q > max fqI ; qII g

q ; so there is

(b), i = 1; 2, Are Increasing in b

Di¤erentiating (14) and using the envelope theorem (note that

1 (b)

is the di¤erence between

two maximized functions) yields
@

1 (b)

@b

= pR R ( (b))

(1 + ) (1

Any blocking of BR innovations requires that
R ( (b))
Since

)R

(b0 )

(b) is nondecreasing and b0

Therefore,
@

(1 + ) (1

2 (b) =@b

1 (b)

0 implies that @

(1

1 (b)

)R

(b0 )

:

(B.7)

0; which by (14) takes the form

(1=b) (1 + ) 1

(b0 )

(1

(b)) :

(B.8)

) b; the right-hand side of (B.8) is strictly positive.

1 (b) =@b

> 0 in (B.7). Similarly, from (17) we obtain

= pR R ( (b)) ; which is always positive.

45

B.4

Proof of Proposition 5

We …rst establish the existence and properties of the religiosity threshold b ( ;

H ; L)

above

which the RP prefer the ideal policy of the RR to that of the secular poor. We them use them
to show the existence and uniqueness of the CPNE outcome.
B.4.1

Preferred alliance of the religious poor

Lemma 5 (1) For any

there exists a unique b ( ;

H ; L)

>

H

> , or b ( ) for short, such

that the religious poor prefer the ideal policy of the secular poor (de…ned by
the religious rich (de…ned by

H (b))

if and only if b

(2) The function b is strictly decreasing in

)) to that of

b ( ):

and strictly increasing in

L

L(

H.

(3) The function b is strictly increasing in :
Proof. (1) The utility of the religious poor under the ideal policy of the religious rich is
f (b)

[1

H

(b)]

+ bR (

L

H

(b))

for b

H;

f (b)

otherwise,

L

(B.9)

whereas under that of the secular poor it equals
g( )
For b

H,

[1

f (b) < g( ). For b

f 0 (b) = R (

H

H,

(b)) + bR0 (

Finally, as b tends to +1,

H

H

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

)) :

(B.10)

f (b) is an increasing function, since

(b))

(b) =

0
H

L

(b=

H)

(b) = R (

H

(b)) + [

H

0
L] H

(b) > 0:

tends to ^, so f (b) tends to +1: This shows

the existence of a unique indi¤erence point, b ( ) >

H

> : Before studying its variations, we

prove two simple properties linking the preferred tax rates of poor and rich agents.
Lemma 6 For any
H

(b ( )) :

2 (

L ; H );

let ~b ( )

(

H = L)

>

H:

Then

L(

) =

~

H (b (

)) >

Proof. The equality follows from L ( ) = ( = L ) and H (b) = (b= H ) for b
H : The
inequality then holds if ~b ( ) > b ( ) or, by monotonicity of f; f (~b( )) > f (b ( )): We have
f (~b( )) = [1
> [1

~ ))]

H (b(
L(

)]

L

L

+ ~b( )R(

+ R(

L(

~ ))) = [1

H (b(

)) = g( )

using the de…nition of b ( ); hence the result. k
46

L(

f (b ( ));

)]

L

+ ~b( )R (

L(

))

(2) For the comparative statics, we make the dependence of f and g on (
@f (b; L ; H )
@ L
@g ( ; L )
@ L

= 1

H

= 1

L(

L; H )

explicit. Thus

(b) ;
)+

L

+ R0 (

L(

@

))

L (b)

@

=1

L(

);

L

by the …rst-order condition of the SP . Therefore,
@f (b;
@

L; H )

@g ( ; L )
=
@ L

L

which is always positive at b = b since
f (b)

H

L(

(b ( )) <

)

(b) ;

H

L(

) ; by Lemma 6.(2) above. Since

g ( ) is also increasing in b, its unique zero, b ( ); is therefore strictly decreasing in

Similarly, @b =@
@f (b;
@

H

L:

> 0 follows from the fact that

L; H )

@g ( ; L )
=
@ H

H

L

+ bR0 (

where we used …rst-order condition bR0 (
@

H

@

(b)
H

=

H

1
bR00 (

H (b))

H

(b)) =

<0<

(b))
H,

@

(b)

H

@

=(

L)

H

H

@

H

@

(b)

< 0;

H

which implies
H

b2 R00 (

H (b))

=

0
H

(b) :

(B.11)

(3) Recall that b ( ) is uniquely de…ned by the indi¤erence condition
[1

H

(b ( ))]

Di¤erentiating in

L

+ b ( )R(

then using R0 (
b 0( ) =

(

H

H

L(

(b ( ))) = [1
and bR0 (

)) =

L)

0
H

L(

H

R ( L ( ))
(b ( )) + R (

)]

L

+ R(

(b)) =

H

H

(b ( )))

L(

)) :

(B.12)

yields
;

(B.13)

From the second part of (B.11), it then follows that b 0 ( ) > 0:
B.4.2

Political equilibrium in the second period

Using the key properties of the di¤erent groups’preferences established in Lemma 5, we now
prove the existence and uniqueness of a CPNE in the political subgame played at t + 1:
A - Region
Case 1:

H

<b<b ( )
b < b ( ): In this case, the optimal tax rate of the RR is

H (b)

> 0: This

implies that the SP strictly prefer the SR to the RR, and the RP strictly prefer the RR to
the SR. The Table B.1 displays the rankings of each group i over the ideal …scal policies of

47

the four groups j ; naturally, its own policy is always ranked …rst.
SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

4

3

2

RP

2

1

3

4

RR

x

y

1

z

SR

x0

4

y0

1

where (x; y; z) = (3; 4; 2) [subcase(a)], or (4,2,3) or (4,3,2) [subcase b]; (x0; y0) = (2; 3) or (3; 2):
Table B.1. Fiscal preferences of each group when

H

b < b ( ):

The …rst two rows are self-explanatory. In the third, subcase (a) occurs when the RR prefer
the SP to the RP (they will then also prefer the SR to the SP ), and subcase (b) when they
prefer the RP to the SP ; we then do not know a priori how the SR are ranked relative to the
RP . The last row shows that the SR’s least preferred policy is that of the RP and that they
may rank that of the SP ahead of that of the RR; or vice versa.
We now show that the SP winning –implementing their preferred …scal policy– in the
second period of the political game (a generation’s old age) is a CPNE outcome (Claim 1),
and then that this equilibrium is unique (see Claims 2–4).
Claim 1: The SP winning at t + 1 is a CPNE outcome.
Proof: Consider the case where only the SP and the RR candidates enter, so that the strategy
pro…le is (SP = E; RP = N; RR = E; SR = N ) where E and N denote respectively the entry
and non-entry of the candidate. The SP are the winner, as they get the support of the RP
and the poor add up to a majority. This is clearly a Nash Equilibrium (NE), as no player has
an incentive to deviate; we next show that there is no self-enforcing coalitional deviation.
Note …rst that any winning deviating coalition must contain the RP and that the SP
must be their 2nd choice. The coalition (RP; RR) gets (2; x) when the SP wins. The only
available vector that could Pareto-dominate (2; x) is (1; y); achieved in subcase (b) by (RP =
E; RR = N ), with the RP winning, since (x; y; z) 2 f(4; 2; 3); (4; 3; 2)g: This coalition is not

self-enforcing, however. If the RR stays in, no one gets a majority in the …rst round (where
there are at least three candidates— SP , RP and RR). By (24), the SP (and eventually the
SR) drop out, and the RR win against the RP in the second round; hence it is optimal for
the RR to deviate by playing E rather than N . The only possible coalitional deviation is thus
not self-enforcing, so the NE with the SP winning is coalition-proof.
Claim 2: The RR winning at t + 1 cannot be a CPNE outcome.
Proof: Assume that there is a NE with the RR winning, and consider the deviating coalition
(SP = E; RP = N ). The SP win with the support of the RP and are better o¤, since (1; 2)

48

< (3; 3); see Table B.1. The deviation is also self-enforcing. Indeed, if the RP deviate and
stay in, there are at least three candidates in the …rst round, none with an absolute majority.
By (24), the SP (and then the SR) drop out, so that in the second round the RP lose to the
RR; ending up with their 3rd rather than 2nd choice; it was therefore not optimal to deviate.
Claim 3: The RP winning at t + 1 cannot be a CPNE outcome.
Proof: Assume there is a NE with the RP winning. The deviation (SP = N; RR = E)
brings the RR to power

48

and is pro…table, as (3; 1) < (4; y) since y

2: This coalition is also

self-enforcing. If the SP deviate and stay in, there will be at least three candidates in the …rst
round. By (24), the RR and the RP will go to the second round, where the RR win anyway.
Claim 4: The SR winning at t + 1 cannot be a CPNE outcome.
Proof: We again show that if there is a NE with the SR winning, it cannot be coalition-proof.
Subcase (a). The deviation (SP = E; RP = N ) leads the SP to power (supported by the
RP ) and it is pro…table, since (1; 2) < (2; 4): To establish that it is also self-enforcing, note in
Table B.1 that, since y = 4; the RP are ranked last by every other group and consequently
can never win, in either round. Therefore, it is not pro…table for them to deviate and enter
against the SP ; conversely, it is not optimal for the SP to let them enter alone.
Subcase (b). A pro…table deviation is (RP = N; RR = E); since it brings the RR to power
and (3; 1) < (4; z); as z

2: The deviating coalition is also self-enforcing: if the RP deviate

from it, the SP (and eventually the SR) drop out in round 1 by (24), and the RR win anyway
against the RP in round 2.
Case 2:

<b<

H:

The preference structure, reported in Table B.2, di¤ers from the previous

one because the RR and the SR now have the same ideal policy (zero tax rate). This implies
that the SP and the RP are both indi¤erent between RR and SR: Moreover, the SR will
always rank the RR0 s policy 2nd , and vice-versa. It is easily veri…ed that the analysis of Case
1 applies here as well (with now only subcase (a) relevant in Claim 4).
SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

3

2

2

RP

2

1

3

3

RR

x

y

1

2

SR

3

4

2

1

where (x; y) = (3; 4) [subcase (a)], or (4; 3) [subcase (b)].
Table B.2. Fiscal preferences of each group when

48

<b<

H

:

When the SR do not enter, all groups but the RP support the RR; who win in round 1. When SR = E
and the sum of RR and SP is less than 50%, the RR and the RP go to round 2, and the RR wins.

49

B - Region b ( ) < b: Table B.3 reports the preference structure for this case.
SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

4

3

2

RP

3

1

2

4

RR

x

y

1

z

SR

x0

4

y0

1

where (x; y; z) = (3; 4; 2) [subcase (a)], or (4; 2; 3) or (4; 3; 2) [subcase (b)]; (x0; y0) = (2; 3) or (3; 2):
Table B.3. Fiscal preferences of each group when b ( ) < b:

Claim 1: The RR winning at t + 1 is the unique Nash equilibrium outcome.
Proof: We show that if the RR enter they always win, independently of all other groups’
strategies; the result will immediately follow. Let the RR enter (either on or o¤ the equilibrium
path), and suppose …rst that RP stay out. They will then back the RR, whom they rank them
second and who thus win in the …rst round. If the RP do enter, there are two possible subcases:
(a) If neither the SP nor the SR enter, both support the RR (whom they always prefer to
the RP ), who thus again win immediately.
(b) If either or both of these groups enter, no one has a majority in the …rst round. The
RP and the RR; being the two largest contestants, make it to the second round, and here
again win with the support of both the SP and the SR:
Claim 2: The RR winning at t + 1 is a (unique) CPNE outcome.
Proof: Let the RR enter alone: (SP = N; RP = N; RR = E; SR = N ): By Claim 1 no group
would gain from deviating, since the RR will win anyway. To show that it is coalition-proof,
note that the minimal winning coalition is (SP; RP ); which obtains (3; 2) when the RR win. As
there is no policy vector that Pareto-dominates (3; 2), there is no pro…table deviating coalition,
hence the result. Uniqueness follows from Claim 1.
C - Locus b = b ( ): The only di¤erence with the previous case is that the RP are now
indi¤erent between SP and RR : the preference structure is still that of Table B.3, except that
the second row is now (2 1 2 4): The preceding reasoning remains unchanged since, whenever the
RP have a (…rst- or second-round) choice between RR and SP; it is enough that they split their
vote equally to ensure the latter’s victory: by Assumption 5, RR + RP=2 = r(1 + n)=2 > 1=2:
The RR winning is thus again the only NE and CPNE outcome.
D - Region b < : The SP and RP have the same preferred policy, so either one entering,
backed by the other, wins a majority. Moreover, the RR winning cannot be a CPNE outcome,
as that same majority of SP plus RP could deviate (e.g., (RP = E; SP = N )) and win.

50

B.5

Proofs for Church’s Repair Policy with Income Heterogeneity

We …rst show that the set of b’s where

y is an interval [b ( ; y); b+ ( ; y)]; then study

(b; )

its comparative statics with respect to inequality.
Lemma 7 (1) The function
R(

H

(b; ) equals 0 for b < b ( ); then jumps up to

(b ( ))) : It is continuous and strictly increasing on [b ( ); b ( )=(1

down to

(b ( )=(1

); ) = R (

H

(b ( )=(1

)))

continuous and strictly decreasing on [b ( )=(1

(1

)R(

H

@ (b;
@b

H)

= R0 (

H

H

=

(b))

H

b2

(1

(b))

0
H

)R(

(b)

); +1); with limb!+1 (b; ) = R(^) > 0:

H

((1

0
H

(b) =

In what follows, we make explicit the dependence of

b+ (

b ( ; y) and
(2) As

H

L

rises, the graph of

H

(b;

((1

)

b;

H );

) b))

0
H

(B.14)
((1

) b)

R0 ( H (b0 ))
;
R00 ( H (b0 ))

now replace (B.1) and (B.15) respectively, with

Lemma 8 (1) As

) b))

)2 R0 (

(1

R0 ( H (b))
R00 ( H (b))

)); then jumps

(b ( ))) : Finally, it is

Proof. The proof is the same as for Lemma 3, except that for b ( )=(1
(b; ) = R (

(b ( ); ) =

(b; ;

L; H )

(B.16)

H=

(via

(B.15)

H

b2 R00 (

H

(b)) > 0:

(b) and b ( )) on

L

and

H:

shifts (weakly) to the left, so that

; y) both (weakly) decrease.

rises, the graph of

(b; ;

L; H )

shifts (weakly) to the right, so that b ( ; y) and

b+ ( ; y) both (weakly) increase.
Proof. (1) (i) The function
b ( )=(1
H )(b

(b; ;

L; H )

depends on

L

only trough the cuto¤s b ( ) and

) at which (b) jumps, respectively from 0 up to (R

( )=(1

)) down to (R

H )(b

( ))

(R

H ) (b

( )) and from (R

)b ( )); note that these four values
are independent of L . Consider now an increase in L to ^L 2 ( L ; H ); by Lemma 5.(2),
the two cuto¤s b ( ) and b ( )=(1
) decrease, to values which we shall denote ^b ( ) and
^b ( ) =(1
), with
^b ( ) < b ( ) < ^b ( ) =(1
provided the change in

H )((1

) < b ( )=(1

);

is not too large. Moreover, by the property just noted, the new
function ^ (b)
(b; ; ^L ; H ) coincides with the old (b)
(b; ; L ; H ) on [0; ^b ( )), on
[b ( ); ^b ( ) =(1
)] and on [b ( )=(1
); +1). They di¤er only on [^b ( ); b ( )), where
^ (b) = R ( H (b)) > 0 = (b) and on [^b ( ) =(1
); b ( )=(1
)), where ^ (b) = R ( H (b))
(1

)R(

H

((1

L

) b)) < R (

H

(b)) = (b):
51

(ii) Omitting the dependence on y to simplify the notation, let now b ( ) and b+ ( ) denote
the two points where, by Property (1)(i) just shown, the graph of (b) intersects the horizontal
= y (we shall denote b ( ) = b ( ) when (b ( )) = R ( H (b ( ))) > y). Let ^b ( )
and ^b+ ( ) similarly denote those intersections for the graph of ^ (with ^b ( ) = ^b ( ) when
^ (^b ( )) = R( H (^b ( ))) > y). By construction, b ( ) lies in the range where (b) is increasing
(including the upward discontinuity), and by Property (1)(i) the graph of ^ is above that of
in that range –strictly when b 2 [^b ( ); b ( )). This implies that ^b ( ) must lie to the left of
b ( ). Similarly, ^b+ ( ) lies in the range where ^ (b) is decreasing; by Property (1)(i), in that
is either above that of ^ (for all b 2 [^b ( ) =(1
); b ( )=(1
))) or
+
+
b ( )=(1
)), so it must be that ^b ( ) lies to the left of b ( ).

range the graph of
equal to it (for all b

(2) (i) To show that an increase in

H

shifts (weakly) the graph of

(; ;

L; H )

to the

right, note the following three features of this function.
First, over the range [b ( ); b ( )=(1

)), the function

(b; ;

strictly increasing and continuous in b and is strictly decreasing in
@ (b; ; L ;
@ H
given that @

H

(b) =@

H

H)

= R0 (

H

(b))

@

(b)

H

@

H;

= R(

H

(b)) is

as

< 0;

H

< 0, by (B.11).

Second, over the range [b ( )=(1

); +1), the function

(b; ;

which is decreasing and continuous in b and strictly increasing in
@ (b; H )
@ H

L; H )

= R0 (
=

1
b

H

(b))

@

H

(b)

(1

@ H
R0 ( H (b0 ))
R00 ( H (b0 ))

where we have used (B.11) and b0

(1

) R0 (

H

((1

L; H )

H.

is given by (B.14),

Indeed,
) b))

@

H

@

(b)
H

R0 ( H (b))
;
R00 ( H (b))
)b. This expression is positive, since

H

(b) is

R0 ( )=R00 ( ) is decreasing in :

increasing in b and Assumption 1 ensures that

Third, by Lemma 5.(2), the two cuto¤s b ( ) and b ( )=(1
) are increasing in
^
Therefore, if we consider an increase in H to H , the two cuto¤s b ( ) and b ( )=(1
increase to values which we shall denote ^b ( ) and ^b ( ) =(1
); with
b ( ) < ^b ( ) <
provided the change in
that an increase in

H

H.

)

^b ( )
b ( )
<
;
1
1

is not too large. The above three properties of

(b; ;

L; H )

imply

shifts the graph of this function (weakly) to the right.
Summarizing, the new function ^ (b)
(b; ; L ; ^H ) has the following shape. Over the
H

range [0; b ( )), it equals zero and coincides with the old (b)
(b; ; L ; H ) : Over the range
^
^
[b ( ); b ( )), (b) = R ( H (b)) > 0 = ^ (b); and over [b ( ); b ( )=(1 )), (b) = R ( H (b)) >
52

R (^H (b)) = ^ (b), where ^H (b) denotes the optimal tax rate of the religious rich when their
income is ^H . The function ^ (b) = R (^H (b)) is continuous and increasing over the range
); ^b ( ) =(1

[b ( )=(1

)), while the function (b) = R (

H

(b))

(1

)R(

H

((1

) b))

is decreasing over this range and has a downward jump at b ( )=(1

). The function ^ (b) =
^
) b)) has a downward discontinuity at b ( ) =(1 ), and it is de-

R (^H (b)) (1

) R (^H ((1
creasing over the range [^b ( ) =(1

R(

H

(b))

(1

)R(

H

((1

); +1) with ^ (b) = R (^H (b)) (1

) R (^H ((1

) b)) >

) b)) = (b):

(ii) By construction, b ( ) lies in the range where (b) is increasing (including the upward
discontinuity), i.e. b ( ) 2 [b ( ); b ( )=(1
^ is below that of

)), and by Property (2)(i) above the graph of
in that range (strictly where ^b > 0). This implies that ^b ( ) must

lie to the right of b ( ). Similarly, b+ ( ) lies in the range where

(b) is decreasing, i.e.

b+ ( ) 2 [b ( )=(1

); +1). By Property (i) above, on that range the graph of ^ is either
increasing or decreasing and above that : It can thus never be that ^b+ ( ) lies in the range
where ^ is increasing but, eventually, ^b ( ) can be in this range. This means that ^b+ ( )
belongs to the range where ^ is decreasing and above ; i.e. ^b+ ( ) 2 [^b ( ) =(1
which in turn implies that ^b+ ( ) lies to the right of b+ ( ):

B.6

); +1),

Proof of Proposition 7

Given any values of the state variables at the start of date t + 1; the ensuing Church decision
and political competition lead to the unique CPNE outcome described in Proposition 5. The
intertemporal expected utilities for each type of agent that result under blocking and no blocking thus de…ne the payo¤s of the date-t political game, which we now show also has a unique
CPNE outcome. Together with its unique continuation, it will constitute the unique PCPNE
of generation t’s two-period, three-stage game.
(1) We …rst show, in Lemma 9 below, that: (i) the RR are always the pivotal group at date
t : they want to block (weakly) less than the RP; while neither the SP nor the SR ever want
1=(1 + ); even the RP prefer not to block in the repairing region, b 2 b; b :

to; (ii) for q

NB
Recall that the RR block, VRR

B ; if and only if (31) and (33) exceed R
VRR

1 ('(a))

H;

in Regions 1 and 2 respectively. We now derive more general conditions for all four types, then
rank them. If all BR innovations are blocked, the RR will be in power at t + 1; so the expected
utility of any agent with income
[1

R

1

('(a))] + [1

2[

+ (1

L; H ]

and religiousness

pR )(1 + )] [(1

H

2 f0; 1g is

(b)) + bR (

H

(b))]:

(B.17)

Suppose now that BR innovations are not blocked, but that their damage to beliefs gets
repaired with probability q~ 2 [0; 1]: While the optimal strategy of the Church implies q~ =
53

1fb2[b;b]g q; for now we treat q~ as a parameter. There are two cases to consider.
b ( )=(1

Case I: b

): The RR will be in power at t + 1 even repair fails, so the expected

utility of agents in group( ; ) is now
+ [1

+ (1

+ pR (1
with b0
R

(1

pR (1

q~)) (1 + )] [(1

q~) (1 + ) [ 1

b0

H

(b)) + bR (

H

+ b0 R

H

(b))]

b0 ];

H

(B.18)

)b: The group of ( ; )-types therefore wants to block if and only if

1 ('(a))

pR f[1
(1

q~ (1 + )] [(1

H

q~) (1 + ) [(1

H

(b)) + bR (

(b0 ))

+

b0 R (

H
H

(b))]

(b0 ))]g

I (b;

; ; q~):
(B.19)

Case II: b 2 [b ( ); b ( )=(1

)): When repair fails, it is now the SP who come to power

at t + 1; implementing (T; G) = (R(
obtained by simply replacing

b0

L(

by

)); 0): The expected utility of any group ( ; ) is thus

and

H (b

0)

by

L(

) in (B.19). Its utility under blocking

is unchanged from (B.17), so the blocking condition is given by similar substitutions in (B.19):
R

1 ('(a)

pR [1
(1

Lemma 9 Let b
1. For all b

q~ (1 + )] (1

(b)) + bR (

H

q~) (1 + ) [(1

L(

)) + R (

H

L(

(b))
))]

II (b;

; ; ; q~):

(B.20)

b ( ): Then:
b ( )=(1

) where

I (b;

; 1; q~)

0; the function

creasing in : Similarly, for all b < b ( )=(1

) where

II (b;

I (b;

; 1; q~)= is strictly de-

; 1; q~)

0;

II (b;

; ; 1; q~)=

is strictly decreasing in : Therefore, whenever the RR want to block, so do the RP:
2. For all b

b ( )=(1

7 implies that
3. For all q

II (b;

);
;

1=(1 + );

I (b;

~)
H ; 0; q
I (b;

; 0; q~) < 0; while for all b < b ( )=(1

); Assumption

< 0: In both cases, no secular agent wants to block.
; ; q) < 0 and

II (b;

; ; ; q) < 0: Therefore, under

Assumption 3, no group …nds it optimal to block in the repairing region, b 2 [b; b]:
Proof. The last claim is immediate. For the other two, note that

I (b;

; 1; q~)= pR is a¢ ne

in ; of the form bAI + BI ; where

since

H

AI

[1

q~ (1 + )]R (

BI

[1

q~ (1 + )] [1

is weakly increasing and

want to block is

I

H

(b))
H

(1

(b)]

(1

q~) (1 + ) (1

)R

q~) (1 + ) [1

H

0
H (b )]

b0

;

< 0;

> 0: By (B.19), a minimal condition for ( ; ) types to

0; which implies that bAI
54

BI > 0: For

= 0 (the secular) this

cannot be, while for
in : Similarly,

II =

= 1 (the religious) this implies that

= bAI = + BI is decreasing

pR is of the form AII ( ) + BII ; where

AII ( )

[1

BII

[1

Moreover, AII (0) < [1
b

I=

q~ (1 + )] bR (

q~ (1 + )] [1
q~ (1 + )] [1

H

H

H

(b))

(b)]

(b)]

(1
(1

(1

q~) (1 + ) R (
q~) (1 + ) [1

q~) (1 + ) (1

L(

L(

)) ;

)] < 0:

L(

))] by (B.20) and

b ( ); the rest of the proof proceeds as in the other case. k
Having proved Lemma 9, we now show that the only CPNE outcome always involves

implementing the preferred policy of RR:
(a) Consider …rst the case where they want to block. Then so do the RP; whereas the
SP and SR never want to. At least one (or both) of RR or RP then …nds optimal to enter:
indeed, if only one of them does it is supported by the other and thus wins in the …rst round;
if both do and it leads to anything else than their common preferred outcome, i.e., blocking,
it is optimal for one of them to deviate and back the other. Thus, in any Nash equilibrium,
blocking must occur. Furthermore, the pro…les (SP = N; RP = N; RR = E; SR = N )
(SP = N; RP = E; RR = N; SR = N ) are both CP N E’s (with the same outcome): for a
deviation to be pro…table it would need to result in a di¤erent outcome, and this can occur
only if the RR or RP; or both, deviate(s); they could only lose, however, and so never will.
(b) Suppose now that the RR do not want to block. The RP is the only group that might
want to. They will never win, however, as it would be optimal for at least one the other
three groups to enter, beating the RP with the support of the other two. Thus, in any Nash
equilibrium, blocking cannot occur. Finally, it is easy to verify that (SP = N; RP = E; RR =
N; SR = N ) is again a CPNE.
This concludes the proof of Part (1) of Proposition 7.
(2) In each Region k = 1; 2; the blocking boundary is de…ned by R

k (b) =@b
RR

with the left-hand side increasing in a: We show in each case @
B(a)
=

(R
H

k ) 1 (' (a))
H
RR

1 (' (a))

H

k (b) ;
RR

=

> 0; implying that

is well-de…ned and increasing in a: Indeed, setting

= 1 and

in (B.19) and (B.20), the envelope theorem implies that

1
@ I
(b;
pR @b
1
@ II
(b; ;
pR
@b

~)
H ; 1; q

= [1

q~ (1 + )] R (

H

(b))]

~)
H ; 1; q

= [1

q~ (1 + )] R (

H

(b)) > 0;

with AI > 0 whenever

I

(1

q~) (1 + ) (1

)R

H

b0

0; as shown earlier. Setting q~ = 0 proves the desired results.

55

= AI ;

B.7

Proof of Proposition 8

Region 1: b > b > b ( )=(1

). No repairing and no power reallocation.
1 (b)
RR

The blocking condition is here
left-hand side with respect to
@

1 (b)
RR

@

H

since

H

R

(b0 ) <

1

H

(b)

(1 + ) 1

ation, using the …rst-order

@
=

1

R

(' (a)) < 0; (B.21)

b < b: No repairing, leading to a power reallocation.
2 (b)
RR
condition R0 (

The blocking condition is now

2 (b)
RR

b0

H

(b) :

Region 2. b ( )

@

0; see (30). Di¤erentiating the

H

and using the envelope theorem yields

H

(' (a)) = pR 1

H

1 (' (a))

R

R

1

R
L(

1 (' (a))

)) =

L;

0; see (32). A similar di¤erenti-

H

yields

(' (a))

H

pR 1

H

(b)

(1 + ) [1

L(

)] + (1 + ) (

L)

H

@

L(

@

)

1

R

(' (a)) :

H

Greater inequality thus leads to more blocking if
1

H

Since maxf

(b)
H

(b) ;

(1 + ) (1
L(

L(

)) + (1 + ) (

L)

H

@

L(

@

)

>

R

1 (' (a))

pR

H

:

(B.22)

)g < 1; a su¢ cient condition for (B.22) to hold is
(

L)

H

@

L(

@

)

>1+

H

R 1 (' (a))
:
pR (1 + )

Di¤erentiating implicitly the …rst order condition R0 (
taking into account that @

L =@ H

@

L(

@

)

=
=

H

n= (1

)) =

L

with respect to

L,

and

n), we have

n
1

L(

(B.23)

1
n

[

R00 (

L(

))]

> 0:

(B.24)

Substituting (B.24) into (B.23), the latter can be rewritten as

H

Since R (

L(

>1+

n)2

(1

)) is C 3 and R00 (

n
L(

R00 (

L(

))

1+

R 1 (' (a))
pR (1 + )

:

)) is nonincreasing (by Assumption 1, R000

is positive, nondecreasing and bounded above by

R00 (^),

(B.25)
0),

R00 (

L(

))

while ' (a) has an upper bound at

': Therefore, condition (B.25) holds under Assumption 8. In this region, greater income inequality thus leads, ceteris paribus, to more blocking.
56

REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005) “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth,”American Economic Review, 95(3),
546-579.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) “Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective,” American Political Science Review 100, 115-131.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2008) “Persistence of Power, Elites and Institutions,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 267-93.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and Persistence of
Ine¢ cient States,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
Aghion, Philippe, Cahuc, Pierre and Yann Algan (2011) “Civil Society And The State: The
Interplay Between Cooperation And Minimum Wage Regulation,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 9(1), 3-42.
Alesina, Alberto and Marios Angeletos (2005) “Fairness and Redistribution,” American Economic Review, 95(4), 960-80.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir and William Easterly (1999). “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1243-84.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2005) “Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of
Opportunities,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6), 897-931.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2013) “Culture and Institutions,”NBER Working Paper
19750, December.
Alexander, Amir (2014) In…nitesimal: How a Dangerous Mathematical Theory Shaped the
Modern World. New York, NY: Scienti…c American / Farrar, Strauss and Giroux.
Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee (2013) “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in
the World, 1950-2010,” Journal of Development Economics, 104, 184-198.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary (2003) “Religion and Economic Growth Across
Countries,” American Sociological Review, 68(5), 760-781.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary (2005) “Which Countries Have State Religions?”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 1331-1370.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann (2009) Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital
Theory Of Protestant Economic History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 531-596.
Bellettini, Giorgio and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, (2005) “Special Interests and Technological
Change,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 43-56.
Bénabou, Roland (1996) “Inequality and Growth,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual, B. Bernanke
and J. Rotemberg eds., 11-74.
Bénabou, Roland (2000) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,”
American Economic Review, 90(1), 96-129.
57

Bénabou, Roland (2008) “Ideology,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3),
321-352.
Bénabou, Roland, Ticchi, Davide and Andrea Vindigni (2014) “Religion and Innovation,”
Princeton University mimeo, December. Forthcoming in American Economic Review, Papers
and Proceedings (2015).
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 699-746.
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2011) “Identity, Morals and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, (2011), 805-855.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Bezalel Peleg, and Michael D. Whinston (1987) “Coalition-Proof Nash
Equilibria I: Concepts,” Journal of Economic Theory, 42(1), 1-12.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate (1997) “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 85-11.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115, 955-988.
Botticini, Maristella and Zvi Eckstein (2012) The Chosen Few: How Education Shaped Jewish
History, 70-1492. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bridgman, Benjamin R., Igor D. Livshits and James C. MacGee (2007) “Vested Interests and
Technology Adoption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 649-666.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (2008). International Economic Accounts. (link).
Caselli, Francesco (1999) “Technological Revolutions,”American Economic Review, 89(1), 78102.
Cavalcanti, Tiago V., Stephen L. Parente and Rui Zhao (2007) “Religion in Macroeconomics: A
Quantitative Analysis of Weber’s Thesis,”Economic Theory, Symposium in Honor of Edward
C. Prescott, 32(1), 105-123.
Chaney, Eric (2008) “Tolerance, Religious Competition and the Rise and Fall of Muslim Science,” mimeo, Harvard University. (link)
Chaney, Eric (2011) “Islam and Human Capital Formation: Evidence from Premodern Muslim
Science,”in The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel M. McCleary,
ch. 4, 81-92.
Chaney, Eric (2013) “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion and Political Power,”
Econometrica, 81(5), 2033-2053.
Chari, V. V. and Hugo Hopenhayn (1991) “Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Di¤usion
of New Technology,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6), 1142-65.
Childress, Diana (2008) Johannes Gutenberg and the Printing Press, Minneapolis, MN: TwentyFirst Century Books.
58

Deming, David (2010) Science and Technology in World History: Early Christianity, the Rise
of Islam and the Middle Ages: 2, Je¤erson, NC: McFarland.
Diner, Dan (2009) Lost In The Sacred: Why the Muslim World Stood Still, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Esteban, Joan, Levy, Gilat and Laura Mayoral (2014) “Liberty, Equality, Religiosity,” LSE
working paper, September.
Freeman, Charles (2005) The Closing of the Western Mind: The Rise of Faith and the Fall of
Reason. New York, NY: Vintage.
Gelman, Andrew (2009) Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor State: Why Americans Vote
the Way They Do, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Bruce I. Sacerdote (2008) “Education and Religion,”Journal of Human
Capital, 2(2), 188-215.
Goldstone, Jack A. (2000) “The Rise of the West-Or Not? A Revision to Socio-Economic
History,” Sociological Theory, 18(2), 175-194.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Gerard Roland (2011) “Which Dimensions of Culture Matter for
Long-Run Growth?” American Economic Review, 101(3), 492-98.
Grant, Edward (2004) Science And Religion, 400 B.C. To A.D. 1550: From Aristotle To
Copernicus, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Greif, Avner (1994) “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Re‡ection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy,
102(5), 912-950.
Greif, Avner (2005) Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval
Trade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Guiso, Luigi, Sapienza, Paola and Luigi Zingales (2003) “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(1), 225-282.
Guiso, Luigi, Sapienza, Paola and Luigi Zingales (2013) “Long-term Persistence,” Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance mimeo, July.
Gusdorf, Georges (1969) La Révolution Galiléenne, Paris: Payot.
Hameed, Salam (2008) “Bracing for Islamic Creationism,” Science, December 12, 322(5908),
1637-1638.
Hoodboy, Pervez Amirali (2007) “Science and the Islamic World - The Quest for Rapprochement,” Physics Today, 49-55.
Indiana Business Research Center, Kelley School of Business, Indiana University. States in
Pro…le. (link)
Jacob, Margaret C. and Larry Stewart (2004) Practical Matter: Newton’s Science in the Service
of Industry and Empire, 1687-1851, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

59

Kertcher, Zack and Ainat N. Margalit (2005) “Challenges to Authority, Burden of Legitimisation: The Printing Press and the Internet,” International Journal of Communications Law &
Policy, 10, 1-30.
Koyré, Alexandre (1957) From the Closed World to the In…nite Universe, Baltimore, MD: The
Johns Hopkins Press.
Krusell, Per and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (1996) “Vested Interests in a Positive Theory of Stagnation and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 63(2), 301-329.
Kuran, T. (2011) The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Huber, John and Piero Stanig (2011) “Church-State Separation and Redistribution,” Journal
of Public Economics, 95 (7-8), 828-836.
Landes, David (1998) The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are So Rich and Some
So Poor. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Levy, Gilat and Ronny Razin (2012) “Religious Beliefs, Religious Participation, and Cooperation,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2012, 4(3), 121-151.
Levy, Gilat and Ronny Razin (2014) “Rituals or Good Works: Social Signalling in Religious
Organizations,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(5), 1317-1360.
Luttmer, Erzo (2001) “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 109(3), 500-528.
Maddison, Angus (2007) Contours of the World Economy, 1-2030 AD. Essays in MacroEconomic History, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, B. (2003) What Went Wrong? The Clash Between Islam and Modernity in the Middle
East. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
McLennan III, James E. and Harold Dorn (2006) Science and Technology in World History,
Baltimore PA: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Merton, Robert K. (1938) “Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth-Century England,”
Osiris, 4, 360-632.
Mokyr, Joel (1992) The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress,
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Mokyr, Joel (1998) “The Political Economy of Technological Change: Resistance and Innovation in Economic history,” in Maxine Bergand and Kristin Bruland eds., Technological
Revolutions in Europe, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishers, 39-64.
Mokyr, Joel (2004) The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Mokyr, Joel (2012) “Culture, Institutions, and Modern Growth,”Prepared for the Conference:
Understanding Institutions and Development Economics: the Legacy and Work of Douglas C.
North, St. Louis, Nov. 4-6, 2010.
60

Mooney, Chris (2005) The Republican War on Science. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Norris, Pippa and Ronald Inglehart (2011) Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics Worldwide. Cambridge Studies in Social Theory, Religion and Politics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
North, Douglass (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Osborne, Martin J. and Al. Slivinsky (1996) “A Model of Political Competition with CitizenCandidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(1), 65-96.
Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1999) “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches,”
American Economic Review, 89(5), 1216-1233.
Pew Research Center (2008) Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, Religion Landscape
Survey. (link)
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2009) “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and
Economic Change,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 88-126.
Phillips, Kevin (2006) American Theocracy: The Perils and Politics of Radical Religion, Oil,
and Borrowed Money in the 21st Century. New York, NY: Viking Press.
Piketty, Thomas (1995) “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(3), 551-584.
Restuccia, Diego (2004) “Barriers to Capital Accumulation and Aggregate Total Factor Productivity,” International Economic Review, 45(1), 225-238.
Roemer, John (1998), “Why the Poor Do Not Expropriate the Rich in Democracies: An Old
Argument in New Garb,” Journal of Public Economics, 70, 399-426.
Ruse, Michael (2005) The Evolution-Creation Struggle, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Saint-Paul, Gilles (2010) “Endogenous Indoctrination: Occupational Choices, the Evolution of
Beliefs and the Political Economy of Reforms,” Economic Journal, 120(544), 325-353.
Saleh, Mohammed (2012) “From Kuttabs to Schools: Educational Modernization, Religion,
and Human Capital in Twentieth Century Egypt,” TSE Working Paper, 12-366, September.
Sherkat, Darren (2011) “Religion and Scienti…c Literacy in the United States,” Social Science
Quarterly, 92(5), 1-17.
Sinding Bentzen, Janet (2014) “Acts of God: Religiosity and Natural Disasters,”University of
Copenhagen mimeo.
Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage (2006) “Religion and Preferences for Social Insurance,”
Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 1(3), 255-286.
Swatos, William H. Jr. and Kevin J. Christiano (1999) “Secularization Theory: The Course
of a Concept,” Sociology of Religion, 60(3), 209-228.

61

Tabellini, Guido (2008) “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,”Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 123(3), 905-950.
Tabellini, Guido (2010) “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677-716.
Ticchi, Davide, Thierry Verdier and Andrea Vindigni (2013) “Democracy, Dictatorship and
the Cultural Transmission of Political Values,” IZA Discussion Papers No. 7441, June.
Trevor-Roper, Hugh (1967) The Crisis of the Seventeenth Century, New York, NY: Harper &
Row.
U.S. Patent And Trademark O¢ ce (2007). Patent Counts by Patent Type and by State and
Country of Origin. (link)
Vander Hook, Sue (2010) Johannes Gutenberg: Printing Press Innovator. Minnesota, MN:
ABDO Publishing Company.
Vidal-Robert, Jordi (2011) “An Economic Analysis of the Spanish Inquisition’s Motivations
and Consequences,” mimeo, Boston University. (link)
Weber, Max [1905] (2002) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Los Angeles, LA:
Roxbury Company.
World Intellectual Policy Organization (WIPO): IP Statistics Data Center, Total Patent Applications (Direct and PCT National-Phase Entries). (link)
Wuthnow, Robert (2011) Red State Religion: Faith and Politics in America’s Heartland,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Young, Cristobal (2009) “Religion and Economic Growth in Western Europe: 1500-2000,”
mimeo, Stanford University. (link)

62

Online Appendix C: Additional Proofs
C.1

Economy without income di¤erences

The only result not proved in Appendix A concerns the behavior of the religious sector.
Lemma 10 The function

~ (~ (~)).
(~; ) = R

(b; ) equals 0 for b < ~, then jumps up to

It is continuous and increasing on [~; ~= (1
)), then jumps down to (~= (1
); ) =
~
~
R (~ (~= (1
))) (1
) R (~ (~)). Finally, it is continuous and strictly decreasing on
~
[~= (1
) ; +1), with limb!+1 (b; ) = R(1)
> 0.
~ has similar properties to those of
Proof. The proof is identical to that of Lemma 3, as R
R: Together with Assumption 10, this yields the optimal-repairing interval.
Let us now turn to the state’s blocking loci. In Region 1, di¤erentiating (A.6) and using
the envelope theorem gives
@

1 (b)

@b

h
~ (~ (b))
= pR R

Blocking BR innovations requires that
~ (~ (b))
R

(1 + ) (1

~ ~
)R

b0

Since ~ (b) is nondecreasing and b0
Therefore,
@

2 (b) =@b

1 (b)

0 implies that @

(1 + ) (1

1 (b)

b0

i

:

(C.1)

0, which by (A.6) takes the form

(~=b) (1 + ) 1

(1

~ ~
)R

~

b0

(1

~ (b)) :

(C.2)

) b, the right-hand side of (C.2) is strictly positive.

1 (b) =@b

> 0 in (C.1). Similarly, from (A.7) we obtain

~ (~ (b)) ; which is always positive. Finally, we omit the proof that there is
= pR R

no blocking when b 2 [b; b] as it closely follows the one in Appendix B.2.

C.2

Economy with Unequal Incomes

Once again, we solve the game backwards from t + 1:
C.2.1

Political preferences at t + 1 : proof of Proposition 11

Recall the de…nitions of ~L (b) and ~H (b) from Appendix A.2.1. The proofs establishing the
existence and uniqueness of b ( ) in Lemma 5 of Appendix B go through unchanged, by simply
~ H (b)): In particular, the RP ’s
replacing everywhere H (b) and R( H (b)) with ~H (b) and R(~
indi¤erence condition (between SP and RR) de…ning b ( ) is now
[1

~H (b ( ))]

L

~ H (b ( ))) = [1
+ b ( ) R(~

63

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

)):

(C.3)

For any b

bH > bL de…ned by (A.9), we have ~H (b) = ~L (b) = 1 : the RR and RP ’s ideal

policies coincide (~ = 1; making

irrelevant), so the RP must prefer the RR to the SP: By

de…nition of b this means that b ( ) < bH ; therefore
~ 0 (~H (b)) =
b ( ); ~H (b) < 1 and bR

8b

H:

(C.4)

The proofs for the comparative statics of b ( ) with respect to
unchanged. For monotonicity in
of the fact that

L(

) >

H

L;

and

H

also remain

however, under the benchmark speci…cation we made use

(b ( )) ; see Lemma 6 in Appendix B. In the present case, we

show a similar inequality, which in turns makes the same proof of monotonicity go through.
Lemma 11 Under Assumption 11,

L(

) > ~H (b ( )) :

Proof. Suppose, by contradiction, that
~H (b ( ))

L(

) =

L(

)

~H (b ( )): Let us rewrite (C.3) as

~ H (b ( )))
b ( )R(~

R(

L

=

~
R(

L

L ( ))

R(

L

~
~ 0 (x)
Since R(0) = R(0)
= 0 and R

))

L

b ( )h~
R(~H (b ( )))

b ( )h~
R(
+

L(

i
(
))
L

i b ( )
(
))
+
L

R(

L(

)): (C.5)

L

~ lies everywhere above R: Together with
R0 (x) for all x, R

b ( ) > ; this implies that the last line in (C.5) is strictly positive. Turning to the second
line, the Mean-Value Theorem implies that
~ H (b ( ))
R(~
for some c 2 [

L(

~
R(

L(

)) = [~H (b ( ))

L(

~ 0 (c);
)] R

) ; ~H (b ( ))]: We can then rewrite (C.5) as
[~H (b ( ))
=

b ( )h~
R(
L

L(

)] 1

b ( ) ~0
R (c)
L

L ( ))

R(

i b ( )
(
))
+
L

R(

L(

)) > 0:

(C.6)

L

This clearly rules out ~H (b ( )) = L ( ) ; but also ~H (b ( )) > L ( ) ; which would imply
~ 0 (c) < L , hence b ( )R
~ 0 (~H (b ( ))) < L ; by concavity of R
~ 0 : Recall, however, that by
b ( )R
~ 0 (~H (b)) = L ; implying a contradiction for b = b ( ):
(C.4) we have bR
C.2.2

Coalition formation and CPNE at t + 1

A - Region b < b ( )
64

Case 1: b < ~L

(1

L(

))

L

+ R(

L(

)): The RP ’s ideal policy coincides with that of

the SP , which is therefore always implemented.
Case 2: ~L

b<

H:

In this case the RP desire G > 0; but the RR do not. Table C.1 reports

the corresponding preference structure.
SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

y

x

x

RP

2

1

3

3

RR

3

4

1

2

SR

3

4

2

1

where (x; y) = (2; 3) [subcase (a)], or (3; 2) [subcase (b)].
Table C.1. Fiscal preferences of each group when (1

L(

))

L

+ R(

L(

))

b<

H:

The RR have the same ideal policy as the SR (G = T = 0), so the SP and RP are
indi¤erent between them (as in Region A, Case 2 of the baseline model, where

<b<

H;

see

Table B.2). The RR and SR prefer the SP to the RP; because both these groups redistribute
income at the rate

L(

) but latter also impose positive levels of G:

The RP rank the SP in 2nd place, by Lemma 5.(1) and the fact that b < b ( ). The SP; in
turn, rank the RP as 2nd for values of b close to

L;

as the latter then impose only a low level

of G (subcase (b)). As b increases (and eventually approaches

H ),

it is possible that the SP

switch to preferring the ideal policy of the SR (and RR) to that the RP; because the losses
generated by ~L (b) more than compensate their gains from redistribution. The RP will then
be ranked last (subcase (a)).
In either subcase, the SP winning is the unique CPNE, as they are preferred to the RR
by both the SP and the RP: Formally, subcase (a) in Table C.1 is identical to that in Table
B.2; that the equilibrium is also unchanged in subcase (b) is immediate to verify.49
Case 3:

H

b < b ( ): Table C.2 reports the preference structure for this case.

49
First note that the RP winning is not a CPNE. Indeed, assume that RP = E is a NE. A pro…table deviation
is (RR = N , SP = E) since it brings the SP to power and (3; 1) < (4; z) as z 2 f2; 3g. The deviation is also
self-enforcing: if the RR deviate and enter, they go to round 2 with the RP and lose. Similarly, it is immediate
to show that the SP winning is a CPNE.

65

SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

y

x

z

RP

2

1

3

4

RR

3

4

1

2

SR

x0

4

y0

1

where (x; y; z) = (3; 4; 2) or (4; 3; 2) [subcase (a)], or (4; 2; 3) [subcase (b)]; (x0; y0) = (2; 3) or (3; 2):
Table C.2. Fiscal preferences of each group when

H

b < b ( ):

This case di¤ers from the previous one, since the RR now choose G > 0: The SP , however,
may still prefer the RP to the SR because of the income redistribution which the former
provide, but not the latter. In this case the SP rank the RR last, as they are a just as source
of losses, by imposing G > 0 (subcase (b)). Alternatively, the SP may rank the SR as 2nd ; they
could then prefer the RR to the RP , or vice versa (subcase (a)).50 By de…nition of b ( ), the
RP still continue to prefer the SP to the RR, and always rank the SR last. The preferences
of the SR are the same as in Region A, Case 1 of the baseline framework (see Table B.1).
Consider, …nally, the RR: A priori, they could now prefer (when b is high relative to

H)

prefer the RP ’s policy to that of the SP; and this in turn may prevent the SP from winning.
The reason is that, in this case, the SP may rank 2nd the RP ’s ideal policy (this was not the
case in the baseline framework). And if both the SP and the RR rank the RP in second place,
they will be the winner. The …rst part of Assumption 12 serves to rule out this scenario and
ensure that the preferences of the RR remain the same as in subcase (a) of Table B.1. Indeed,
the RR prefer the SP to the RP if:51
[1

L(

)]

H

+ R(

L(

)) > [1

~L (b)] [(1

L(

))

H

+ R(

L(

~ L (b)):
))] + bR(~

This expression simpli…es to
(b)

~L (b) [(1

L(

))

H

+ R(

This condition always holds for b equal or close to
societal policy is ~H (
L(

H)

L(
H,

~ L (b)) < 0:
))] + bR(~

(C.7)

since in this case the RR’s preferred

0, whereas the RP impose on them not only the same redistribution

) as the SP , but also a strictly positive ~L (B): Hence, (C.7) is always satis…ed if @ =@b

for all

H

0

b < b ( ): Di¤erentiating (C.7), we obtain

50

The religious component of the RR’s policy package imposes lower losses (a lower ~) on the SP than that
of the RP: However, the RP provide some income redistribution that may compensate for such losses.
51
Both SP and RP tax and redistribute income at the same rate L ( ), but transfers T under the SP are
higher, as there are no income losses from a positive ~.

66

@
=
@b

@~L (b)
[(1
@b

L(

))

H

+ R(

~ 0 (~L (b))
))] + bR

L(

@~L (b)
~ L (b)):
+ R(~
@b

(C.8)

Interior solution for ~L (b): Suppose …rst that b ( )
bL ; so that for all b
b ( ); ~L (b)
~ 0 (~L (b)) = ~L : This also implies that @~L (b)=@b =
is de…ned by the …rst-order condition bR
~L =[ b2 R
~ 00 (~L (b))] > 0, therefore @ =@b 0 if and only if
(~L )2
~ L (b))
+ R(~
~ 00 (~L (b))
b2 R
~ 00 (~L (b))
R
~ L (b))
R(~
~ 0 (~L (b))]2
[R

~L
~ 00 (~L (b))
b2 R
(1
(1

[~L + (1

L(

)) ( H
L ( )) L + R(

L(
L)
L(

))

)) (

L )]

H

:

(C.9)

The left-hand-side is increasing in ~L (b), and therefore reaches its maximum at
On the right-hand side, the numerator is minimized when
is always less than

L

L(

()

~ 00 (1)R(1)=[
~
~ 0 (1)]2 .52
R
R

) = ^, while the denominator

+ R(^). Therefore, (C.9) will hold provided that
~ 00 (1)R(1)
~
R
~ 0 (1)]2
[R

(1

^) ( H
L)
:
L + R(^ )

Rearranging terms, this is exactly the …rst part of Assumption 12. Thus
that the RR prefer the SP to the RP , holds for all b

(b) < 0, meaning

bL :

Corner solution for ~L (b): Suppose now that b ( ) > bL meaning that ~L (b) = 1 for all
b 2 [bL ; b ( )]; for ~H (b); in contrast, we have (C.4). Over that range, (C.8) now yields
~
@ =@b = R(1)
> 0; so (C.7) will hold if it is satis…ed at b = b ( ), i.e.
~
b ( )R(1)
< (1

L(

))

H

+ R(

L(

)):

Since ~L (b) = 1; it follows from b ( ) < bH and the de…nition of bH
~ 0 (1): Therefore, a su¢ cient condition is
b ( ) < H =R
~
R(1)
~ 0 (1)
R

(1

L(

))

H

+ R(

L(

))

(C.10)
~ 0 (1) in (A.9) that

H =R

;

(C.11)

H

which is Assumption 13. Thus (b) < 0 for b 2 [bL ; b ( )] as well, and again the RR prefer the
SP to the RP:

Clearly, the RR also always prefer the SR to the SP (who tax). The rest of the proof that
the SP winning is the unique CPNE is then similar to that of the baseline model.
~ 00 (x) R
~ (x) =[R
~ 0 (x)]2 is increasing in x (hence maximized at x = 1), since
Indeed, S (x)
R
h
i2
~ 0 (x) = [R
~ 000 (x) R
~ (x) + R
~ 00 (x) R
~ 0 (x)]R
~ 0 (x) [R
~ 00 (x)]2 R
~ (x) > 0:
S 0 (x) R
52

67

B - Region b ( ) < b.
The RP now prefer the RR to the SP . If the SP prefer the RR to the RP , the entire
structure of preferences is the same as in the baseline’s Table B.3, leading to the RR winning
as the unique CPNE. The SP indeed prefer the RR’s policy package to that of the RP if
[1

~H (b)]

L

> [1

~L (b)] [(1

L(

))

L

+ R(

L(

))]

~L (b)]~L :

[1

(C.12)

As b increases, ~L (b) and ~H (b) reach 1 at …nite levels bL and bH de…ned in (A.9); since there
is no income to left redistribute, the …scal component of the RP ’s policy becomes irrelevant.
When b 2 [bL ; bH ), the SP prefer the RR to the RP , and when b

bH they are indi¤erent

between them. We now need to check that (C.12) is satis…ed for all b 2 [b ( ); bL ); when this
interval is nonempty. At b = b ( ); by de…nition,
[1

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

)) = [1

~H (b ( ))]

L

~ H (b ( ))):
+ b ( )R(~

(C.13)

Substituting (C.13) into (C.12) evaluated at b ( ), the latter can be rewritten as
~L (b ( ))[1

~H (b ( ))]

L

~ H (b ( ))) > 0:
~L (b ( ))]b ( )R(~

[1

(C.14)

Lemma 12 Condition (C.14) is satis…ed when ~L (b ( )) is high enough, namely

where

(

L)

H

1

n

h
~
H R(

+ R( L ( ))
;
L ( )] L + R( L ( ))
L

~L (b ( )) >

[1

L ( ))

R(

i
(
))
+(
L

) R(

H

(C.15)
o
(
))
:
L

Proof. The proof proceeds in three steps.
Step 1. From the de…nition of b ( ) in (C.13), we obtain
~ H (b ( ))) = [~H (b ( ))
b ( ) R(~

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

)):

(C.16)

Substituting (C.16) into equation (C.14) yields
0 < ~L (b ( )) [1

~H (b ( ))]

L

[1

~L (b ( ))] f[~H (b ( ))

L(

)]

L(

)

L

+ R(

L(

))g

or, after some simple manipulations,
~L (b ( ))

L

f[~H (b ( ))

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

))g + ~L (b ( )) [

Isolating the terms in ~L (b ( )), this is equivalent to
68

L

+ R(

L(

))] > 0:

~L (b ( )) f[1

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

))g > [~H (b ( ))

L(

)]

L

+ R(

L(

)):

Since the term in curly brackets is strictly positive, (C.14) becomes
~L (b ( )) >

[~H (b ( ))
L ( )] L + R( L ( ))
:
[1
(
)]
L
L + R( L ( ))

(C.17)

Step 2. In the remaining part of the proof, we look for a lower bound on ~H (b ( ))

L(

)

that does not depend on b ( ). Recalling the de…nition of b ( ) as rewritten in (C.6), we have
b ( )

~H (b ( ))

L(

L

)=

h

~
R(

L(

))

R(

L(

b ( )
L

for some c 2 (~H (b ( ));

L(

L(

L

)<

h

~
R(

L(

))

R(

b ( )
L

~ 0 (~H (b ( )))
Recalling next that b ( )R
H

~H (b ( ))

L(

)<

h

~
R(

L(

H

))

L(

L(

R(

L

L(

))
;

1

i
)) +

b ( )

~ 0 (~H (b ( )))
R

L

R(

L(

))
:

(C.18)

1

< b ( ), (C.18) in turn implies
R(

L(
H

i
)) + (

Step 3. Condition (C.17) provides an upper bound,
the term ~H (b ( ))

~ 0 (c)
R

b ( )

)). Since R0 is decreasing, this implies
b ( )

~H (b ( ))

i
)) +

H

) R(

L(

))
:

(C.19)

L

, which does not depend on b ( ), for

) : Together with (C.17), this implies a fortiori:
~L (b ( )) >

+ R( L ( ))
;
L ( )] L + R( L ( ))
L

[1

which is exactly (C.15). Finally, since the right-hand-side does not depend on b ( ); it provides
a lower bound for ~L (b ( )) above which (C.14) holds.
From here on we shall assume that ~L (b ( ) satis…es (C.15), so that (C.12) holds at b =
b ( ). To show that it also holds for b > b ( ), we rewrite it as
[1

~H (b)]

[1

L

~L (b)] ~L > 0:

(C.20)

Under (C.14), a su¢ cient condition for (C.12) to hold for b > b ( ) is that the left-hand side
of (C.20) be nondecreasing in b: From the …rst order conditions of the RR’s and RP ’s, we have
@~H (b)
=
@b

~ 0 (~H (b))
R
;
~ 00 (~H (b))
bR
69

@~L (b)
=
@b

~ 0 (~L (b))
R
:
~ 00 (~L (b))
bR

Using these expressions, [1

~H (b)]
~L

[1

L

~L (b)] ~L weakly increases in b if

~ 0 (~H (b))
R
~ 00 (~H (b))
R

L

~ 00 (~L (b))
R
;
~ 0 (~L (b))
R

(C.21)

~ 0 (~H ) < 1; since R
~ 0 (0) = 1 R
~ 0 (x) for any x as R
~ 00 (x) < 0;
By Assumption 9, we have: (i) R
~ 00 (~L (b)) =R
~ 0 (~L (b))
~ 00 (1) =R
~ 0 (1) ; since R
~ 00 (x) =R
~ 0 (x) is increasing in x and
(ii) R
R
~ 0 (1) > 0; (iii) R
~ 00 (~H (b))
~ 00 (0) ; since R
~ 000 (x) 0 and R
~ 00 (x) < 0. These three facts
R
R
imply that
~ 00 (1)
R
1
~ 00 (0) R
~ 0 (1)
R

~ 0 (~H (b)) R
~ 00 (~L (b))
R
;
~ 00 (~H (b)) R
~ 0 (~L (b))
R

so that (C.21) is always satis…ed under Assumption (12), the second part of which is ~L = L
~ 00 (1) =[R
~ 00 (0) R
~ 0 (1)]: This completes the proof that (C.12) is satis…ed for all b 2 [b ( ); bL )
R

and, therefore, that the SP prefer the ideal policy of the RR to that of the RP in this range.
Table C.3 reports the preference structure for this case.
SP

RP

RR

SR

SP

1

4

3

2

RP

3

1

2

4

RR

x

y

1

z

SR

x0

4

y0

1

where (x; y; z) = (3; 4; 2) [subcase(a)], or (4; 2; 3) or (4; 3; 2) [subcase b]; (x0; y0) = (2; 3) or (3; 2):
Table C.3. Fiscal preferences of each group when b ( ) < b:

It is the same as in the baseline’s Table B.3, so the RR winning is the unique CPNE.
C.2.3

Behavior of the Religious Sector and Science Policy

Replacing

H (b)

and R(

H (b))

~
by ~H (b) and R(~
H (b)) in Lemma 7 and Assumption 6 (which

then becomes Assumption 14), the same proofs lead to the same characterization and comparative statics of the Church’s repairing policy.
As stated at the end of Appendix A, with these same substitutions the four groups’blocking
preferences (value functions at t) inherit, from the later stages of the game, the same properties
as in the core model, and therefore does the equilibrium coalition formation (PCPNE) and its
comparative statics.

70

-5

Figure 1a

JPN
JPNJPNJPN
KOR
JPN KOR
USA
DEU
USA
FIN
SWE
SWE
DEU
USA
NZL
AUS
SWE
CHE
FIN
CHE
FIN
DEU
GBR
DEU
SWE
USA
NZL GBR GBR
FIN
DNK
GBR
FIN
SWE
AUT USA
NOR
NOR
AUT
IRL
HUN
DNK
FRA
FRA
CHE
NOR FRA
IRLDNK
FRA
LUX
ISL
NOR
SVN
RUS
CANSVN
RUS
NLD
SVN
HUN
NLD
ITA
NLD
NLD CAN
AUS
ROU
RUS
IRL
UKR
ITA
ZAF
POL
HUN AUS
MDA
BLR
UKR ISL CAN
BEL
LVA
ROU
HUN
HRV
UKR
MDA
ESP
ESP
CAN
ISL
MDAPOL
BEL
POL
BLR
CZE
GEO
MLT
ARM
IRN
ESP
HRV
BEL
CZE
POLGEO
ESP
MKD
SVK
ESP
SRB
ARG
ROU
BGR
SVK
ROU
LVA
MKD
BGR
ZAF
ARG
LTU
ARG AZE
BGR
GRC
ARG
HKG
BGR
ZAF
MLT
ZAF LTU BRA
ZAFARG
MYS
CYP CHL
BRA
BRA
CHL
JOR
TUR
THA
CHLCHL
EST
URY
PRT
MEX
EST
JOR
BIH
EGY
PRT
MEX
URY
EGYIRN
MLT
MEX
MAR
MEX
VNM
IND TUR COL
MEX
SAU
MAR
TUR
TUR VEN
COL PHL
IND
PHL
IND
PER
GTM
IND
DZA
PERIDN
VNM
TTO
IDN
BGD
BGD
SLV

Innovation by residents (log)
-15
-10

DEU

CHN

CHN

CHN

PAK

NGA
BFA

-20

1980
1995
2005
0

1990
2000

.2

ETH

.4

.6
Religiosity

.8

1

-5

Figure 1b

JPN
KOR

JPN

SWE

-20

Innovation by residents (log)
-15
-10

JPN

JPN

DEU
SWE

GBR SWE
FRA

BLR
CZE
CZE
BGR

CHN

EST

VNM

BGR

EST

USA
USA
NZL
AUS
FIN
CHE
FIN
DEU
DEU
USA
NZL GBR
GBR
DNK
USA
AUT
AUT
IRL
HUN NOR
DNK
NOR
FRA
IRL
FRA
LUX
DNK
ISL
NOR
RUS
NLD SVN
SVN CAN
HUN
NLD
ITA
NLD UKR
ROU IRL
RUS
ITA
ZAF
POL
HUN
AUS
UKR
CAN
BEL
LVA
ISL
ROU
HUN
HRV
MDA
ESP
CAN
ISL
MDA
BEL
POL
GEO
MLT BLR HRV
ARM
IRN
ESP
BEL
ESP
SVKMKD
ESP
BGR
SVK ROU ARG
LVA
MKD
KOR
ZAF
ARG
LTU
ARG
AZE
GRC
ARG
ZAF
MLT
ZAF
ARG
LTU
BRA
BRA
CHL
JOR
CHL CHL
URY
PRT
MEX
BIH
EGY
PRT
MEX
IRN
MLT
MEX
MEX TUR
COL
SAU
MAR
TUR
PHL
VEN
IND
PHL
IND
PER
GTM
IND
DZA
IDN
BGD
BGD
SLV
SWE

DEUFIN

PAK
PAK
NGA

1980
1995
2005
.2

1990
2000

.4

.6
Belief in God

.8

1

Innovation by residents (residuals)
-2
0
2

4

Figure 2a

JPN
JPN

CHN

CHN
CHN

-4

1980
1995
2005
-1

UKR
ROU
ZAF
FIN
JOR
IRN
UKR
FIN
ROU
GBR
JPN
ISL
FIN
DEU
AUS
BGR HUN
AUT
DNK
SWE
POL
EGY
VNM SWE
ARGRUS ISL
MLT
DNK UKR
SVK
DNK
FRA
LTUCHE
GBR
ARG
SWENOR
JOR
ROU
DEU RUS
ISL
CHE DEU
SVK
HUN
DEU
BGD
BGR DEUNZL
ZAF
FIN MLT
ITA POL
NOR FRA
AUT
MAR
EGY
GBR
CZE
BGR ESP IND
BGD
MAR
THA
ZAF RUS
IND
NORNZL
NLD
CHL
CZE
IRL ARG
BRA
SWE
FRA
VNM
IRN POL
ARG
IND
BRA
FRA
IND
ARG
ZAFLTU
CHE
ESP
GBR
URY
ZAF
NLD
ITA
MYS
BRA
NOR
MEX
USA
ESP
CAN
NLD
GRC
TUR
URY
ESP
CHL
PHL
MLT
MEX CAN
CHL CHL
NLD
USA
AUS
IDN
PRT
ESP
USA
IDN
CAN
USA
COL
USA
PAK
AUS
TUR
CYP
PHL
TURCAN
TUR
DZA
MEX
SAU COL
PER
PRT
MEX
VEN
MEX
KOR
KOR
SWE
JPN
JPN

FIN

1990
2000

PER

TTO

-.5
0
Religiosity (residuals)

.5

3

Figure 2b

JPN

Innovation by residents (residuals)
-1
0
1
2

JPN
UKR

SWE
JPN
JPN

ROU
ZAF
IRN JOR
FIN

FIN
UKR

ROU
GBR
FIN
DEU
HUN
AUS
BGR
AUT
DNK
SWE
EGY
RUS
ARG
MLT
DNK
SVK
DNK
ISL
FRA
LTU
GBR
ARG
NOR
SWE
RUS
DEU
ISL
CHE
DEU
SVK
HUN
DEU
BGD
BGR
ZAF POL MLT
NZL
ITA
FRA
NOR
AUT
MAR
GBR
IND
ESP
BGD
ZAF
IND
NOR
NLD
NZL
CHL
ARG
IRL
BRA
FRA
IRN
ARG ARG
IND
LTUBRA
ZAF
ESP
URY
NLD
SGP
ITA
ISL

SWE KOR

CZE
CZE
VNM

MEX
NLD
MEX

ESP
CAN
GRC
ESPPHL MLT CHL
CAN
CHL

USA
USA
USA

AUS

PRT

IDN

COL

USA

CAN

PAK

-2

1980
1995
2005
-.8

1990
2000

PHL
PAK

TUR
DZA TUR
MEX
SAU
PER
PRT
MEX

-.6

-.4
-.2
Belief in God (residuals)

0

.2

-7

Figure 3a

ID

Innovation by residents (log)
-11
-10
-9
-8

VT

WY

CA
OR WA
MA
MN
NH
CT
DE
CO
NJMI
RI
WI
NY
AZ IL OH
PA MD
IA
IN
KS
NV
FL
NM
VA
MO
ND
NE
MT
DC
ME
SD
WV
HI

UT
TX

NC

GA
OK
SC TN

KY

AL
LA
AR

MS

-12

AK

.3

.4

.5
.6
Importance of Religion

.7

.8

-7

Figure 3b

ID

VT
CA
OR
WA

MA
NH

CT

CO

Innovation by residents (log)
-11
-10
-9
-8

RI

DC
ME

MN

DE
NJ MI WI
NY AZ
IL OH UT
MD
PA TXNC
IA
IN
KS
NVFL
GA
NM VA
ND
NE
MTMOOK
SC
KYTN
WY
SD
WV
HIAR

AL
LA

MS

-12

AK

.8

.85

.9
Belief in God

.95

1

Figure 4a

1.5

ID

DE

1

VT

Innovation (residuals)
0
.5

OR
WA

WY

MN

CA
NV

NH
MI
IA OH CT
AZ

WI

RI
IN
TX

MA

PA

CO
IL

NY

NM

-.5

FL
WV
ME

AKNJ
ND
MO

MT

KY

NE

SD

UT
NC
OK
TN
KS
LA GA

SC

MD

AL

AR

MS

-1

VA
HI

-.2

-.1

0
.1
Importance of Religion (residuals)

DC

.2

Figure 4b

1.5

ID

DE

1

VT
WA
CA
NV RI NH

WY
MI

CT
AZ

IA

WV
ME

MN

WI
IN
OH
TX

MA
NY
NM

-.5

Innovation (residuals)
0
.5

OR

CO
AK

FL

PA

UT
IL KYNJ NC
OK
ND
TN SC
KS
MO
MT
LA
GA NE
MD

SD

AL
MS

AR

-1

VA
HI

-.06

-.04

-.02
0
Belief in God (residuals)

.02

DC

.04

