NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SALIENCE, MYOPIA, AND COMPLEX DYNAMIC INCENTIVES:
EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE PART D
Christina M. Dalton
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Robert Town
Working Paper 21104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21104

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015, Revised April 2019

We have received helpful comments from Jason Abaluck, Dan Ackerberg, Itai Ater, David
Bradford, Juan Esteban Carranza, Chris Conlon, Øystein Daljord, Áureo de Paula, Pierre Dubois,
Martin Dufwenberg, Liran Einav, David Frisvold, Antonio Galvao, Hide Ichimura, Guido
Lorenzoni, Carlos Noton, Matthew Perri, Asaf Plan, Mary Schroeder, Marciano Siniscalchi,
Changcheng Song, Ashley Swanson, Bill Vogt, Glen Weyl, Tiemen Woutersen, and seminar
participants at numerous institutions. We thank Doug Mager at Express Scripts for data provision
and Amanda Starc for data assistance. Nora Becker, Emma Dean, Mike Kofoed, Tola Kokoza,
and Sanguk Nam provided excellent research assistance. Gowrisankaran acknowledges research
support from the Center for Management Innovations in Healthcare at the University of Arizona.
A previous version of the paper was distributed under the title “Myopia and Complex Dynamic
Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21104.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Christina M. Dalton, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Salience, Myopia, and Complex Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D
Christina M. Dalton, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert Town
NBER Working Paper No. 21104
April 2015, Revised April 2019
JEL No. D03,I13,I18,L88
ABSTRACT
The standard Medicare Part D drug insurance contract is nonlinear—with reduced subsidies in a
coverage gap—resulting in a dynamic purchase problem. We consider enrollees who arrived near
the gap early in the year and show that they should expect to enter the gap with high probability,
implying that, under a benchmark model with neoclassical preferences, the gap should impact
them very little. We find that these enrollees have flat spending in a period before the doughnut
hole and a large spending drop in the gap, providing evidence against the benchmark model. We
structurally estimate behavioral dynamic drug purchase models and find that a price salience
model where enrollees do not incorporate future prices into their decision making at all fits the
data best. For a nationally representative sample, full price salience would decrease enrollee
spending by 31%. Entirely eliminating the gap would increase insurer spending 27%, compared
to 7% for generic-drug-only gap coverage.
Christina M. Dalton
Department of Economics
Wake Forest University
tina.marsh.dalton@gmail.com
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
P.O. Box 210108
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and HEC Montreal
and also NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu

Robert Town
Department of Economics
The University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
robert.town@austin.utexas.edu

1

Introduction

In 2006, the U.S. government added a new entitlement to the Medicare program, Part D,
which offers prescription drug coverage to enrollees on top of the original entitlements of
hospital (Part A) and physician/outpatient services (Part B). Part D, which was the largest
benefit change to Medicare since its introduction in 1966, has proven very popular with
Medicare enrollees.1 Despite its popularity, the program nonetheless has its critics. Perhaps
the biggest criticism of Part D is its nonlinear benefit structure. Enrollees with a standard
Part D benefit faced modest out-of-pocket expenditures in the initial coverage region until
their accrued total year-to-date drug spending placed them in the coverage gap—also called
the “doughnut hole.” Once in the doughnut hole, the enrollee paid the full price of all drugs
until reaching the catastrophic region. As shown in Figure 1, in 2008, the year of our data,
the gap began at $2,510 in total drug spending and did not end until $4,050 in out-of-pocket
expenditures, which corresponds to a mean of $5,932.50 in total drug spending.2
With a nonlinear price schedule, a rational dynamically-optimizing enrollee must forecast
her future expenditures when making prescription purchase decisions. For instance, if she is
currently in the initial coverage region but forecasts that she will end the year in the doughnut
hole, then she would want to account for the higher future price, which would likely make her
choose cheaper or fewer drugs than otherwise. If enrollees do not act as dynamic optimizers
in the presence of nonlinear insurance contracts, such contracts can create a welfare loss
from “behavioral hazard,” defined as sub-optimal behavior resulting from mistakes or nonneoclassical biases (Baicker et al., 2012).
Understanding the importance of behavioral hazard in Part D is important because some
studies find that Part D enrollees do not act fully rationally in their choice of Part D health
plans (Heiss et al., 2010; Abaluck and Gruber, 2011, 2013; Schroeder et al., 2014; Ho et al.,
1
The program enrolled over 38 million (or 68%) of Medicare beneficiaries in 2013 (Medpac, 2014). Evidence
indicates that Part D lowered Medicare beneficiaries’ out-of-pocket costs while increasing prescription drug
consumption (Yin et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009; Lichtenberg and Sun, 2007; Ketcham and Simon, 2008).
2
The mean coinsurance rates are 25% in the initial coverage region and 2% in the catastrophic region.
The 25% rate implies that the initial coverage region has mean out-of-pocket spending of $627.50. Thus, the
coverage gap ends after the initial coverage region total spending of $2,510 plus a mean of $3,422.50 (=$4,050
− $627.50) in further out-of-pocket/total spending, for a combined total of $5,932.50 in mean spending.

1

Expected out-of-pocket spending ($)
2,000
4,050

6,000

Figure 1: Coverage by region in 2008 with standard Medicare Part D plans

Catastrophic
region

Coverage
gap

0

Initial coverage region

0

2,510

5,000

7,500

Total spending ($)

2017),3 while other studies find that enrollees are, at least in part, rational in their Part D
plan choice (Ketcham et al., 2012). Moreover, although the doughnut hole is specific to Part
D, most health insurance plans have nonlinear aspects, such as out-of-pocket maxima and
deductibles, implying that behavioral hazard is potentially important in many healthcare
contexts.4 Finally, nonlinear contracts such as high-deductible health plans are likely to
increase in the U.S. and other countries as a way to contain increasing health care costs.
This paper has two goals. The first is to test whether the behavior of Part D enrollees in
their prescription drug purchases meaningfully deviates from the predictions of a benchmark
model defined by neoclassical preferences and a discount factor close to 1 at the annual
level. We develop tests that avoid several selection issues that often make such inference
challenging. The second is to identify the sources and magnitudes of any behavioral hazard
and how they affect counterfactual policy outcomes.
We proceed by constructing two behavioral dynamic models of drug purchases: quasi3

Also consistent with behavioral hazard, critics of Part D point to the possibility that the doughnut hole
may lead to adverse health consequences (Liu et al., 2011).
4
This point that has been recognized since at least the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, which found
that utilization increased once enrollees hit their out-of-pocket maxima (Newhouse, 1993).

2

hyperbolic discounting (Laibson, 1997; Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Strotz, 1956) and price
salience (Chetty et al., 2009; Bordalo et al., 2012). The benchmark model is a limiting case
for both models. For both models, we derive and/or compute the implications for drug
purchases in the face of nonlinear insurance contracts. We use the implications of these
models and a discontinuity design to test for deviations from the benchmark model and
provide evidence that enrollees’ drug consumption behavior deviates from its predictions but
can be explained by behavioral models. We then structurally estimate the parameters of
both behavioral models. Using the estimated structural model, we obtain inference on which
behavioral model can best explain purchase patterns, the importance of behavioral hazard,
and the impact of policies such as eliminating the coverage gap.
We believe that our tests of the benchmark model and estimation framework may be
useful more broadly. In particular, there has been substantial recent interest in understanding
the implications of nonlinear pricing in a variety of sectors, with many papers rejecting the
predictions of the benchmark model.5 We contribute to this literature by developing new tests
of the benchmark model—which are not vulnerable to many important selection issues—and
a framework to structurally estimate both price salience and quasi-hyperbolic discounting.
Both of our behavioral models (as well as the limiting benchmark model) consider a Part
D enrollee’s drug purchase decisions within a calendar year. Each week, the enrollee faces a
distribution of possible health shocks and, for each shock, chooses one of a number of drug
treatments, or no treatment. Future weeks are discounted with the weekly discount factor
δ. The drug choice decision is dynamic because purchasing a drug in the initial coverage
region moves the enrollee closer to the coverage gap. With our first behavioral model, quasihyperbolic discounting, the enrollee or her physician discounts future health expenditures
in the current week with the factor β, in one week with the factor βδ, in two weeks with
the factor βδ 2 , etc. A quasi-hyperbolic discounter with β < 1 is myopic: she would make
different tradeoffs at time t between utility at times t + 1 and t + 2 than she would make upon
5

Brot-Goldberg et al. (2017) find that employees who were forced into a high deductible health insurance
plan significantly reduced healthcare expenditures even when this would not reduce out-of-pocket expenditures. Ito (2014) shows that enrollees respond to average electricity prices, even though the benchmark
model implies that people should respond to marginal prices. Grubb and Osborne (2014) find that consumers exhibit a range of biases in nonlinear cellular phone contracts. In contrast, Nevo et al. (2016) study
forward-looking consumers faced with nonlinear broadband internet contracts using the benchmark model.

3

reaching time t + 1.6 Our second behavioral model, price salience, specifies that any decision
that the enrollee and her physician make in the initial coverage region only incorporates
the possibility of a price change in the doughnut hole with probability σ. Doughnut hole
prices become fully salient during the first purchase decision made after arriving inside the
coverage gap. A value of σ < 1 implies that doughnut hole prices are less than fully salient.
The two behavioral models predict different timings of when the coverage gap prices are fully
internalized and, as a consequence (and as long as β or σ < 1), imply different consumption
dynamics as enrollees approach and enter the doughnut hole. For β or σ = 1, both behavioral
models are equivalent to each other and to geometric discounting with full salience.
These two behavioral models have very different counterfactual policy implications, highlighting the importance of distinguishing between them. For instance, the literature on
quasi-hyperbolic discounting has argued that with “sophisticates,” it might be useful to give
people future commitment contracts (Laibson, 1997). However, if the deviation from the
benchmark model is due to a lack of salience about the doughnut hole, then policies that
provided information to help enrollees view future prices as more salient might be useful.
In the benchmark model, where β or σ = 1 and δ is close to 1 at the annual level, drug
purchase decisions depend largely on the distribution of coverage regions where the individual
expects to end the year. To see this, consider an extra drug purchase in the initial coverage
region for an enrollee who expects to end the year in the coverage gap. This extra purchase
results in some later purchase(s) no longer having an insurance subsidy, implying that the
total extra price will be roughly the full price rather than the price with insurance. This
makes robust tests of the benchmark model challenging, generally requiring an estimation
of the expected distribution of the coverage regions where the individual expects to end the
year, made at each potential purchase point in the sample.
Our innovation is to consider enrollees who have reached $2,000 in total spending early in
the year. Since these enrollees have reached near the coverage gap start of $2,510 early in the
year, we hypothesize, and then verify, that they will enter into the coverage gap with near
certainty and leave with low probability. Thus, we can approximate rational expectations
6
We estimate both variants where the quasi-hyperbolic discounters are sophisticated and naı̈ve about their
future behavior.

4

with the simple assumption that the enrollee will end the year in the gap with certainty.
Moreover, since these enrollees will use all their insurance in the initial coverage region with
very high probability, their Part D subsidy is very close to constant. We show that this
implies that there should be little or no drop in prescription drug purchases upon entering
the doughnut hole under the benchmark model. In contrast, under either behavioral model,
because enrollees do not fully account for the prices that they will pay in the coverage gap,
purchases will be flat away from the doughnut hole, drop on approach into the doughnut
hole, and again be flat inside the doughnut hole. Finally, for the geometric discounting
model with a low but positive δ, purchase probabilities should drop throughout the initial
coverage region.
We consider the predictions of the benchmark model by examining whether there are
drops in spending upon reaching the doughnut hole for the set of enrollees noted above.
We further examine whether our data are consistent with geometric discounting with a low
discount factor versus the behavioral models by evaluating whether purchases are flat in
a period before the doughnut hole. Finally, since the two behavioral models have different
predictions as to when doughnut hole prices start to affect behavior, our structural estimation
identifies the most appropriate behavioral model by evaluating which estimated structural
model fits the data best on this dimension.
Our empirical work is based on 2008 Medicare Part D administrative claims data from a
large pharmacy benefit manager. Using the subset of enrollees who arrive near the doughnut
hole early in the year, we estimate weekly spending as a function of individual fixed effects
and an indicator for being in the coverage gap. Consistent with the predictions of the
behavioral models, we find that drug purchases are flat in a region before the doughnut hole
and drop significantly and sharply upon reaching the doughnut hole, with mean total drug
expenditures falling by 28% and the number of filled prescriptions falling by 21%. Thus, we
find violations of the benchmark model.
We identify the sources and magnitudes of behavioral hazard by structurally estimating
the parameters of our models for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting and price salience models using a nested fixed-point maximum likelihood estimation and the the same subset of
enrollees. While versions of the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model have been previously
5

estimated (e.g. Fang and Wang, 2015), to our knowledge, this is the first paper to estimate
a structural dynamic model of price salience. The parameters of the structural models are
price elasticity parameters, fixed effects for each drug, the geometric discount factor δ, and
the behavioral parameter β or σ. We show that we can identify the discount factor and
behavioral parameter given a rank condition and sufficient variation in drug attributes.
Our structural estimation splits our sample into three subsamples based on an ex ante
measure of expected pharmacy expenditures. For each subsamples, we can reject β or σ > 0.
The price salience model fits the data best, with a much higher estimated likelihood. The
reason is because the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model cannot explain the sharpness of the
drop in drug spending at the threshold, even with β = 0, which has the sharpest spending
drop. These findings imply that future doughnut hole prices are not at all salient when in
the initial coverage region. Alternately put, enrollees in our sample appear not to take future
coverage gap prices into account at all in their choices of drugs.
Using our structural estimates, we examine behavioral and policy counterfactuals for a
nationally representative sample.7 To isolate the importance of price salience, we examine
how prescription purchase behavior changes under the benchmark model, using an annual
discount factor of 0.95. Optimization under the benchmark model would cause enrollees to
reduce their spending by 31%, with total prescription drug spending dropping by 15%. In
contrast, eliminating drug insurance would lower total prescription drug spending by 35%,
implying that both behavioral hazard and drug insurance are important in this market.
Our policy counterfactuals examine the elimination of the doughnut hole as mandated by
the 2010 Affordable Care Act. We find that eliminating the doughnut hole would increase
total spending by 10% and insurer spending by 27%, implying a substantial cost to the
government. Coinsurance would have to increase to 37% from the current average of 25%
to implement a revenue neutral insurance scheme without the doughnut hole. Providing
doughnut hole coverage for generic drugs only would increase insurer spending by only 7%.
Our paper is most closely related to the works of Einav et al. (2015) and Abaluck et al.
(2018) who both also consider the implications of benefit design for Medicare Part D. We
7

The sample is composed of a mix of the estimation sample and others in our claims data, with the mix
chosen to ensure that the percent of enrollees reaching the doughnut hole is equal to the population average.

6

develop complementary tests to Einav et al. (2015): we test for violations of the benchmark
model by evaluating whether there are changes in behavior upon crossing into the doughnut
hole when the benchmark model predicts none, while Einav et al. tests for the presence of
forward-looking behavior by evaluating whether there are changes in behavior when predicted
by the benchmark model (in their case, across enrollees joining Part D plans with deductibles
at different points of the year). Our tests avoid selection issues that may be present in
other studies by comparing the same individuals at different points in time. Einav et al.
also estimate a structural, dynamic model and find that the weekly discount factor is δ =
0.96, implying an annualized discount factor of 0.12; our framework provides a behavioral
explanation for our findings and can reject the geometric discounting model with a low but
positive δ. Our structural estimation also builds on Einav et al. by developing a modeling
framework for drug choices that is more similar to a standard dynamic multinomial choice
models and by providing results on identification for this type of model. Abaluck et al.
(2018) use a very different identification strategy based on the assumption that changes in
plan benefits are exogenous and do not result in enrollee selection due to plan stickiness.
Using this assumption, they develop a simpler structural model of drug choice that abstracts
away from the fact that enrollees may not fully know their health shocks requiring drug
purchases at the beginning of the year. They also find that price salience plays an important
role in explaining deviations from the benchmark model. Finally, our structural model of
quasi-hyperbolic discounting builds on Fang and Wang (2015) and Chung et al. (2013).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides our model. Section 3 describes our
data. Section 4 presents evidence based on the discontinuity near the doughnut hole. Section 5 describes the econometrics of our structural model. Section 6 provides results and
counterfactuals, and Section 7 concludes.

7

2

Model

2.1

Overview

We develop a dynamic framework to study the drug purchase decisions of a Medicare Part D
enrollee within a calendar year.8 We consider two behavioral models as well as the limiting
case of the geometric discounting model. Our first behavioral model allows enrollees to have
time-inconsistent or myopic preferences that satisfy quasi-hyperbolic discounting (Laibson,
1997; Phelps and Pollak, 1968; Strotz, 1956). In this model, enrollees are present-biased and
discount the future more than would geometric discounters. Our second behavioral model
allows future doughnut hole prices to lack full “salience” (Chetty et al., 2009; Bordalo et al.,
2012; Abaluck et al., 2018). In this model, the enrollee does not pay full attention to the fact
that prices will change in the future. The two explanations differ in their underlying causes
of the deviations from benchmark behavior implying different effective solutions to remedy
these deviations. Moreover, as we formalize below, the two models imply different purchase
patterns near the coverage gap start, thereby allowing our estimation to evaluate the sources
of any deviations from the benchmark model.9
A period in our model is a week, starting with Sunday.10 Enrollees discount future weeks
with a weekly (geometric) discount factor δ. Each week, the enrollee is faced with a number,
zero or more, of health shocks. Each health shock is defined by its type. Each health shock
type has a unique set of drugs that can be used as treatments. An example of a health shock
type is “conditions treated with calcium channel blockers,” which is treated exclusively with
calcium channel blockers.11 An example of a calcium channel blocker is Cardizem (diltiazem
hydrochloride) in tablet form; our uniqueness assumption implies that this drug is not in a
treatment for any other health shock type. Upon receiving a health shock, the enrollee makes
8

Section 5 discusses estimation of the model which involves aggregation across enrollees.
A previous working paper version of this paper only allowed for quasi-hyperbolic discounting. The current
model generalizes the earlier version by considering both price salience and time-inconsistent preferences.
10
Our empirical analysis uses the enrollee/week as the unit of observation. A longer time interval, such as
a month, would reduce information through aggregation, while a shorter time interval, such as a day, may
have noisy outcomes because a typical enrollee will fill zero prescriptions on most days. We chose an interval
of a week as a balance between these two constraints.
11
For brevity, when unambiguous, we refer to this health shock type simply as “calcium channel blockers.”
9

8

a discrete choice of one of the treatment drugs for the health shock type, or the outside option,
which consists of no drug treatment. It is important to model the outside option because
individuals may substitute away from drug purchases when in the doughnut hole.
Each week, the enrollee receives between 0 and N health shocks.12 She receives the shocks
sequentially, implying that upon receiving one shock, she does not know how many more she
will receive, although she does know the parameters of her categorical distribution, and hence
her conditional distribution of additional shocks. Each health shock is an i.i.d. draw from
the enrollee’s distribution over health shock types.13 Because the distribution of health shock
types is specific to an enrollee, our model is consistent with within-enrollee correlations of
health shock types, as would occur with a chronic disease. For instance, some enrollees might
have type II diabetes, and those enrollees would draw from a health shock type distribution
with type II diabetes while other individuals would not have type II diabetes and hence
would not draw from this health shock type.14
The enrollee’s decision problem is dynamic because each drug purchase brings her closer
to the next phase of her nonlinear insurance contract (i.e., the coverage gap if in the initial
coverage region), and purchasing an expensive drug brings her relatively closer than purchasing a cheaper one. The quasi-hyperbolic discounting model specifies that the enrollee
discounts a future event t ≥ 0 weeks in the future with factor βδ t . We estimate two variants
of the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model (Strotz, 1956; Fang and Wang, 2015). Under the
“sophisticates” variant, the enrollee knows that in the future she will continue to act as a
quasi-hyperbolic discounter. Under the “naı̈fs” variant, the enrollee believes that she will follow the geometric discounting model in future drug purchase decisions. Both variants with
β = 1 are equivalent to the geometric discounting model.
The price salience model focuses on the information that the enrollee uses to make her
drug purchase decision. We specify that the enrollee—or her physician acting as her agent—
makes her drug purchase decision prior to the point of sale, e.g., in the physician’s office or at
12

Hence, the realized number of health shocks received is distributed i.i.d. categorical, or equivalently,
multinomial with one trial.
13
We model multiple potential drug purchases within a week in this way in order to leverage standard
discrete choice multinomial logit models for each individual purchase decision.
14
Our structural estimation stratifies enrollees into groups based on health risks and allows for each group
to draw from different health shock distributions.

9

home before going to fill a prescription when her current supply runs out.15 At the decision
point, the enrollee is aware of the drug prices in the coverage region of her last purchase, but
is not necessarily fully salient about future prices. We assume that the enrollee in the initial
coverage region assesses a probability σ that there remains some future coverage region, with
this probability changing to 1 only after the individual has made a purchase that brings
her into the gap. In other words, with σ < 1, the first purchase decision made with full
salience about the doughnut hole prices will be the first one made after $2,510 or more in
total expenditures. Note that σ = 1 is equivalent to the geometric discounting model.

2.2

Enrollee optimization

We first introduce some additional notation and then formally define enrollee preferences.
We represent the distribution of the number of health shocks via conditional probabilities:
let Qn , for n = 0, . . . N , denote the conditional probability of having another health shock
given that n have already occurred in the current week. Note that QN = 0. At the nth
drug purchase decision node in any week, the enrollee’s information regarding the number of
future health shocks that she will receive in the week is given by Qn , . . . , QN .
Let H denote the number of health shock types. We assume that health shock type
h ∈ {1, . . . , H} occurs with probability Ph . For each h, index the prescription drugs that can
be used for treatment by j = 1, . . . , Jh . For each h and j, let phj denote the full price and
oophj denote the out-of-pocket price when inside the initial coverage region. Each h also has
a baseline health cost ch , that applies equally to all treatment options including the outside
option.
The expected perceived flow utility from drug j for health shock type h is additive in:
(1) the fixed utility from treatment, φhj , which is a parameter to estimate; (2) the disutility
from the current expected perceived price of the drug, which we detail below;16 and (3) an
unobservable component εhj , which is distributed type 1 extreme value, i.i.d. across health
15

This is similar to other empirical specifications. For instance, Chetty et al. (2009)’s estimation is based
on the idea that purchase decisions for grocery store items are made at the place where items are displayed
and not at the point of sale.
16
Our inclusion of this price term in the flow utility is equivalent to there being a money good with utility
equal to the negative of this term.

10

shocks and individuals. We assume that current, but not future, values of εhj are known to
the individual when making her choice decision. For each h, denote the outside option as
good 0. We assume that ph0 = ooph0 = φh0 = 0 and that good 0’s flow utility is εh0 .
Denote a typical state by (t, m, n, h, ε), where t ≥ 0 is the number of weeks remaining
in the year after the current week; m ≥ 0 is the monetary distance to the doughnut hole at
the start of a given purchase decision;17 n ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} is the number of previous health
shocks during the week; h ∈ 1, . . . , H is the health shock type; and ε ≡ (εh0 , . . . , εhJh ) is the
vector of unobservables. At each state, the enrollee maximizes the expected discounted value
of her expected perceived flow utility subject to her behavioral biases regarding the valuation
of future states, the salience of price changes, and expectations regarding her future behavior.
Our estimation focuses on enrollees whose drug spending in the early part of the year
have brought them near the start of the coverage gap. Given this, our tests of the benchmark
model and estimation of the structural parameters are based on:
Assumption 1. With probability 1, enrollees in our sample expect that, even if they change
their purchase for any one health shock:
(a) they will reach the doughnut hole start of $2,510 in total spending, and
(b) they will not reach the sample minimum catastrophic region start.
The first part of Assumption 1 states that consumers will always expect to reach the
doughnut hole, and that a one-time change in behavior will not affect this outcome. The
second part of Assumption 1 states that consumers believe that they will never go beyond
the doughnut hole.
We now show two related preliminary results that simplify the dynamic decision problem.
First, we show that ch does not affect choice probabilities when δ < 1. Second, we show that
Assumption 1 allows us to exposit the problem as an infinite horizon Bellman equation, and
not account for the week of the year, given either δ < 1 or an assumption on ch .
Lemma 1. Consider two vectors of baseline health costs, c ≡ (c1 , . . . , cH ) and c0 ≡ (c01 , . . . , c0H ).
Let st (m, n, h, j|c) denote the optimizing probability of purchase of drug j = 0, . . . , Jh for
17

For instance, if the individual had already spent $2,350, then m = $2, 510 − $2, 350 = $160.

11

a given set of state variables (t, m, n, h)—integrating over ε and conditioning on c. Let
s(m, n, h, j|c) denote the analogous probability for an infinite horizon model where the doughnut hole will always be reached (and hence where t is not a state variable). Then,
(a) For δ < 1, st (m, n, h, j|c) = st (m, n, h, j|c0 ) and s(m, n, h, j|c) = s(m, n, h, j|c0 ), ∀m, n, h, j, c, c0 .
(b) Given Assumption 1, st (m, n, h, j|c) = s(m, n, h, j|c0 ), ∀m, n, h, j, if δ < 1 or ch = c0h =


Ph
γ + log 1 + Jj=1
exp(φhj − α × p) for each h.
(Proofs of lemmas and propositions are in Appendix C.)
Lemma 1 (a) allows us to specify arbitrary values of ch in computations and demonstrations regarding probabilities when δ < 1. It occurs because ch affects all options equally.18
Lemma 1 (b) allows us eliminate t from the state space and write a typical state at the
time of a drug purchase as (m, n, h, ε). When δ = 1, this result uses the assumption that


PJh
ch = γ +log 1 + j=1 exp(φhj − α × p) , which makes ch equal to the expected utility given
optimizing behavior inside the doughnut hole, implying that the value function is finite even
with δ = 1. Appendix B formally exposits the behavioral dynamic optimization problems
for the infinite horizon model.
Let pef f (m, phj , oophj ) be the expected effective price perceived by the enrollee. When
price is fully salient as in the benchmark and quasi-hyperbolic discounting models, we can
write pef f as:



phj , if 0 ≤ m < oophj



pef f (m, phj , oophj ) = oophj + phj − m, if oophj ≤ m < phj




oop , if p ≤ m.
hj
hj

(1)

In (1), the first line pertains to the enrollee who has to pay the full price because she is either
already completely in the coverage gap or would be completely inside after paying her out-ofpocket price. The second line considers the intermediate case where the purchase would move
the enrollee into the coverage gap at some point after she pays the out-of-pocket price. The
last line considers the enrollee who is completely in the initial coverage region, even after the
18

We impose δ < 1 since for δ = 1, the values can be infinite depending on the choice of ch .

12

current purchase. The first and second lines reflect Part D rules which specify that, when a
purchase moves the enrollee into the coverage gap, the enrollee pays the out-of-pocket price,
the insurer pays any remaining amount until total spending reaches the coverage gap start,
and the enrollee also pays the final remaining amount.
For the price salience model, pef f satisfies:

pef f (m, phj , oophj ) =




phj , if m = 0






σphj + (1 − σ)oophj , if 0 < m < oophj

(2)



σ(oophj + phj − m) + (1 − σ)oophj , if oophj ≤ m < phj






oophj , if phj ≤ m.
In (2), the first and last line are the same as in (1). However, the middle two lines, which
consider the intermediate cases where the purchase would move the enrollee into the coverage
gap, are different. In these cases, with probability 1 − σ, the enrollee perceives that prices are
simply the out-of-pocket prices, since her drug purchase decision was made in the physician’s
office where these prices were not yet fully salient. But, with probability σ, the doughnut
hole prices are salient and the individual makes her decision using the prices from (1).
Finally, let the function α(p) denote the disutility from current expected perceived spending level p. In order to flexibly capture the different impacts of price on decisions, our estimation allows α(·) to be a linear spline, which nests the case of a linear price coefficient. Applying
(1) or (2), the current disutility from expected perceived price is α(pef f (m, phj , oophj )).
Note that the price salience model is very similar in its implications to the quasi-hyperbolic
discounting sophisticates model, but not to the naı̈fs model. With limited salience, the
enrollee believes that at any future pre-doughnut hole state she will still perceive a salience
probability of σ. This is similar to the sophisticate who believes that she will continue
to act as a quasi-hyperbolic discounter in the future. Naı̈fs believe that they will act as
geometric discounters in the future, which leads to different purchase decisions. The one
difference between the price salience and sophisticates models is in pef f for drugs that move

13

the enrollee into the doughnut hole, which are the two middle cases in (2).19

2.3

Testable Implications of the Model

This subsection discusses testable implications of our model that allow us to distinguish
between the benchmark model and other models. We focus on enrollees who have spent
$2,000 or more early in the year and hence impose Assumption 1 throughout.
Our main insight is that enrollees will act approximately the same before and after the
doughnut hole under the benchmark model (which is the geometric discounting model with
fully salient prices and an annual discount factor close to 1). This is not true for the behavioral
models with β or σ < 1. Intuitively, under the benchmark model, if enrollees perceive that
they will end the year inside the doughnut hole, they will always obtain the full insurance
subsidy for the initial coverage region, and hence will not change their behavior upon crossing
into the doughnut hole. For these enrollees, Part D insurance is very similar to a lump-sum
check for the insured amount. Formally, we can show that there is no change in behavior
upon crossing into the doughnut hole, for the case where both full and out-of-pocket prices
are the same across all drugs and δ = 1:
Proposition 1. Consider a dynamically-optimizing Part D enrollee for whom Assumption 1 holds and for whom β or σ = 1 and δ = 1. As in Lemma 1 (b), fix ch = γ +


Ph
exp(φhj − α × p) for each h. Suppose further that there is a common full
log 1 + Jj=1
price p and a common out-of-pocket price oop that are charged for every (inside-good) drug
and that price disutility is linear so that α(p) ≡ αp. Then, the purchase probability of each h, j
is the same across ex ante states, i.e., for all m, n, m0 , n0 , h, j, s(m, n, h, j) = s(m0 , n0 , h, j).
We note three points about Proposition 1. First, the proposition considers the case where
all drugs have the same total and out-of-pocket prices. If there were variation in prices,
then enrollees might change their behavior before and after the doughnut hole because the
doughnut hole start is based on total spending and not out-of-pocket spending. For instance,
19

It is also be possible to define the drug purchase decision as occurring at (instead of prior to) the point of
sale, in which case the salience model would be identical to the sophisticates model, except for the relabeling
of the parameter β to σ.

14

if one drug has a higher out-of-pocket price relative to the full price than a second one, then
the enrollee would substitute towards the first drug when in the doughnut hole. Overall,
though, we would expect such substitution to not affect the basic testable implication of the
proposition, which is that, for this sample, crossing into the doughnut hole should not reduce
spending. Second, while Proposition 1 considers the case of δ = 1, we expect the results to
be approximately true for δ close to 1. Finally, by Lemma 1, the assumption on the ch values
would not be necessary if δ < 1 or if we considered the finite horizon model instead of the
infinite horizon model.

0

Mean spending in week ($)
20
40
60

80

Figure 2: Simulated drug spending for the geometric model across discount factors

2000

2200
2400
2600
2800
Cumulative total spending at beginning of week ($)
δ=.999
δ=.1

3000

δ=.96
δ=0

To provide further insight as to the role of δ in the geometric discounting model in affecting
dynamic drug consumption patterns, we simulate the model for different values of δ. Figure 2
reports simulated mean total spending per week across discount factors as a function of the
cumulative total spending at the beginning of the week. We report simulations for four
discount factors δ: 0.999, which corresponds to an annualized 5% discount; 0.96, which is the
weekly discount factor estimated by Einav et al. (2015) and corresponds to an annual discount
factor of 0.12; 0.1, to understand the impact close to 0; and 0, the case of perfect myopia.

15

We calculate dynamically-optimizing decision-making for enrollees and then simulate weekly
spending in the figure. Enrollees in the simulation all have one health shock each week and
each health shock is drawn with equal probability from one of 20 health shock types, each
with one drug.20
Figure 2 shows that mean weekly spending with δ = 0.999 is flat before and after the
doughnut hole. This occurs even though there are different priced drugs in our sample, suggesting that Proposition 1 is approximately true more generally.21 With δ = 0.96, spending
decreases throughout the initial coverage region and then is flat inside the doughnut hole.
The reason for the sustained decrease is that the time value of money drives the drop in
spending: with a 25% coinsurance, a foregone $100 purchase with $2,300 in total spending
would result in $25 in immediate savings and $75 in savings discounted by the time until the
enrollee expects to cross into the doughnut hole. The same foregone purchase with $2,100
in total spending would have the $75 in savings discounted more because the time until the
expected crossing is longer. With δ = 0, spending is flat in the pre-doughnut-hole region
before $2,310 since discounted savings are worth nothing. Finally, the δ = 0.1 line is only
slightly downward sloped in this region, showing that the slope is continuous in δ.
Now we consider spending under the behavioral models. Both behavioral models result
in the future effectively being discounted but in a different way than for the geometric discounting model. With δ = 1, in the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, all future purchase
occasions are discounted by the same β. In the price salience model, future doughnut hole
prices are salient with the same probability σ. This suggests that the model can predict
flat spending before and after the doughnut hole but a drop in spending upon reaching the
doughnut hole. We formalize:
Proposition 2. Consider a Part D enrollee for whom Assumption 1 holds and for whom
δ = 1. Fix ch for each h as in Proposition 1. Suppose further that there is a common full
20

Drug 1 has price p = $10 and quality φ = 0.1; drug 2 has price $20 and quality 0.2. Other drugs follow
the same pattern until drug 20, which has price $200 and quality 2.0. Out-of-pocket prices oop are always
25% of total price. Price disutility is α(p) = p. These ranges of prices are roughly similar to the sample.
21
The slight dip before the doughnut hole is due to the peculiarities of Part D coverage around the doughnut
hole, as reflected in (1) and the discussion surrounding it, whereby cheaper drugs are insured at a higher rate
than more expensive ones right before the doughnut hole.

16

price p and out-of-pocket price oop that is charged for every (inside-good) drug and that price
disutility is linear so that α(p) ≡ αp. Finally, assume that there is a unique solution to the
ex ante value functions for the behavioral models. Then, for any h and j,
(a) at the doughnut hole: under the sophisticates or naı̈fs quasi-hyperbolic discounting model
with β < 1 or the price salience model with σ < 1, s(0, n, h, j) will be equal to its value
under the benchmark model for all n, h, j;
(b) away from the doughnut hole: under the price salience model with σ < 1 or the sophisticates or naı̈fs quasi-hyperbolic discounting model with β < 1, s(m, n, h, j) = s(m0 , n0 , h, j) >
s(0, n00 , h, j) if m, m0 ≥ p and for all n, n0 , n00 , h, j; and
(c) across models: the purchase probabilities s(m, n, h, j) will be the same for the sophisticates
quasi-hyperbolic discounting model as for the price salience model and higher than for the
quasi-hyperbolic discounting naı̈fs model if m ≥ p and 0 < β = σ < 1 and for all m, n, h
and for j = 1, . . . , Jh .
Proposition 2 shows that enrollees will purchase the same amount in every period when
completely before the doughnut hole. Similarly, they will consume the same amount in each
period when inside the doughnut hole. Importantly, however, the within doughnut hole
consumption will be strictly lower than the outside doughnut hole consumption. The logic
for this is that, unlike in the benchmark model, the decision process is now different before
and inside the doughnut hole. In the initial coverage region, the quasi-hyperbolic discounter
knows that she will essentially have to repay the insurance subsidy by moving one purchase
into the doughnut hole, but that repayment is discounted with a factor β. The enrollee in the
price salience model only considers that the repayment will occur with probability σ, thereby
generating an analogous result. The fact that the effective discount of this repayment is
always β or σ, regardless of how far the individual is from the coverage gap start, is what
generates the result that spending is flat before the doughnut hole. Naı̈fs spend less than
sophisticates in the pre-doughnut-hole region because naı̈fs expect that their future selves will
make the most responsible choices possible, which raises the value in saving for the future.
Figure 3 shows simulation evidence for the same set of flow utility parameters as in
17

0

Mean spending in week ($)
10
20
30
40

50

Figure 3: Simulated drug spending for different behavioral models

2000

2200
2400
2600
2800
Cumulative total spending at beginning of week ($)
β=.5, δ=.999 Sophisticates
β=.5, δ=.999 Naifs

3000

σ=.5, δ=.999 Salience
β or σ=1, δ=.999 Benchmark

Figure 2 but now across behavioral models, setting δ = 0.999 throughout. The figure displays
results from the two quasi-hyperbolic discounting models with β = 0.5, from the salience
model with σ = 0.5, and also repeats the benchmark model from Figure 2.
The figure shows that the same results from Proposition 2 are approximately true here.
In particular, the three behavioral models all show virtually flat mean spending per week
when the cumulative spending is less than $2,310 (up to which even the most expensive drug
would not move the enrollee into the doughnut hole). The sophisticates and price salience
models generate virtually the same expected spending in the pre-$2,310 region while the naı̈fs
model shows lower spending. Note also that the behavioral models have different predictions
from the geometric model with the low weekly discount factor of δ = 0.96. Under the
behavioral models, spending is flat until reaching a drug that could move the individual into
the doughnut hole while under the low geometric discount factor model, spending decreases
continuously from the beginning of the sample.
Importantly, the price salience model differs from the sophisticates model at the point of
entry into the doughnut hole. Under the price salience model, enrollees are not fully aware

18

of the doughnut hole prices until after the purchase that moves them into the doughnut hole,
while the quasi-hyperbolic discounter makes decisions based on the price at the point of sale.
Thus, as shown in the figure, the sophisticate will have lower spending than the enrollee
with price salience in the region between $2,310 and $2,510. In the limiting case of σ = 0,
under the price salience model, the enrollee would not lower her weekly spending at all in
this region (given that there is only one health shock per week). This difference between the
two models near the doughnut hole can identify which behavioral model is accurate.
Combining the insights from the propositions and the figures, the testable implications
of our model are:
1. The benchmark model predicts that there should be no drop in spending at the doughnut hole while the other models that we consider predict a drop in spending at the
doughnut hole.
2. We can test for deviations from a geometric model with low δ by examining whether
there is a region before the doughnut hole where spending is flat.
3. The price salience and sophisticates models have similar implications for drug purchases away from the coverage gap but the price salience model has higher spending
immediately before the doughnut hole, generating a steeper decline at the gap start.
4. Conditioning on other parameters, the naı̈fs model with 0 < β < 1 has less spending
before the coverage gap than the price salience or sophisticates models.
We test implications 1 and 2 in Section 4 and our structural estimation results in Section 6.1
are identified by implications 3 and 4.

3

Data

For our analysis, we rely on a proprietary claims-level dataset of employer-sponsored Part
D plans in 2008, the third year of the program. The data come from the pharmacy benefits
manger Express Scripts, which managed Medicare Part D benefits for approximately 30
different employer-sponsored Medicare Part D plans with a total of 100,000 enrollees. The
19

plans were offered to eligible employees and retirees as part of their benefits. Employers
receive subsidies from Medicare in exchange for providing these plans to their employees. We
believe that enrollees in employer-sponsored Part D plans have, on average, higher income
than typical Part D enrollees, and hence are less likely to be liquidity constrained. The
employer-sponsored Part D market constituted nearly 7 million enrollees or 15 percent of
Part D enrollment in 2008 (Medpac, 2009, p. 282).
The data contain all claims made by an enrollee in the year 2008 for each plan. For
each claim, we have plan and patient identifiers, the age (at the fill date) and gender of the
patient, the date the prescription was filled, the total price of the drug, the amount paid
by the patient, the National Drug Code (a unique identifier for each drug), the pill name,
the drug type (e.g., tablet, cream, etc.), the most common indicator of the drug (e.g., skin
conditions, diabetes, infections, etc.), the dispensed quantity of the drug, and an indicator
for whether the drug is generic or branded. We keep only individuals who are 65 or older at
the time that they fill their first prescription.
Each of the employers offered multiple plans, each with different coverage structures. Our
base analysis uses data from five Express Scripts plans. We chose these plans because (1)
they have a coverage gap that starts at exactly $2,510 in total expenditures and ends at
greater than $4,000 in out-of-pocket expenditures; (2) there is no insurance in the coverage
gap; and (3) the employers that offer these plans allowed us to use their data. We also include
falsification evidence from a sixth plan which has the coverage gap start at a higher spending
level.
Table 1 displays the characteristics of the six plans that we consider. The plans represent
three different employers; plan and employer identities are masked. We consider all covered
individuals at Employer 2 and the majority of covered individuals at Employer 1 (with the
other covered individuals at this employer choosing plans with different coverage gap regions
or some insurance in the coverage gap). Importantly, the fact that each covered individual
could choose from only similar plans minimizes the selection issues across plans that one
might observe in non-employer-sponsored Part D coverage.
Four of the five plans in our base analysis have a deductible. All deductibles take relatively
low values of $275 or less. By construction, the coverage gap start is the same across the
20

Table 1: Plan characteristics and enrollment

Employer
% of employees from employer
Deductible ($)
Doughnut hole start (total $)
Catastrophic start (out-of-pocket $)
Total enrollment
% hitting $2,510
% hitting catastrophic coverage
Estimation sample:
Enrollment
% hitting $2,510
% hitting catastrophic
Mean total spending ($)
Mean out-of-pocket ($)
Mean age
Percent female
Mean ACG score

Plan
A
B
C
1
1
1
26
45
9
275
100
100
2,510 2,510 2,510
4,050 4,050 4,050
7,541 12,858 2,431
20
13
16
2
1
1

D
2
79
0
2,510
4,010
4,062
16
1

620
96
11
4,284
2,373
74
62
1.04

304
49
97
94
10
12
4,246 3,974
2,045 2,071
75
75
62
59
0.91 1.07

644
94
6
3,867
2,010
73
58
1.17

126
95
9
4,009
2,125
73
53
1.18

E
2
21
200
2,510
4,010
1,058
13
1

F
3
46
0
4,000
4,050
35,395
20
0
2,981
97
0
4,072
1,026
78
64
0.67

Note: Plan A provides generic coverage in deductible region; Plan F used for falsification exercise only and provides generic
coverage in doughnut hole.

base plans and the coverage gap end out-of-pocket spending levels are similar. All six plans
include generous coverage in the catastrophic region. Table 1 also lists summary statistics
on plan enrollment. The five base plans cover a total of 27,950 individuals.
The sixth plan in our data, plan F, is only used for falsification tests. Plan F has its
coverage gap start at $4,000 in total spending, a much higher threshold than for the other
plans. Its enrollees are older and disproportionately female relative to the plans in our base
analysis sample.
Our base estimation sample consists of all enrollees who start a week between Sunday,
March 30 and Sunday, July 20, 2008 with total spending in the range [$2000, $2, 510). We
chose these dates and this range of spending to be in the part of the year where enrollees
are not yet in the doughnut hole but should perceive that they will end the year in the
doughnut hole with very high probability under the benchmark model. This sample contains
1,743 enrollees distributed across the five plans in our sample. Between 94 and 97 percent

21

of the enrollees in the estimation sample hit the coverage gap during the year, reflected in
a mean total spending levels of approximately $4,000 across the plans. The mean percent
hitting the catastrophic coverage region ranges from 6 to 12 percent, reflected in mean outof-pocket spending levels of approximately $2,200 across plans, or about 55 percent of the
value necessary to hit the start of catastrophic coverage.
Using our database of claims, we first drop claims for drugs which we believe are not in
the formulary. Drugs that are not in the formulary are sometimes reported to the insurance
company by the enrollee but do not count towards spending for purposes of determining if
the enrollee is in the coverage gap or catastrophic coverage regions. We assume that any
claim in the initial coverage region for which the total price is $100 or higher and the out-ofpocket price is the same as the total price reflects a drug that is not in the formulary.22 We
then calculate the dollars until the doughnut hole (m) for each prescription by tabulating
the spending up to this point during the year.23
We merge our claims data with data on the expected pharmacy claims cost for each
patient, based on their claims from before our sample period. Specifically, we use claims
from Jan. 1, 2008 to Mar. 29, 2008 to construct the Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical Group
(ACG) Version 10.0 score for each enrollee. The ACG score is meant to predict the drug
expenditures over the following one-year period. We use the ACG scores to define groups for
the structural analysis and then estimate separate coefficients for each group. ACG scores
have been widely used to predict future health expenditures in the health economics and
health services literature (see, e.g., Gowrisankaran et al., 2013; Handel, 2013). Table 1 shows
that the base plans have mean ACG scores which are similar to the over-65 population mean
score of 1; the falsification plan has a somewhat lower mean score.
Our analysis classifies each drug into a unique health shock type meant to capture the
treatment of the drug. A clinically trained research assistant performed the coding using
the pill name, drug type (e.g., tablet or cream), most common indication, and National
22

We also drop one claim with a quantity-filled entry of over 1 million.
There is some ambiguity of the order of claims if there are multiple claims filled on the same date for a
given enrollee. For such multiple claims, we assume that the claims are filled in increasing order of out-ofpocket price. For multiple claims for an enrollee on a given date with the same out-of-pocket price, we use
the order specified in the database that we received from Express Scripts.
23

22

Drug Code. We classified drugs on the basis of function rather than the diseases they treat
because we believe that drug function is the relevant attribute for a choice model. Thus,
even though both calcium channel blockers and renin-angiotensin system blockers are used
to treat hypertension, they form separate health shock types in our analysis because their
mechanisms are separate.
Table 2 lists the health shock types with the most claims in our estimation sample.
Approximately 9 percent of the claims were for cholesterol-lowering (antihyperlipidemic)
drugs. The next most common categories include blood pressure medicines, opioids, and
antidepressants.24
Table 2: Most common health shock types in base estimation sample
Health shock type
Cholesterol-Lowering
Renin-Angiotensin System Blocker
Beta-Blocker
Opioid
Antidepressant
Diuretic
Calcium Channel Blocker
Insulin Sensitizer
Gastroesophageal Reflux & Peptic Ulcer
Hypothyroidism

4

Number Rx
2,143
1,814
1,259
1,200
1,190
1,183
933
792
778
774

% of obs.
9.4
7.9
5.5
5.2
5.2
5.2
4.1
3.5
3.4
3.4

Most common Rx
Simvastatin
Lisinopril
Metoprolol
Hydrocodon
Sertraline
Furosemide
Amlodipine
Metformin
Omeprazole
Levothyroxine

Evidence from Discontinuity Near Doughnut Hole

This section presents evidence on whether individuals act in a way that is consistent with
the benchmark model, with geometric discounting with a low but positive discount factor, or
with our behavioral models. We base our evidence on the testable implications of the model
developed in Section 2.3. We perform a series of discontinuity-based analyses that all use our
analysis sample of enrollees who arrived near the doughnut hole in the middle of the year.
Our analyses are similar to a standard regression discontinuity framework. However, while
24

Table A1 in Appendix A provides details on the ten most common drugs purchased.

23

regression discontinuity analyses typically consider different individuals near a breakpoint,
we consider the same individual immediately before and after reaching the coverage gap.
Specifically, the unit of observation for each regression is an enrollee observed over a week.
Enrollees are in the estimation sample from the first week with starting expenditures of over
$2,000 until the last week with starting expenditures of less than $3,000, or the end of the
year if it comes first.

0

Mean spending in week ($)
20
40
60

80

Figure 4: Spending near coverage gap for base estimation sample

2000

2200
2400
2600
2800
Cumulative total spending at beginning of week ($)
Mean spending during week

3000

Smoothed spending during week

We start by graphing mean weekly spending levels and non-parametric regressions of
these levels. Figure 4 plots mean total drug spending by $20 increments of beginning-of-week
cumulative spending and a kernel smoothed “lowess” regression of mean total drug spending
on beginning-of-week cumulative spending.25 The mean total drug spending shows little
change in spending over the range $2,000-2,380 in beginning-of-week cumulative spending.
Mean spending then drops until the doughnut hole and remains roughly constant until the
highest cumulative spending level.
Note that week observations that are near the doughnut hole but not yet in the doughnut
25

We use a bandwidth of 0.3 for these regressions.

24

hole may move the individual into the doughnut hole, either because of an expensive drug
or because of multiple drugs. Thus, the fact that spending starts to drop slightly before the
doughnut hole does not necessarily indicate that individuals are forward-looking. In contrast,
the flat spending in the $2,000-2,380 range and the flat but lower spending in the doughnut
hole range is a pattern that is consistent with quasi-hyperbolic discounting or limited price
salience but not geometric discounting with δ > 0, as in Figure 2.26
Figure A2 in Appendix A provides a falsification exercise on Plan F, which had a coverage
gap that started at at the much higher level of $4,000 in total spending. We report the same
plots on this plan as on our base sample. We find very different results: there is no drop in
spending upon reaching $2,510 in total spending. This finding allows us to rule out that our
results are due to the drop in spending when hitting $2,510 in our sample being coincident
with a medical condition, such as the seasonal onset of a disease. Thus, the figure supports
the conclusion that the drop in spending is due to the coverage gap itself.
Having shown visually that there is flat spending in a region before the doughnut hole
and a drop in spending at the coverage gap start, we now examine the data in more detail
with linear regressions. Our linear regression specifications follow:
Yit = F Ei + λ1 1{0 < mit0 ≤ $110} + λ2 1{mit0 = 0} + vit ,

(3)

where mit0 is the beginning-of-week spending left until the doughnut hole, F Ei are enrollee
fixed effects, λ1 is the coefficient on an indicator for being above $2,400 in spending (within
$110 of the doughnut hole) and λ2 is the coefficient on an indicator for being in the doughnut
hole, which implies starting the week with at least $2,510 in expenditures. We examine a
number of different dependent variables Yit , including total prescription drug expenditures,
branded drug expenditures, and number of prescriptions filled. The λ1 coefficient captures
the fact that, if the enrollee starts the week near the doughnut hole, her spending during the
week may move her into the doughnut hole.
By selecting a small region around the doughnut hole, we are comparing the same indi26

Figure A1 in Appendix A displays the analogous figure to Figure 4 for the catastrophic zone. The
catastrophic sample size is small and so the impact of entering the catastrophic zone on spending is imprecise.

25

vidual at similar points in the year but faced with different contemporaneous prices. This
minimizes the possibility that factors other than the presence of the doughnut hole might be
influencing our findings. By including individual fixed effects, we are further controlling for
individual differences at different points in our sample, i.e. the possibility that more severely
ill individuals show up more in the region after the doughnut hole.
Our first set of linear regression findings are reported in Table 3.27 We find sharp drops
in most measures of prescription drug use. Supporting the results in Figure 4, total drug
spending dropped by $18 from a baseline of $62. The number of prescriptions fell by 21% from
a baseline mean of 0.84 per week. Branded prescriptions fell more than generic prescriptions:
27% versus 19%. Similarly, expensive prescriptions – those with a total price of $150 or more
– fell by 27% while inexpensive ones – those under $50 – had no significant drop. The mean
total price of a prescription fell by 12% from a baseline level of $80. All effects, except for
those on the number of inexpensive prescriptions, are statistically significant. Not reported
in the table, the indicators for weeks that start with $2,400 to $2,509 in total spending are
generally significantly negative and much smaller than the reported coverage gap indicators.
Table A2 shows the same analysis from Table 3, but on plan F, the falsification plan,
which had no price change at $2,510 in spending. The coefficients with this sample are
much smaller in magnitude than for the base sample, e.g., we find a $3.35 increase in weekly
spending at the $2,510 point for this plan, compared with a $17.46 decrease for the base
sample. They also do not show a consistent pattern, with three of the coefficients being
positive and five being negative.
These results paint a picture of enrollees who react strongly to being in the doughnut
hole. As discussed in Section 2.3, the interpretation of this result is that they have either a β
or σ or a δ that is substantially less than one: the dynamics of their drug purchase decisions
do not reflect the predictions of the benchmark model.
Next, Table 4 provides evidence on whether drug spending is downward sloped in all
regions before the doughnut hole, as predicted by the geometric model with a low but positive
discount factor (e.g. Einav et al., 2015), but not by the behavioral models. We perform the
same regressions as in Table 3 but with the addition of an extra regressor, which measures the
27

In the interest of brevity, we do not report either the enrollee fixed effects or λ1 values in our tables.

26

Table 3: Behavior for sample arriving near coverage gap
Dependent variable:
Mean spending in week
Mean price per Rx
Number of Rxs
Number of branded Rxs
Number of generic Rxs
Expensive Rxs
Medium Rxs
Inexpensive Rxs

Mean value
before $2,400
61.97
79.47
0.84
0.30
0.54
0.12
0.23
1.10

Beginning of week spending in:
$2,510 - 2,999
−17.46∗∗ (1.38)
−9.77∗∗ (1.37)
−0.18∗∗ (0.02)
−0.08∗∗ (0.01)
−0.10∗∗ (0.01)
−0.04∗∗ (0.00)
−0.06∗∗ (0.01)
−0.01 (0.01)

N
28,543
10,846
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level.
Each row represents one regression. All regressions also include enrollee fixed effects and an indicator for
beginning-of-week spending between $2,400 and $2,509, and cluster standard errors at the enrollee level.
An observation is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week
spending ≥ $2, 000 and < $3, 000. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50 and expensive ones are $150 or more.

change in spending in the region $2,200 to $2,399. Thus, the excluded region is now $2,000
to $2,199. Supporting the results in Figure 4 again, the coefficient on total spending in the
$2,200 to $2,399 range is not significant and close to 0. The implication is that, while spending
before the doughnut hole is higher than in the doughnut hole, the increment does not grow
as one moves further back. This is consistent with the predictions of the behavioral models
with β or σ much lower than δ. It is, however, inconsistent with the geometric discounting
model with a sufficiently high discount factor. For instance, the analogous coefficient for
δ = 0.96 in Figure 2 (which uses simulated data) would be well above the confidence interval
for our estimates here.28
Table A3 in Appendix A provides evidence on the five health shock types which have the
largest drops in prescriptions upon entering the doughnut hole and the five with the largest
increases in prescriptions. Here, we perform similar regressions to Table 3 but with the
number of prescriptions for drugs that treat a health shock type as the dependent variable.
We then report the health shock types with the biggest and smallest coefficients on the
spending drop in the doughnut hole region. The five health shock types with the biggest
drops in prescriptions are also among the ten most common health shock types, as reported
in Table 2. Indeed, the only one of the top five health shock types that does not have a drop
28

We perform formal tests on β and σ in the context of our structural estimation results in Section 6.1.

27

Table 4: Behavior near coverage gap with variation in pre-coverage gap region
Dependent variable:
Mean spending in week
Mean price per Rx
Number of Rxs
Number of branded Rxs
Number of generic Rxs
Expensive Rxs
Medium Rxs
Inexpensive Rxs

Mean value
before $2,400
61.97
79.47
0.84
0.30
0.54
0.12
0.23
1.10

Beginning of week spending in:
$2,510 - 2,999 $2,200 - 2,399
−17.79∗∗ (1.76) −0.68 (2.25)
−8.97∗∗ (1.72)
1.64 (2.13)
∗∗
−0.20 (0.02)
−0.03 (0.03)
∗∗
−0.08 (0.01)
0.01 (0.01)
−0.12∗∗ (0.02) −0.04∗ (0.02)
−0.04∗∗ (0.01)
−0.00 (0.01)
∗∗
−0.06 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)
−0.02∗ (0.01)
−0.01 (0.02)

N
28,543
10,846
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level.
Each row represents one regression. All regressions also include enrollee fixed effects and an indicator for
beginning-of-week spending between $2,400 and $2,509, and cluster standard errors at the enrollee level.
An observation is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week
spending ≥ $2, 000 and < $3, 000. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50 and expensive ones are $150 or more.

that is also in the top five is opioids. The five health shock types with the biggest increases
in prescriptions upon entering the doughnut hole are all health shock types with very few
prescriptions (and the coefficients are all insignificant). Overall, this table shows that the
percentage drops in prescriptions are similar across most health shock types. This finding is
also consistent with Chandra et al. (2010) who find similar demand responses to increased
cost-sharing across drug categories.
Appendix D considers, and eliminates, a number of other threats to the identification
of our results rejecting the benchmark model and geometric model with a low but positive
discount factor.

5
5.1

Econometrics of the Structural Model
Estimation

We structurally estimate the model developed in Section 2. Our estimation partitions enrollees into groups g = 1, . . . , G based on their ACG score, with separate parameters by
group. We assume that Qn (the probability of further health shocks), N (the maximum
number of health shocks), and Ph (the probability of each health shock) vary across groups.

28

Our data include 8 discrete ACG score groups.29
Our data do not allow us to directly estimate Ph and Qn since we do not know when
enrollees have a health shock but choose the outside good. Rather than attempting to identify
these parameters from our estimation sample, we estimate them from the same enrollees,
observed earlier in the year. Specifically, we assume that enrollees in our estimation sample
will always choose an inside drug in the months before they enter our estimation window,
with the logic being that the doughnut hole is sufficiently far away. Thus, we estimate Ph
and Qn for each ACG group from that group’s enrollees’ weekly drug purchases measured
from their first week of purchases after the deductible region (conservatively defined as $300
in total spending) until the last week before they enter our sample (which starts at $2,000 in
total spending).
We estimate a separate Ph and Qn distribution for each group g. In addition, we allow
the other parameters to vary in three sets: the lowest, highest, and middle six ACG scores.
For each estimation, we lump together health shock types with fewer than 100 prescriptions
filled for the estimation sample over the entire year in a type called “Other.” We also lump
together drugs within a health shock type as “Other” until such point as every drug has at
least 50 prescriptions filled over the entire year.30
Our basic approach to estimation is maximum likelihood with a nested fixed point algorithm: for any parameter vector, we solve for agents’ dynamically optimal decisions, and then
define the likelihood function based on s, the predicted probabilities at the optimum. The
model is an optimal stopping problem (where stopping indicates a drug purchase) with many
options (where an option is a particular drug). In this way, the problem is similar to Rust
(1987)’s classic paper on optimal stopping and also to more recent work that combines optimal stopping decisions with a multinomial choice (see, for instance, Melnikov, 2013; Hendel
and Nevo, 2006; Gowrisankaran and Rysman, 2012).
Our framework differs from these models in that we do not observe all health shocks: we
only observe health shocks when the individual chooses to purchase a drug rather than the
29

Table A4 in Appendix A provides details on the enrollees by group.
We make these simplifications for computational tractability, since our estimation has fixed effects for
each drug and requires an accurate estimation of the probability of each health shock type.
30

29

outside option. Moreover, a large part of our identification will come from people choosing not
to purchase drugs as they approach or are in the doughnut hole. Thus, we develop methods
that allow us to integrate in closed form over the shocks at which the individual chooses a
drug, which makes this estimator computationally tractable.31 Appendix B provides details
on the likelihood function.
Finally, note that we estimate over 200 parameters, mostly drug fixed effects φ. It can
be difficult to estimate structural, dynamic models with this many parameters. Fortunately,
with the exception of the discount / salience effects, our estimation is similar to a multinomial
logit model, which has a well-behaved likelihood. We estimate the model by performing a grid
search over β or σ and δ and then using a derivative-based search for all other parameters,
given each value of β or σ and δ.32 Not reported in the paper, we also performed Monte
Carlo simulations to verify the accuracy of the code and power of the estimator.

5.2

Identification

The parameters that we seek to identify from our structural likelihood estimation are the
fixed utility from treatment parameters φ, the price elasticity parameters of α(·), δ, and β or
σ. We begin with an intuitive description of identification and then provide a proposition.
In dynamic discrete choice models, exclusion restrictions can be used to identify δ (Magnac
and Thesmar, 2002; Fang and Wang, 2015; Abbring and Daljord, 2018). In our setting, the
variability of drug prices near the doughnut hole provides such exclusion restrictions. To
see this, consider the geometric discounting case with a cheap drug k —with pk = 40 and
oopk = 10—and an expensive drug l—with pl = 100 and oopl = 25. From (1), at a state that
is m0 = $20 dollars from the doughnut hole, there is no insurance subsidy for drug l but there
is $10 in insurance subsidy for drug k. Hence, our exclusion restriction is that the expected
31
We also cannot easily use the computationally advantageous conditional choice probability estimators
initially proposed by Hotz and Miller (1993). These estimators rely on observing all serially correlated state
variables, which is not the case in our setting. Specifically, we do not observe the state variable n, which is
the purchase occasion within the week, because we do not observe the outside option purchase. Moreover, a
high n for one drug purchase is positively correlated with a high n for the next drug purchase.
32
We also sped up computation by using parallel computation methods and by using the structure of the
problem, where the doughnut hole is an absorbing state without any dynamic behavior, to simplify the value
function calculation.

30

discounted value from purchasing drug l at m0 is the same as inside the doughnut hole.33
Focusing on the geometric discounting model, this exclusion restriction allows us to identify δ based on the change in the relative purchase probabilities of k to l compared to inside
the doughnut hole.34 We then identify the parameters of α(·) using price variation across
drugs inside the doughnut hole, and identify the φ parameters from choice probabilities net
of the price disutility.
Finally, we can identify β or σ by considering the change in purchase probabilities as
we move further back from the doughnut hole start. Intuitively, having identified the other
parameters as in Figures 2 and 3, identification of β or σ follows from the difference in
purchase probabilities at the second to last purchase occasion compared to the final purchase
occasion before the doughnut hole. These probabilities will be similar if β is low and δ is
close to 1, while the earlier purchase occasion will have a higher purchase probability if β is
1 and δ is low.
We offer a formal identification result, which uses the above intuition:
Proposition 3. Let Assumption 1 hold. Assume that there is exactly one health shock per
week; that 0 < δ < 1 and β or σ > 0; and that there is one health shock type, so that there
are J drugs. Assume also that there is sufficient price variation across drugs such that for
some drugs k and l and state variables m0 and m00 that are reached by the data, (i) oopk < pk
and (ii) oopk < m0 < m00 < min{p1 , . . . , pJ , oopl }. Finally, assume that the price disutility is
linear so that α(p) ≡ αp. Then:
(a) For a given β or σ, α, φ1 , . . . φJ , and δ are identified given any of the three models—of
quasi-hyperbolic discounting naı̈fs and sophisticates and price salience.
(b) Provided a rank condition holds, β or σ is also identified given any of the three models.
33

Abbring and Daljord (2018) consider identification of the discount factor with restrictions on flow utility
but not the value function. In our case, the theory directly imposes a restriction on the choice-specific value
functions, as in Magnac and Thesmar (2002), and hence we do not apply the Abbring and Daljord results.
34
Magnac and Thesmar (2002) also require a rank condition, which is satisfied in our case because there is
insurance value for drug k at state m0 , unlike in the doughnut hole, implying that this state is different from
the corresponding inside-the-doughnut-hole state.

31

For the quasi-hyperbolic discounting with sophisticates model, the rank condition is:

log

 J


s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l) h X
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
0
s(m , 1, 1, j) log
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)
j=1
−

J
X

i
s(m , 1, 1, j) log(s(m , 1, 1, j)) + s(m , 1, 1, 0) log(s(0, 1, 1, 0))
0

0

0

j=0


− log

−

 J


s(m00 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l) h X
00
s(m , 1, 1, j) log
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)
j=1
J
X

i
s(m , 1, 1, j) log(s(m , 1, 1, j)) + s(m , 1, 1, 0) log(s(0, 1, 1, 0)) 6= 0. (4)
00

00

00

j=0

Several implications of the proposition deserve further comment. First, while we cannot
verify that the rank condition in Proposition 3 (b) would always hold, we simulated choice
probability data from the equilibrium of the model for a number of parameter values. We
verified that the condition always holds for these parameter values and that we are always
able to recover β and δ.35
Second, Proposition 3 focuses on states near the doughnut hole for tractability: for these
states, any drug purchase leads to an exclusion restriction of the value function, as noted
above.36 However, in practice, states with multiple purchases necessary to reach the doughnut
hole will help identify the parameters and add identifying variation.
Third, also for tractability, Proposition 3 imposes a number of assumptions—such as the
presence of only one health shock type and only one shock per week—but more complex
environments should yield more identifying variation.
Fourth, while we did not formally consider the identification of the different behavioral
models, our proof shows that β and σ are identified from any pair of states m0 and m00
within some range. We have many such pairs of states and our identifying equations are not
collinear across pairs of states for the simulated parameters that we tried. Thus, intuitively,
these additional pairs of states will also help identify the best model. Moreover, it is easy
35

We include the simulation code, output, and instructions in the supplementary materials to the paper.
Thus, unlike the above intuition, our proof does not use multiple drug purchase occasions, but the effect
of observing the purchase probabilities at different amounts to the doughnut hole is mathematically similar.
36

32

to see how model specification between the quasi-hyperbolic discounting and salience models
is identified: under quasi-hyperbolic discounting, the purchase probabilities at 0 < m <
min{oop1 , . . . , oopJ } are identical to inside the doughnut hole, while under the salience model,
they are strictly higher.
Finally, we note that our identification leverages the heterogeneity of prices across drugs
and health shock types and responses to this heterogeneity. Our overall takeaway is that to
identify discount factors from administrative data such as ours, it is useful to have variation
in prices across drugs. Moreover, to accurately identify the behavioral parameters, we need
to concurrently identify price elasticity parameters, implying that an accurate specification
of a choice model is important.

6

Structural Estimation Results and Counterfactuals

6.1

Estimation Results

Our structural estimation stratifies the sample of patients in Section 4 by ACG score and
performs the estimation on the three separate samples. For each sample, we estimate the
quasi-hyperbolic discounting model with naı̈fs and sophisticates and the price salience model.
Table 5 reports results for the middle ACG scores. We find complete myopia or lack of
price salience, that β = 0 for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting models and σ = 0 for the
price salience model. With β = 0, the implications of the naı̈fs and sophisticates variants are
identical. Since δ is not identified when β or σ = 0, we do not report δ.
We cannot compute a standard error for β or σ given our estimated parameters, because
they are not on the interior of the parameter space. Instead, we performed Lagrange multiplier tests on the restricted model with fixed δ and β or σ (Newey and McFadden, 1994),
over a grid of these values. We reject all values of β or σ > 0 and δ > 0 that we tested.
Table 5 provides test statistics for selected values of these parameters.
We next turn to model selection. Here we find that the price salience model fits the
data better than the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, with a log likelihood that is 137.9
points higher. It is difficult to formally test the two models, because our estimated β and
33

Table 5: Main results of structural estimation
Model:

Price spline < $20
Price spline ∈ [$20, $50)
Price spline ∈ [$50, $150)
Price spline ≥ $150,
Behavioral parameter: β or σ
Discount factor: δ
log L
log L β or σ = 0.1, δ = 0.1
P-value for LM test
log L β or σ = 0.1, δ = 0.4
P-value for LM test
log L at β or σ = 0.1, δ = 0.995
P-value for LM test
log L at β or σ = 0.3, δ = 0.995
P-value for LM test
Number of health shock types H
Number of drug fixed effects φ
N

Quasi-hyperbolic
discounting:
naı̈fs
−0.116∗∗ (0.006)
−0.012∗∗ (0.002)
−0.013∗∗ (0.001)
−0.006∗∗ (0.001)
0 (–)
–
−95,594.6
−95,602.6
0.00
−95,604.8
0.00
− 95,619.6
0.00
−95,672.5
0.00

Quasi-hyperbolic
discounting:
sophisticates
−0.116∗∗ (0.006)
−0.012∗∗ (0.002)
−0.013∗∗ (0.001)
−0.006∗∗ (0.001)
0 (–)
–
−95,594.6
−95,602.4
0.00
−95,604.5
0.00
−95,615.7
0.00
−95,663.8
0.00
60
245
18,897

Price
salience
−0.148∗∗ (0.007)
−0.014∗∗ (0.002)
−0.018∗∗ (0.001)
−0.003∗ (0.001)
0 (–)
–
−95,456.7
−95,460.4
0.00
−95,462.0
0.00
−95,471.6
0.00
−95,532.9
0.00

Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses are calculated using standard outer product approximations,
treating β, σ and δ as fixed. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level. An observation
is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week spending ≥ $2, 000
and < $3, 000, with a middle ACG score. Each column displays the results from the maximum likelihood
estimation for one model. Reported price coefficients are −α(·); all prices affect utility negatively. All
specifications also include fixed effects φ for each drug. LM tests are for the restrictions on β or σ and δ.

σ parameters are at the boundary. Thus, we perform a non-nested test of model selection
that conditions on β = σ = 0. Using the Vuong (1989) test, we reject the quasi-hyperbolic
discounting model in favor of the salience model (test statistic = 7.36, p<0.001).
To provide graphical evidence on the fit of our models, Figure 5 reports mean spending
in the data and from equilibrium simulations of both estimated models. The simulations use
the same empirical distribution of health shocks as does our estimation. The figure shows
that the salience model follows the pattern of relatively constant spending inside the initial
coverage region and a steep drop in spending in weeks that start right before the doughnut
hole. If some groups in our estimation sample were salient about the doughnut hole prices
when in the initial coverage region, we would expect to see the data reflect a more gradual
34

0

Mean spending in week ($)
20
40
60

80

Figure 5: Fit of quasi-hyperbolic discounting and price salience models near coverage gap

2000

2200
2400
2600
2800
Cumulative total spending at beginning of week ($)
Mean spending in data
Simulation: quasi-hyperbolic discounting

3000

Simulation: salience

drop in spending before the doughnut hole than predicted by the estimated salience model.
In contrast, the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model predicts too early a spending decline
from the doughnut hole. Given the estimated value of β = 0, this early decline is exclusively
caused by health shocks with expensive prescriptions and weeks with multiple health shocks,
rather than by forward-looking behavior by enrollees. Finally, the salience model also matches
the drop in spending at the doughnut hole more closely than the quasi-hyperbolic discounting
model.37
Table A5 in Appendix A presents the model fit for all the moments reported in the
reduced-form analysis in Table 3. The salience model fits better on many of these moments,
such as the drop in the number of expensive prescriptions and in the number of branded
prescriptions.
Table A6 in Appendix A reports results for other ACG scores, which are very similar to
37

Mean weekly spending in the data drops by 23.7% in the [$2,510, $3,000) region relative to the [$2,000,
$2,400) region in the data, compared with 18.2% for the estimated salience model and only 12.9% for the
estimated quasi-hyperbolic discounting model. Thus, while both models underpredict the drop, the salience
model fits much better, at 77% of the realized drop.

35

the base results.38 Overall, our estimates of σ = 0 imply that enrollees in the initial coverage
region were not taking into account the fact that they will face doughnut hole prices in the
future when making their drug purchase decisions in the initial coverage region.
Finally, we turn to our estimates of the price spline coefficients. These coefficients are
all negative and statistically significant, implying that enrollees value price negatively at all
ranges for all three models. However, it appears that enrollees care far less about price for
higher-priced drugs than for lower-priced ones. In order to further understand our price
coefficients, we used our estimated parameters to simulate the impact of a 1% increase in all
drug prices and out-of-pocket prices on the expected number of drugs purchased by enrollees
in our sample over the entire year 2008. We find that the 1% price increase would lead to
a 0.54% decrease in the base-price-weighted number of drugs purchased in 2008 for enrollees
in our estimation sample. Comparing our elasticity of −0.54 to analogous numbers from the
literature,39 Abaluck et al. (2018) estimate a Medicare Part D elasticity of −0.09, Einav et al.
(2015) estimate −0.50, and Ketcham and Simon (2008) estimate −0.22. Karaca-Mandic et al.
(2013) estimate an elasticity of adherence for statin drugs of −0.95.
Thus, our elasticity numbers are in the middle of the range reported by the literature.
Since overly small estimated price coefficients may lead to overly low estimated β or σ in
order to explain the drop in spending at the doughnut hole, this also adds to credibility that
our estimated values of β and σ are not too low.

6.2

Counterfactuals

We now consider counterfactuals as to enrollee preferences and insurance environments. We
use enrollees and estimates for the price salience model and the middle ACG scores (the last
column of Table 5), but the results are very similar across ACG scores.
Our counterfactuals modify our structural estimation framework in two ways. First, since
our estimation sample pertains to a selected set of enrollees who reached a high spending
38

Not reported in the paper, we also estimated the model with stratification both by ACG score and by
whether the patient had purchased an insulin sensitizer or cholesterol-lowering drug. The results are similar
across these groups, suggesting that our assumptions on the arrival of disease shocks are not overly influencing
our results.
39
Using the nationally representative sample described in Section 6.2 below, we find an elasticity of −0.38.

36

level early in the year, we create a nationally representative sample by taking a convex
combination of enrollees in our estimation sample and enrollees in the same plans who are
not in our estimation sample. The combination is chosen so that 33% of enrollees reach
the coverage gap after 52 weeks, the same as the aggregate figure for 2008.40 Second, we
compute a 52-week model, where we model both the doughnut hole and the catastrophic
coverage region, instead of an infinite horizon model with the doughnut hole as an absorbing
state. The reason is that individuals in counterfactual environments may frequently not reach
the doughnut hole, unlike in our base estimation.41
We start by examining the relative importance of behavioral hazard to drug insurance.
Here, behavioral hazard is the extent to which the lack of salience about future drug prices
affects purchase decisions.42 To quantify behavioral hazard, we compare the baseline Part
D program to the benchmark model, which we define here as geometric discounting with
δ = 0.999 at the weekly level (or 0.95 at an annual level). We examine the importance of
drug insurance by comparing the baseline to the case without insurance. All cases report
enrollee welfare using σ = 1 and an annualized 95% discount factor.43
The results, in Table 6, show that the benchmark model (Case 2) would cause a 31% drop
in weekly enrollee prescription drug spending and a 15% drop in total drug expenditures relative to our estimated baseline with σ = 0 (Case 1). However, there is little difference in
the number of prescriptions drugs between the two scenarios. Instead, there is a significant
change in the composition of drugs consumed. There is a 25% drop in prescriptions for expensive drugs with substitution towards the most inexpensive. This substitution effect is also
apparent in the increase in the number of generic drugs under the benchmark model. Interestingly, there is a small decrease in insurer expenditures in moving to geometric discounting,
40

Our counterfactual sample draws 31.8% from our estimation sample, with the remainder from other
enrollees. For each ACG score, we estimate different distributions for the parameters on having a health
shocks (Qn ) and on health shock type probabilities (Ph ) for the estimation and non-estimation samples.
41
We compute welfare measures using ch = γ. A different ch would rescale the welfare of each counterfactual
by the same amount.
42
This is a relatively simple view of the potential behavioral hazard present here, focusing only on overconsumption of drugs, and not on substitution to non-pharmaceutical spending.
43
Note that there is no one definition of welfare in models with behavioral hazard. Moreover, our welfare
effects do not account for substitute therapies to drugs. For these reasons, we report, but do not focus on,
welfare effects.

37

Table 6: Relative impact of behavioral hazard and drug insurance
Statistic
(per week)

Baseline: σ = 0
Benchmark
future
model (no
not salient
behavioral hazard)
Case 1
Case 2
Number of Rxs
0.59
0.57
Number of branded Rxs
0.16
0.13
Number of generic Rxs
0.35
0.38
Expensive Rxs
0.08
0.06
Medium Rxs
0.17
0.15
Inexpensive Rxs
0.33
0.36
Enrollee spending ($)
15.82
10.91
Insurer spending ($)
25.39
24.17
Total spending ($)
41.20
35.08
Enrollee welfare
1.21
1.27

No drug
insurance
Case 3
0.42
0.11
0.25
0.05
0.13
0.25
26.61
0.00
26.61
0.63

Note: Simulations use estimated parameters from Table 5 column 3. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50
and expensive ones are $150 or more. Simulations are performed for 52 weeks starting enrollees at $0 in
expenditures and use a mix of the estimation sample and other enrollees in same plans so that 33% reach
the doughnut hole in the base case. Geometric discounting case uses an annualized discount factor of 95%.

as enrollees substitute to drugs which are cheaper for themselves and also for the insurers.
Comparing the baseline to the case without insurance (Case 3), we find that eliminating drug
insurance would cause drug expenditures to drop by 35%. Thus, both behavioral hazard and
drug insurance are important in affecting drug spending.
We now examine the implications of counterfactual policies regarding eliminating the
doughnut hole. Table 7 presents the results of the baseline (Policy 1) and three counterfactual
policies. Policy 2 extends the initial coverage region out-of-pocket prices to the doughnut
hole. Policy 3 also eliminates the doughnut hole but leaves insurance spending constant by
setting the coinsurance to a constant fraction of the total price of the drug. Finally, Policy
4 removes the doughnut hole for generics only.
We find that removing the doughnut hole (Policy 2) results in the total number of prescriptions increasing 7% and total drug spending increasing 10%. Insurer drug spending
would increase 27%. Enrollees would consume more drugs and more expensive drugs. Einav
et al. (2015) also estimate that removing the doughnut hole will increase pharmaceutical
spending 10%, while Abaluck et al. (2018) estimate that figure to be 6%.

38

Table 7: Impact of filling the doughnut hole
Statistic
(per week)

Baseline: σ = 0
future not
salient
Policy 1
Number of Rxs
0.59
Number of branded Rxs
0.16
Number of generic Rxs
0.35
Expensive Rxs
0.08
Medium Rxs
0.17
Inexpensive Rxs
0.33
Enrollee spending ($)
15.71
Insurer spending ($)
25.55
Total spending ($)
41.26
Enrollee welfare
1.21
Coinsurance rate
from data

No doughnut
hole
Policy 2
0.63
0.18
0.37
0.10
0.18
0.35
12.83
32.49
45.32
1.35
from data

No doughnut hole
with constant
insurer spending
Policy 3
0.62
0.17
0.37
0.08
0.16
0.38
14.88
25.55
40.43
1.31
37%

No doughnut
hole for
generics only
Policy 4
0.61
0.16
0.39
0.08
0.17
0.36
14.25
27.23
41.48
1.29
from data

Note: Simulations use estimated parameters from Table 5 column 3. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50
and expensive ones are $150 or more. Simulations are performed for 52 weeks starting enrollees at $0 in
expenditures and use a mix of the estimation sample and other enrollees in same plans so that 33% reach
the doughnut hole in the base case.

It is important to evaluate what might be the overall health consequences of removing the
doughnut hole. We can provide some back-of-the-envelope calculations using Chandra et al.
(2010), who estimate substitution between drug utilization and inpatient hospitalization.
Applying these estimates to the increase in drug consumption under Policy 2 implies that
inpatient hospital admissions would decrease by 1.8% by eliminating the doughnut hole.44
Under a linear contract with the same insurer cost (Policy 3), enrollees would face a
37% coinsurance rate. This is significantly higher than the current average 25% coinsurance.
Enrollees would consume more drugs but fewer expensive ones than in the baseline as the
lack of price salience is no longer relevant since the contract is not dynamic. Not shown in the
table, this contract also lowers the expected standard deviation of enrollee spending, to $548
relative to $625 under Policy 1. Finally, Policy 4, removing the doughnut hole for generics,
yields a 9% decrease in enrollee spending and a 7% increase in insurer spending relative to
44

Chandra et al. (2010) find that a drug use drop of 18.2% leads to an increase in hospitalizations of 5.4%.
We derive our result by applying the resulting elasticity of 0.27 to our 6.8% increase in drug utilization.
Our calculation assumes that all the offset in Chandra et al. (2010) is attributable to the decline in drug
consumption and not the decline in outpatient visits.

39

the baseline. The end effect is that total spending is almost the same as in the baseline, as
enrollees substitute to generic drugs and away from branded drugs.

7

Conclusion

The Medicare Part D program established an important prescription drug benefit, but one
that required enrollees interested in optimizing their drug purchases to calculate an inherently dynamic problem, due to the coverage gap. We develop a dynamic behavioral modeling
framework for complex insurance contracts which allows for quasi-hyperbolic discounting and
price salience. Using the framework we provide a discontinuity-based test of the benchmark
model, with a geometric discount factor close to 1 and no quasi-hyperbolic discounting or
price salience. A central challenge of estimating the impact of dynamic incentives on consumer behavior is selection: individuals compared across different settings may be different
in dimensions that are often unobservable. Our test is based on examining how individuals
who arrive near the doughnut hole early in the year change their behavior upon reaching
the doughnut hole. It avoids selection issues by considering how a given enrollee changes her
behavior within a relatively small time period.
We find strong evidence against the benchmark model. Enrollees lower their prescription
drug purchases upon reaching the doughnut hole, with a disproportionate drop for branded
drugs and drugs that cost over $150. Moreover, the data can reject a geometric discounting
model with a low but positive discount factor because spending is flat in a region before
the doughnut hole. Having established evidence against the geometric discounting model, we
turn to structurally estimating the parameters of our model. Our modeling framework builds
on standard industrial organization choice models, with a multinomial choice problem where
enrollees face a health shock of a random type. Each health shock type requires treatment
by a one of a particular set of drugs. The enrollee thus chooses to purchase one of the drugs
in that set or the outside option. The price elasticity parameters are separately identified
from the geometric discount factor and the behavioral parameter by the fact that different
drugs have different prices.
We find that enrollees have significant price elasticities. We also reject the quasi-hyperbolic
40

discounting in favor of the price salience model. Finally, we find that future prices are not
at all salient. This suggests that policies to make doughnut hole prices more salient in
consumers’ drug purchase decisions in the initial coverage region would add value.
Our structural estimation approach has several limitations. We do not allow for any
medical dynamics to treatment; we do not measure substitute therapies to drugs; we do not
model imperfect physician agency; and our arrival process for diseases is relatively simple.
Nonetheless, we believe that our structural results are reasonable, given that our estimated
model matches data moments reasonably well.
Last, we examine the impact of counterfactual preferences and policies. We find that
closing the doughnut hole would raise total spending 10% or necessitate a 37% coinsurance
for budget balancing. Doughnut hole coverage for generics only would be much less expensive.

References
Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2011). Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence from
plan choice in the Medicare Part D program. American Economic Review, 101(4):1180–
1210.
Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2013). Evolving choice inconsistencies in choice of prescription
drug insurance. NBER Working Paper 19163.
Abaluck, J., Gruber, J., and Swanson, A. (2018). Prescription drug use under Medicare Part
D: A linear model of nonlinear budget sets. Journal of Public Economics, 164:106–138.
Abbring, J. H. and Daljord, Ø. (2018). Identifying the discount factor in dynamic discrete
choice models. Mimeo, Tilburg University.
Baicker, K., Mullainathan, S., and Schwartzstein, J. (2012). Behavioral hazard in health
insurance. NBER Working Paper 18468.
Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., and Shleifer, A. (2012). Salience theory of choice under risk. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1243–1285.
Brot-Goldberg, Z. C., Chandra, A., Handel, B. R., and Kolstad, J. T. (2017). What does a
deductible do? the impact of cost-sharing on health care prices, quantities, and spending
dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1261–1318.
Cabral, M. (2016). Claim timing and ex post adverse selection. The Review of Economic
Studies, 84(1):1–44.
41

Chandra, A., Gruber, J., and McKnight, R. (2010). Patient cost-sharing and hospitalization
offsets in the elderly. American Economic Review, 100:193–213.
Chetty, R., Looney, A., and Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence.
The American Economic Review, 99(4):1145–1177.
Chung, D. J., Steenburgh, T., and Sudhir, K. (2013). Do bonuses enhance sales productivity?
A dynamic structural analysis of bonus-based compensation plans. Marketing Science,
33(2):165–187.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Schrimpf, P. (2015). The response of drug expenditure to
nonlinear contract design: evidence from Medicare Part D. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 130(2):841–899.
Fang, H. and Wang, Y. (2015). Estimating dynamic discrete choice models with hyperbolic
discounting, with an application to mammography decisions. International Economic Review, 56(2):565–596.
Gowrisankaran, G. (1999). Efficient representation of state spaces for some dynamic models.
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 23:1077–1099.
Gowrisankaran, G., Norberg, K., Kymes, S., Chernew, M. E., Stwalley, D., Kemper, L., and
Peck, W. (2013). A hospital system’s wellness program linked to health plan enrollment
cut hospitalizations but not overall costs. Health Affairs, 32(3):477–485.
Gowrisankaran, G. and Rysman, M. (2012). Dynamics of consumer demand for new durable
goods. Journal of Political Economy, 120:1173–1219.
Grubb, M. D. and Osborne, M. (2014). Biased beliefs, learning, and bill shock. The American
Economic Review, 105(1):234–271.
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When
nudging hurts. American Economic Review, 103(7):2643–2682.
Heiss, F., McFadden, D., and Winter, J. (2010). Mind the gap! Consumer perceptions and
choices in Medicare Part D prescription drug plans. In Wise, D., editor, Research Findings
in the Economics of Aging. University of Chicago Press.
Hendel, I. and Nevo, A. (2006). Measuring the implications of sales and consumer stockpiling
behavior. Econometrica, 74:1637–1673.
Ho, K., Hogan, J., and Scott Morton, F. (2017). The impact of consumer inattention on
insurer pricing in the Medicare Part D program. The RAND Journal of Economics,
48(4):877–905.
Hotz, J. V. and Miller, R. J. (1993). Conditional choice probabilities and the estimation of
dynamic models. Review of Economic Studies, 60:497–529.
42

Ito, K. (2014). Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
electricity pricing. The American Economic Review, 104(2):537–563.
Karaca-Mandic, P., Swenson, T., Abraham, J. M., and Kane, R. L. (2013). Association
of Medicare Part D medication out-of-pocket costs with utilization of statin medications.
Health Services Research, 48(4):1311–1333.
Ketcham, J. and Simon, K. (2008). Medicare Part D’s effects on elderly patients’ drug costs
and utilization. American Journal of Managed Care, 14(11 Suppl):SP14–22.
Ketcham, J. D., Lucarelli, C., Miravete, E. J., and Roebuck, M. C. (2012). Sinking, swimming, or learning to swim in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review, 102(6):2639–
2673.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(2):443–478.
Lichtenberg, F. and Sun, S. (2007). The impact of Medicare Part D on prescription drug use
by the elderly. Health Affairs, 16:1735–1744.
Liu, F., Alexander, C., Crawford, S., Hedeker, D., Pickard, S., and Walton, S. (2011). The
impact of Medicare Part D on out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs, medication utilization, health resource utilization, and preference-based health utility. Health Services
Research, 46(4):1104–1123.
Magnac, T. and Thesmar, D. (2002). Identifying dynamic discrete decision processes. Econometrica, 70(2):801–816.
Medpac (2009). Report to the Congress: Medicare payment policy. Technical report, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.
Medpac (2014). Report to the Congress: Medicare payment policy. Technical report, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.
Melnikov, O. (2013). Demand for differentiated products: The case of the U.S. computer
printer market. Economic Inquiry, 51:1277–1298.
Nevo, A., Turner, J. L., and Williams, J. W. (2016). Usage-based pricing and demand for
residential broadband. Econometrica, 84(2):411–443.
Newey, W. K. and McFadden, D. (1994). Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing.
Handbook of Econometrics, 4:2111–2245.
Newhouse, J. P. (1993). Free for all? Lessons from the RAND health insurance experiment.
Harvard University Press.
Phelps, E. and Pollak, R. (1968). On second-best national saving and game-equilibrium
growth. Review of Economic Studies, 35:201–208.
43

Rust, J. (1987). Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical model of Harold
Zurcher. Econometrica, 55:999–1033.
Schroeder, M. C., Brooks, J. M., and Cook, E. A. (2014). Heart attacks and subsequent
medication choices: the effect of Medicare Part D benefit phase and time of year. Mimeo,
University of Iowa.
Starc, A. and Town, R. J. (2016). Externalities and benefit design in health insurance.
Mimeo, University of Texas.
Stokey, N. L., Lucas, R. E., and Prescott, E. C. (1989). Recursive methods in economic
dynamics. Harvard University Press.
Strotz, R. H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. Review of
Economic Studies, 23:165–80.
Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested hypotheses.
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 307–333.
Yin, W., Basu, A., Zhang, J. X., Rabbani, A., Meltzer, D. O., and Alexander, C. (2008). The
effect of the Medicare Part D prescription benefit on drug utilization and expenditures.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 148:169–177.
Zhang, Y., Donohue, J. M., Lave, J. R., O’Donnell, G., and Newhouse, J. P. (2009). The
effect of Medicare Part D on drug and medical spending. New England Journal of Medicine,
361:52–61.

44

Appendix A: Extra Figures and Tables
Table A1: Most common drugs in base estimation sample
Drug
name
Lisinopril

Health
shock type
ReninAngiotensin
System Blocker
Metoprolol
Beta-Blocker
Simvastatin
CholesterolLowering
Hydrocodon
Opioid
Plavix
Antiplatelet
Furosemide
Diuretic
Levothyroxine Hypothyroidism
Metformin
Insulin Sensitizer
Amlodipine
Calcium Channel
Blocker
Warfarin
Anticoagulant

BranTotal
red
price ($)
N
18.28

Out of pocket Number
price ($)
of Rxs
9.75
709

%
of obs.
3.1

N
N

29.11
32.57

10.07
11.14

629
629

2.7
2.7

N
Y
N
N
N
N

21.44
169.55
8.16
11.38
23.86
52.16

7.88
40.47
6.79
9.16
9.50
10.93

609
594
575
549
514
496

2.7
2.6
2.5
2.4
2.2
2.2

N

16.21

8.50

339

1.5

Note: Reported total prices and out-of-pocket prices derived from authors’ calculations.

45

0

Mean spending in week ($)
500
1000

1500

Figure A1: Spending near catastrophic coverage start for base estimation sample

3600

3800
4000
4200
4400
Cumulative out-of-pocket spending at beginning of week ($)

Mean spending during week

4600

Smoothed spending during week

Note: Figure is based on plans in estimation sample, using enrollees who start a week with between $3,550
and $4,050 in out-of-pocket spending between Mar. 30 and Jul. 20, 2008.

Table A2: Behavior for falsification plan sample arriving near coverage gap
Dependent variable:
Mean spending in week
Mean price per Rx
Number of Rxs
Number of branded Rxs
Number of generic Rxs
Expensive Rxs
Medium Rxs
Inexpensive Rxs

Mean value
before $2,400
72.18
83.02
0.94
0.30
0.63
0.15
0.21
1.17

Beginning of week spending in:
$2,510 - 2,999
3.35∗ (1.52)
3.02∗ (1.47)
−0.02∗ (0.01)
−0.01 (0.01)
−0.02∗ (0.01)
0.01∗∗ (0.00)
−0.01 (0.01)
−0.01 (0.01)

N
42,687
17,528
42,687
42,687
42,687
42,687
42,687
42,687

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level.
Each row represents one regression. All regressions also include enrollee fixed effects and an indicator for
beginning-of-week spending between $2,400 and $2,509, and cluster standard errors at the enrollee level.
An observation is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week
spending ≥ $2, 000 and < $3, 000. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50 and expensive ones are $150 or more.

46

0

20

Mean spending in week ($)
40
60
80

100

Figure A2: Spending near $2,510 for falsification Plan F

2000

2200
2400
2600
2800
Cumulative total spending at beginning of week ($)
Mean spending during week

3000

Smoothed spending during week

Note: Figure is based on analog to base estimation sample for plan F.

Figure A3: Histogram of total year drug spending for base estimation and full samples

0

Density
5.0e-04

.001

End-of-year spending, full sample

1000

1500

2000

2500
Total spending

3000

3500

4000

3500

4000

0

Density
5.0e-04

.001

End-of-year spending, estimation sample

1000

1500

2000

2500
Total spending

47

3000

Figure A4: Information provided to Part D enrollees on distance to doughnut hole

48

Table A3: Health shock types with largest and smallest spending changes near coverage gap
Dependent variable
Number of Rxs for:

Mean value
before $2,400

Cholesterol-Lowering
Beta-Blocker
Gastroesophageal Reflux & Peptic Ulcer
Renin-Angiotensin
System
Blocker
Antidepressant
Anti-Glaucoma
Antidiarrheal
Diuretic & Renin-Angiotensin
System Blocker
Folic Acid Antagonist Antibiotic
Antiarrhythmic

0.081
0.046
0.032

Beginning of week
spending in:
$2,510 - 2,999
−0.0177∗∗ (0.0034)
−0.0135∗∗ (0.0023)
−0.0130∗∗ (0.0022)

28,543
28,543
28,543

0.065

−0.0120∗∗ (0.0029)

28,543

0.045
0.010
0.001
0.002

−0.0102∗∗ (0.0024)
0.0001 (0.0014)
0.0002 (0.0004)
0.0003 (0.0005)

28,543
28,543
28,543
28,543

0.003
0.002

0.0005 (0.0008)
0.0007 (0.0005)

28,543
28,543

N

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level.
Each row represents one regression. All regressions also include enrollee fixed effects and an indicator for
beginning-of-week spending between $2,400 and $2,509, and cluster standard errors at the enrollee level.
An observation is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week
spending ≥ $2, 000 and < $3, 000. Inexpensive Rxs are less than $50 and expensive ones are $150 or more.

Table A4: ACG scores by base estimation sample status
ACG
score
0.000
0.024
0.260
0.970
1.043
1.541
1.753
2.251

Enrollees in
base sample
3,287
878
2,265
1,699
3,192
9,008
2,659
7,413

Enrollees not
in base sample
296
71
203
100
207
574
167
444

Maximum number
of health shocks, N
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8

Note: Our data contain only the 8 discrete ACG scores listed above.

49

Used in
which estimator
Lowest ACG score
Middle ACG scores
Middle ACG scores
Middle ACG scores
Middle ACG scores
Middle ACG scores
Middle ACG scores
Highest ACG score

Table A5: Fit of estimated salience and quasi-hyperbolic discounting model to data
Statistic

Data

Estimated
salience
model

Percent change in Mean spending in week from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Mean price per Rx from when beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning
of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of Rxs from when beginning
of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of
week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of branded Rxs from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of generic Rxs from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of Expensive Rxs from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of Medium Rxs from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)
Percent change in Number of Inexpensive Rxs from when
beginning of week spending in [2000,2400) to when beginning of week spending in [2510,3000)

-23.7%

-18.2%

Estimated
quasihyperbolic
discounting
model
-12.9%

-18.7%

-5.9%

-3.8%

-6.9%

-13.2%

-10.1%

-14.5%

-15.6%

-10.3%

-2.5%

-13.2%

-11.3%

-30.8%

-24.3%

-17.1%

-9.2%

-12.5%

-8.3%

2.1%

-1.2%

-1.3%

50

Table A6: Robustness results of structural estimation: lowest and highest ACG scores
Estimation sample:
Model

Lowest ACG Lowest ACG
Sophisticates
Price
salience
Price < $20
−0.101∗∗
−0.122∗∗
(0.011)
(0.012)
∗∗
Price ∈ [$20, $50)
−0.015
−0.022∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
Price ∈ [$50, $150)
−0.014∗∗
−0.017∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
Price ≥ $150
−0.003
0.002
(0.004)
(0.004)
Behavioral β or σ
0
0
–
–
δ
–
–
log L
−27,244.4
−27,220.7
# health shock types
37
37
# drug FEs
120
120
N
4,692
4,692

Highest ACG
Sophisticates
−0.141∗∗
(0.014)
−0.025∗∗
(0.005)
−0.017∗∗
(0.002)
−0.002
(0.003)
0
–
–
−19,558.9
31
94
4,958

Highest ACG
Price
salience
−0.193∗∗
(0.018)
−0.030∗∗
(0.005)
−0.023∗∗
(0.002)
0.002
(0.002)
0
–
−19,504.9
31
94
4,958

Note: Standard errors reported in parentheses do not account for variance in β or σ or δ. ‘∗∗ ’ denotes
significance at the 1% level and ‘∗ ’ at the 5% level. An observation is an enrollee/week for an enrollee in
the base estimation sample and beginning-of-week spending ≥ $2, 000 and < $3, 000, with a middle ACG
score. Each column displays the results from the maximum likelihood estimation for one model. Reported
price coefficients are −α(·); all prices affect utility negatively. All specifications also include fixed effects φ
for each drug.

51

Appendix B: Details of Dynamic Optimization Problems
and Likelihood Function
We now exposit the enrollee’s dynamic optimization problem for the infinite horizon model
where the doughnut hole is the absorbing state, starting with the quasi-hyperbolic discounting
model for sophisticates. Define the ex ante state (m, n) to be the state before the current
health shock or ε are realized. We define the value function, V (m, n), to be a function of the
ex ante state. V (m, n) is the value gross of β, with m dollars remaining until the doughnut
hole and at the point in time where n health shocks have already occurred this week but
before it is known whether the n + 1th health shock will exist or what it will be. Using the
value function, we can specify enrollee optimization. For any state (m, n, h, ε), the enrollee’s
expected perceived utility from choice j ∈ {0, . . . , Jh } can be written as:
uj (m, n, h) + εhj ≡ φhj − α(pef f (m, phj , oophj )) − ch + βV (max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1) + εhj .
(5)
Equation (5) states that the value of a choice is given by the current flow utility (the first,
second, third, and fifth terms) plus the future value (the fourth term). The fourth term
shows that the dynamic effect is that the purchase of drug j moves the individual closer to
the doughnut hole by phj dollars. But, because the enrollee is a quasi-hyperbolic discounter,
this term is discounted with factor β. We combine the first three terms of (5) into the mean
utility, defined as uj (m, n, h).
We now consider s(m, n, h, j), the ex ante purchase probability at each state. Because the
drug choice problem is equivalent to a standard logistic utility with mean utility uj (m, n, h),
s(m, n, h, j) takes on a standard logit functional form:
exp(uj (m, n, h))
.
s(m, n, h, j) = PJh
exp(u
(m,
n,
h))
k
k=0

(6)

Finally, we exposit the value function:
V (m, n) = (1 − Qn )δV (m, 0) + Qn

H
X
h=1



φhj − α(p

ef f

Ph

Jh
X

s(m, n, h, j)×

j=0


(m, phj , oophj ) − ch ) + V (max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1) − log s(m, n, h, j) + γ , (7)

where γ is Euler’s constant. Equation (7) evaluates, in turn, the two possibilities ex ante to
the health shock realization: first, that there are no more health shocks in the week (which
occurs with probability 1 − Qn ), and second, that there are more health shocks (which occurs
with probability Qn ). In the second case, the equation sums the utility over health shock
types. Here, we cannot use the standard logit expression for utility because the individual
is not necessarily making the optimizing choice given geometric discounting. The first three
terms on the second line of (7) account for the expected future utility gross of εhj . The final
52

terms, − log s(m, n, h, j) + γ, account for the expectation of εhj conditional on choice j (Hotz
and Miller, 1993).
The quasi-hyperbolic naı̈fs case is slightly different. Here, the enrollee perceives that she
will act as a geometric discounter in the future. Hence, we can rewrite the Bellman equation,
which is used to account for perceived future behavior, in its standard geometric (geo) form:
V geo (m, n) = (1 − Qn )δV (m, 0) + Qn

H
X

Ph ×

h=1

"
γ + log

Jh
X

#!
ef f

exp φhj + α(p

(m, phj , oophj ) − ch ) + V

geo

(max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1)



.

j=0

(8)
The naı̈f enrollee will make choices with a utility function analogous to uj (m, n, h) in (5),
but using V geo instead of V for future valuations.
The equations underlying behavior for the price salience model are analogous to those
in the sophisticates quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, but with effective prices from (2)
instead of (1). Using this pef f and substituting σ for β, the same equations define uj (m, n, h),
s(m, n, h, j) and V (m, n) for the salience model as for the sophisticates model. Note that σ
takes the place of β because the enrollee assesses probability σ of there being a price change
in the future, while with probability 1 − σ, there are no expected perceived future price
changes. This is quite similar to weighting the future with quasi-hyperbolic discount factor
β.
We now define the likelihood. Let g(i) denote the group of individual i and now index
terms by group g, so that we have Qgn , Ng , Pgh , and s(g, m, n, h, j) respectively. For each
person/week observation it, let Nit denote the number of health shocks. For n = 1, . . . , Nit ,
let mitn denote the value of m, the dollars till the doughnut hole; hitn ∈ {1, . . . , H} denote
the realization of the health shock; and jitn ∈ {0, . . . , Jh } denote the drug chosen.
We first explain what our likelihood would be if we observed outside option choices, and
then explain how the likelihood is different based on not observing the outside option. If
all health events were observable, then Nit , hitn , jitn , and mitn would all be observable. We
could then write the log likelihood for individual i at week t as:
log Lit =

Nit
X

n=0

log 1{n = Nit }(1 − Qg(i)n ) + 1{n < Nit }Qg(i)n Pg(i)hitn+1 s(g(i), mitn+1 , n + 1, hitn+1 , jitn+1 ) .
(9)

In words, the log likelihood for an observation can be broken down into a sum across health
shocks n. For each n (starting at 0), there are two possibilities: an additional health shock
occurrence or none. If there is an additional health shock what matters is the probability of
seeing the additional shock multiplied by the conditional probability of the observed shock
53

(given that one is observed) and the conditional probability of the drug chosen for that shock
(given the observed shock). If there is no additional shock, then the likelihood is simply the
probability of seeing no more shocks.
We now consider the likelihood accounting for the fact that we only observe health shocks
when the individual purchases an inside good instead of the outside option. The likelihood is
the sum of the likelihood conditional on a configuration of outside option purchases (which
is given by equation 9) times the probability of each outside option purchase configuration.
We illustrate with an example. Consider an enrollee/week observation with 2 purchased
drugs, with A being purchased before B, where the enrollee has a maximum of 4 health shocks
in a period. The drug purchases could occur at the following health shocks (with A being
before B always): ((1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (2, 3), (2, 4), (3, 4)). If the last drug purchase is at shock
4, the total number of health shocks must be 4, yielding three possible configurations. If the
last drug purchase is at shock 3, the total number of shocks could be 3 or 4, yielding four
possible configurations. Finally, if the last drug purchase is at shock 2, then the total number
of shocks could be 2, 3, or 4, yielding three possible configurations. The likelihood sums the
probability of the observed data conditional on each of these 10 outside good configurations
times the probability of each outside good configuration.
Formally, let N̂it denote the number of health shocks where the purchase included an
inside good. Let litn , n = 1, . . . N̂it denote the places of each health shock, with 1 ≤ lit1 <
· · · < litN̂it ≤ Ng(i) . Let L(N̂ , N ) denote the set of possible vectors of places when there
are N̂ health shocks with an inside good purchase and N possible purchase occasions; e.g.
L(2, 4) has six elements as listed above. Then, the log likelihood is:


log Lit = log 

Ng(i)

NY
it −1

X

X

!
Qg(i)n

(1 − Qg(i)Nit )

n=0

l1 ,...,lN̂ ∈L(N̂it ,N ) Nit =lN̂it
it

N̂it
Y

Pg(i)hitn s (g(i), mitn , ln , hitn , jitn )



n=1
Nit
Y

H
X

n=1,n6=l1 ,...,n6=lN̂

it


Pg(i)h s g(i),

h=1

min

ñ s.t. lñ <n


!
 . (10)
mitñ , n, h, 0

In words, the first line of (10) represents the double sum over the possible places of each health
shock (l) and the number of health shocks (Ng(i) ), and, for each case, lists the probability
of observing that many health shocks. The second line provides the probabilities of seeing
the drugs chosen for the health shocks with observed drug choices, where the places of the
drug shocks show up through ln . The third line is the probability of seeing an outside option
chosen at each place without a drug purchase, where the dollar amount until the doughnut
hole m is simply the dollar amount from the most recent drug purchase (which is also the
minimum dollar amount across previous purchases). Note that equation (10) is similar to the
earlier likelihood in equation (9) but with two main differences: first, it integrates over the
54

places of each observed shock, the total number of health shocks, and the health shock type
with the outside option chosen; and second, it combines all health shocks in a week because
they are no longer separable given the unknown places and number of shocks.
The advantage of our formulation in (10) is that it derives the likelihood in closed form
conditional on any set of health shock occurrences L(N̂it , N ). By solving for the likelihood
in closed form, we eliminate the need for simulation which improves the efficiency and computational time required to estimate our model.
The remaining challenge is in enumerating the elements of L(N̂it , N ). We now describe our
method in more detail, which follows Gowrisankaran (1999) closely. For brevity of notation,
we now suppress the dependence of variables on individual i, group g, or time t. Recall
that each element in L(N̂ , N ) corresponds to one vector of places for the health shocks with
inside good purchases when there are N̂ health shocks with inside good purchases and N is
the maximum number of health shocks. For instance, if N = 8 and N̂ = 3, an element of
L(N̂ , N ) is (1, 5, 8).
As in Gowrisankaran (1999), let o(·) denote the number of elements in a set. Using a
similar proof structure to Gowrisankaran (1999) Theorem 1, we offer the following:
Proposition A1.
follows:
Base case 1: N̂
Base case 2: N̂
Inductive case:

Using induction, the number of elements in L(N̂ , N ) can be described as
= 1. o(L(1, N )) = N .
= N . o(L(N, N )) = 1.
1 < N̂ < N . o(L(N̂ , N )) = o(L(N̂ , N − 1)) + o(L(N̂ − 1, N − 1)).

Proof We split the proof into assertions of the base cases and the inductive case.
Base case 1: L(1, N ) enumerates all possible places for the single health shock with an
inside good purchase. This single health shock can occur at any of the purchase occasions
between 1 and N . There are thus N possible places.
Base case 2: Here L(N, N ) represents all possible place vectors for the inside good purchases when the number of inside good purchases is equal to the maximum number of purchase
occasions. Here, each purchase occasion must be used for an inside good purchase. Thus,
the unique place vector is (1, . . . , N ), which gives o(L(1, N )) = 1.
Inductive case: Assume by induction that the theorem holds for all cases with maximum
number of purchase occasions less than N and also for the (N, N ) case. We now prove that
it holds for the (N̂ , N ) case by induction, where 1 < N̂ < N .
We divide the possible place vectors into two exhaustive and mutually exclusive cases.
Either the N th health shock has no inside good purchase or it has one. Suppose first that it
has none. Then, all the N̂ inside good health shocks must occur at the first N − 1 places. By
the inductive assumption, there are o(L(N̂ , N − 1)) possible place vectors that satisfy this
criterion. Now suppose that the last place contains the last inside good purchase. Then the
N̂ − 1 earlier inside good purchases must occur sometime during the first N − 1 places. Again
by the inductive assumption, there are o(L(N̂ − 1, N − 1)) possible place vectors that satisfy
this vector. Adding up the number of elements in both cases, we have proven the inductive
case.

55

Note that the inductive formula in Proposition A1 is the same as the inductive formula
that defines binomial coefficients. Hence, we could also write L(N̂ , N ) = Binom(N + 1, N̂ ) ≡
(N +1)!
. Finally, note that Gowrisankaran (1999) Theorem 2 provides a computation(N̂ )!(N +1−N̂ )!
ally efficient method for enumerating and accessing individual elements of L(N̂ , N ). The
analogous method works here and hence we use the method from that paper here also.

56

Appendix C: Proofs of Lemmas and Propositions from
Paper
Proof of Lemma 1 We now prove the lemma for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model
for sophisticates. We first prove part (a) of the lemma. Starting with the infinite horizon
models, we show that s(0, n, h, j|c) = s(0, n, h, j|c0 ), i.e., that choice probabilities are the
same across parameter values inside the doughnut hole. For j = 0, . . . , Jh ,
uj (0, n, h|c) = φhj − αphj − ch + βV (0, n + 1| c)
and
uj (0, n, h|c0 ) = φhj − αphj − c0h + βV (0, n + 1| c0 ).
Since δ < 1, V (0, n + 1| c) and V (0, n + 1| c0 ) are finite. Thus, uj (0, n, h|c) and uj (0, n, h|c0 )
differ by the same finite constant across all options, implying that s(0, n, h, j|c) = s(0, n, h, j|c0 ).
We now consider the m > 0 case. Suppose, by contradiction, that there is some m0 , n, h, j,
where m0 > 0 and s(m0 , n, h, j|c) 6= s(m0 , n, h, j|c0 ). Let m0 > 0 be the smallest value of m
such that this inequality holds; let the expected number of health shocks remaining, given
that n shocks have already occurred, be EHSRn for n = 0, . . . , N ; and let the difference
in the expected discounted future baseline health costs, given that n shocks have already
occurred, be
H
X
δ
Ph (c0h − ch ).
EHSR0 )
DF BCn = (EHSRn +
1−δ
h=1
Because the choice probabilities are the same for m < m0 , V (m, n|c) = V (m, n|c0 ) + DF BCn
for m < m0 . It then follows that, for j > 0,
uj (m0 , n, h|c) = uj (m0 , n, h|c0 ) − ch + c0h + βDF BCn+1 .

(11)

Given (11), (5) and (7) for m = m0 and ∀h, n fully define u0 (m0 , n, h|c) and V (m0 , n|c)
respectively. We now propose candidate values for these terms:
u0 (m0 , n, h|c) = u0 (m0 , n, h|c0 ) − ch + c0h + βDF BCn+1 , ∀h, n,

(12)

V (m0 , n|c) = V (m0 , n|c0 ) + DF BCn , ∀n.

(13)

and
At these candidate values, uj (m0 , n, h|c) and uj (m0 , n, h|c0 ) differ by the same constant across
all options, implying that s(m0 , n, h, j|c) = s(m0 , n, h, j|c0 ). We now verify that, with these
candidate values, (12) and (13) are jointly satisfied at m = m0 , for all h, n when we substitute

57

in from (5) and (7). Starting with (12), for any n, h,
RHS(12) = u0 (m0 , n, h|c0 ) − ch + c0h + βDF BCn+1
= −c0h + βV (m0 , n + 1|c0 ) − ch + c0h + βDF BCn+1
= βV (m0 , n + 1|c0 ) − ch + βDF BCn+1
= −ch + β(V (m0 , n + 1|c0 ) + DF BCn+1 )
= −ch + βV (m0 , n + 1|c)
= u0 (m0 , n, h|c) = LHS(12) .

Continuing to (13), for any n,
RHS(13) = V (m0 , n|c0 ) + DF BCn
0

0

= (1 − Qn )δV (m , 0|c ) + Qn

H
X
h=1

Ph

Jh
X


s(m0 , n, h, j|c0 ) × φhj − α(pef f (m0 , phj , oophj ) − c0h )+

j=0

0

V (max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1|c0 ) − log s(m0 , n, h, j|c0 ) + γ] + DF BCn
0

= (1 − Qn )(δV (m , 0|c) − δDF BC0 ) + Qn

H
X
h=1

Ph

Jh
X

s(m0 , n, h, j|c)×

j=0


φhj − α(pef f (m0 , phj , oophj ) − c0h ) + V (max{m0 − phj , 0}, n + 1|c)
−DF BCn+1 − log s(m0 , n, h, j|c) + γ] + DF BCn
0

= (1 − Qn )δV (m , 0|c) + Qn

H
X
h=1

Ph

Jh
X

s(m0 , n, h, j|c)×

j=0



φhj − α(pef f (m0 , phj , oophj ) − ch ) + V (max{m0 − phj , 0}, n + 1|c) − log s(m0 , n, h, j|c) + γ
!!
H
X
Ph (c0h − ch )
+ DF BCn
− (1 − Qn )δDF BC0 + Qn DF BCn+1 +
h=1
0

= V (m , n|c) − DF BCn + DF BCn = V (m0 , n|c) = LHS(13) .
Since the candidate values at m0 satisfy all the above conditions, they are the actual values,
implying that s(m0 , n, h, j|c) = s(m0 , n, h, j|c0 ). This provides a contradiction.
Considering now the finite horizon model, the logic is very similar. The same base case
holds, implying that st (0, n, h, j|c) = st (0, n, h, j|c0 ) for all n, h, j, t. By contradiction, we can
then again examine the smallest m0 such that st (m0 , n, h, j|c) 6= st (m0 , n, h, j|c0 ). We then
consider the lowest t (latest week) among all the states at m0 where this inequality holds.
We can then redefine
H
X
δ − δ t+1
DF BCn = (EHSRn +
EHSR0 )
Ph (c0h − ch ),
1−δ
h=1

58

which accounts for the finite nature of the problem. The rest of the proof is then analogous
to the infinite horizon proof.
We now prove part (b) of thelemma. Here, we use an underlying cost of illness of ch = γ +

Ph
log 1 + Jj=1
exp(φhj − α × p) for each h, as in the statement of the lemma. By part (a),
the result holds across values of ch if δ < 1. Analogously to the infinite horizon problem, let
V t (m, n) and utj (m, n, h) be the value function and mean utility respectively, for the state
where there are t weeks remaining in the year after the current week. Thus, the year, and
the decision problem, is over at the end of the t = 0 period.
We first show that the choice probabilities are the same inside the doughnut hole for the
finite and infinite horizon problems. Formally, we show that for all t, n, h, j, st (0, n, h, j) =
s(0, n, h, j). For the doughnut hole states, applying the analogs of (5) for the finite- and
infinite-time models respectively, implies that
utj (0, n, h) = φhj − αphj − ch + βV t (0, n + 1) ,

(14)

uj (0, n, h) = φhj − αphj − ch + βV (0, n + 1) .

(15)

and
For both models, the future state is unaffected by the current choice and hence the mean
utility functions are identical up to a constant, implying that st (0, n, h, j) = s(0, n, h, j). By
Assumption 1 (a), individuals inside the doughnut hole will never leave the doughnut hole
for the catastrophic region. Moreover, once inside the doughnut hole, after subtracting the
baseline health cost ch , optimizing behavior from (14) or (15) produces expected mean flow
utility of 0. This renders the value functions V t (0, n) = V (0, n) = 0, ∀n, t inside the doughnut
hole for both models.
Consider now the mean utility function at states t, m, n:
utj (m, n, h) = φhj − α(pef f (m, phj , oophj )) − ch + βV t (max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1)

(16)

and accompanying value function:
V (m, n) = 1{t > 0}(1 − Qn )δV
t

t−1

(m, 0) + Qn

H
X
h=1

Ph

Jh
X

st (m, n, h, j)×

j=0



φhj − α(pef f (m, phj , oophj ) − ch ) + V t (max{m − phj , 0}, n + 1) − log st (m, n, h, j) + γ .
(17)
From (16), for it to be the case that st (m, n, h, j) 6= s(m, n, h, j), it would have to be
the case that V t (m, n) 6= V (m, n). Suppose then, by contradiction, that there is some
t, m, n, h, j, where m > 0 and V t (m, n) 6= V (m, n). Consider the smallest m0 > 0 such
that the equality does not hold. It follows that V t (m, n) = V (m, n) for all m < m0 and for
all t, n. Let t0 be a period such that the equality does not hold at m0 . Because m0 is the
lowest value where the future value functions of each model are not equal, the finite horizon
equations (16) and (17) are similar to their infinite horizon analogs (5) and (7) respectively,
59

except for the term 1{t0 > 0}(1 − Qn )δV t −1 (m0 , 0) in (17). This term occurs because, when
t0 = 0 in the finite horizon model, the decision process ends. But, Assumption 1 (b) implies
that the expected probability of ending the year without reaching the doughnut hole is 0
with any single change in behavior. Substituting (17) into (16), if we consider the case of
t0 = 0, then the only way that the assumption is met is when m0 = 0. But at m0 = 0,
V (m0 , 0) = 0, eliminating the term which was different between the two models. Hence,
the system of equations at m0 is identical to its infinite horizon analog for all n. This then
implies that the solution to the infinite horizon system is also a solution to this system, which
generates a contradiction. Furthermore, since the mean utility and value functions are the
same, st (m, n, h, j) = s(m, n, h, j).
We omit the proofs for the salience model and the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model for
naı̈fs as they are similar.

0

Proof of Proposition 1 Our proof uses Lemma 1 (b) and hence uses the infinite horizon
problem modeled in Section 2.3. For further tractability, we analyze a model with exactly
one health shock per week. A simple manipulation of (8) shows that, when δ = 1, any V geo
that is a solution with this assumption is a solution without the assumption, thus showing
that our results also apply without this assumption. Intuitively, this result holds because,
with the infinite horizon and the absence of discounting, the number of health shocks in a
week is irrelevant. Note also that our assumption on the ch values implies that the expected
flow utility from optimizing behavior when inside the doughnut hole is equal to the illness
cost, which renders the value function equal to 0 inside the doughnut hole.
We now claim that V geo with these assumptions has the following functional form:
 

m
geo
(p − oop) + max {0, m%p − oop} ,
(18)
V (m, 1) = α
p
where “b·c” is the floor function and “%” is the remainder function. In (18), V geo (m, 1)
is equal to the marginal utility of money multiplied by the remaining maximum insurance
amount, which essentially implies that the insurance
j kcoverage does not bias benchmark agents
away from their optimal decisions. On the first mp drugs, the enrollee receives a subsidy of
(p − oop) with a smaller, possibly zero subsidy on the next drug, and no subsidy thereafter.
The complication in the expression, e.g., as reflected in the second term, is only due to the
fact that the drug price does not necessarily divide by the initial coverage amount equally
and, on the last insured drug, the enrollee pays her out-of-pocket cost before the insurance
coverage starts. Finally, note that, as defined here, V geo (0, 1) = 0.
We now verify our claim that V geo satisfies (18) by showing that the Bellman operator,

60

T (V geo ), defined here by:
T (V

geo

)(m, 1) =

H
X


Ph γ+

h=1

"
log exp(V geo (m, 1)) +

Jh
X

#


exp φhj − αpef f (m, p, oop) + V geo (max{m − p, 0}, 1) − ch ,

j=1

(19)
will have as its value a function equal to (18) when its argument is the same.
We divide our analysis of (19) into three sets of ex ante states. First, we consider all
states V geo (m, 1), 0 ≤ m ≤ oop, i.e., all states with no future insurance value including the
doughnut hole state. For these states, V geo is zero for the state reached from m following
any choice. Further, note that, in this case, pef f (m, phj , oophj ) = p. Substituting these values
into (19), we obtain:
"
#
!
Jh
H
X
X
Ph γ + log 1 +
T (V geo )(m, 1) =
exp (φhj − α × p) − ch = 0,
j=1

h=1

if 0 ≤ m ≤ oop.
Second, we consider all states V geo (m, 1) with oop < m ≤ p. Here, the remaining insurance amount is m − oop, V geo (m, 1) = α(m − oop), and the current out-of-pocket payment
is p − m + oop. Thus, the future value is zero upon choosing an inside option; it remains
m − oop with the outside option choice. Substituting these values into (19), we obtain:
T (V geo )(m, 1) =
H
X

"
Ph γ + log exp(α(m − oop)) +

Jh
X

!

exp (φhj − α(p − m + oop)) − ch

j=1

h=1

= α(m − oop) +

#

H
X
h=1

"
Ph γ + log 1 +

Jh
X

#
exp (φhj − α × p) − ch

!
= α(m − oop),

j=1

if oop < m ≤ p.
geo
Finally,
j kwe consider all states V (m, 1) with m > p. The remaining insurance amount
is ι ≡ α mp (p − oop) + max {0, m%p − oop}, V geo (m, 1) = αι, and the current out-of-pocket
payment is oop. Thus, the future value is α(ι − p + oop) upon choosing an inside option; it

61

remains αι with the outside option choice. Substituting these values into (19), we obtain:
T (V geo )(m, 1) =
H
X

"
Ph γ + log exp(αι) +

Jh
X

#

!

exp (φhj − α(oop + ι + p − oop)) − ch

j=1

h=1

= αι +

H
X
h=1

"
Ph γ + log 1 +

Jh
X

#
exp (φhj − α × p) − ch

!
= αι,

j=1

if m > p.
Thus, for all cases, T (V geo ) = V geo , where V geo is defined using (18). Applying the
standard contraction mapping approach to dynamic programming theory (Stokey et al.,
1989), (18) is accurate. Note that the mean utility function from (21) specializes to:
uj (m, 1, h) = φhj − αpef f (m, p, oop) − ch + V geo (max{m − p, 0}, 1) ,

(20)

for all j = 1, . . . , Jh and all h. Similarly, u0 (m, 1, h) = −ch +V geo (m, 1) for all h. Substituting
from (18), uj (m, 1, h) − u0 (m, 1, h) = φhj − α × p for all j = 1, . . . , Jh and each of the three
cases considered above. Thus, s(m, 1, h, j) = s(m0 , 1, h, j) for all m, m0 , h, j.

Proof of Proposition 2 Our proof again uses Lemma 1 (b). We also again specify that
there is exactly one health shock per week. Note that the sophisticates and price salience
models use V and not V geo . Similarly to Proposition 1, if δ = 1, a simple manipulation of (7)
shows that any solution to V with the one health shock assumption is a solution without the
assumption. While uniqueness does not follow from standard dynamic programming theory,
our assumption that there is a unique solution to V further ensures that this is the only
solution to the model without the one shock assumption. Thus, our results are again valid
without this additional assumption.
We first prove part (a) of the proposition. Across the three models, uj deviates from the
benchmark model only in inclusion of the V or V geo term. But, the future state is always
the same, m = 0, and hence current choices are unaffected by this term. Hence, the enrollee
solves the statically optimal policy, exactly as in Proposition 1.
We now prove part (b) for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting naı̈fs model case. As in
(8), naı̈fs believe that they will act as benchmark optimizers from next period on. Thus,
specializing to our case, the naı̈f enrollee will have:
uj (m, 1, h) = φhj − αpef f (m, p, oop) + βV geo (max{m − p, 0}, 1) − ch ,

(21)

for all j = 0, . . . , Jh and all h and where V geo is defined in (18). Applying (18), uj (m, 1, h) −
u0 (m, 1, h) = φhj − α(oop + β(p − oop)) for all m, m0 ≥ p, h, and j = 1, . . . , Jh . This implies
that s(m, 1, h, j) = s(m0 , 1, h, j) for all h, j and m, m0 ≥ p. Since oop + β(p − oop) < p for
β < 1, s(m, 1, h, j) > s(0, 1, h, j) for m ≥ p, h, and j = 1, . . . , Jh .
62

We now prove part (b) for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting sophisticates and price salience
model. For ease of notation, let p̃(m) = pef f (m, p, oop), m̃(m) = max{m − p, 0}, V(m, 1) =
V (m, 1) − V (m̃(m), 1), and xhj (m) = exp(φhj − αp̃(m)), for all h and j = 1, . . . , Jh . Note
that the price salience and sophisticates models are mathematically identical except for a
different p̃(m) (when 0 < m < p) and the use of β instead of σ. In our exposition below,
we will use β but the proof would apply equally well to the price salience model with the
substitution of σ.
First, note that uj (m, 1, h) = φhj − αp̃(m) − ch + βV (m̃(m), 1), for all h and j = 1, . . . Jh ,
and u0 (m, 1, h) = −ch + βV (m, 1), for all h. Thus, for all h and j = 1, . . . Jh ,
s(m, 1, h, j) =

exp(φhj − αp̃(m))
Ph
exp(β(V (m, 1) − V (m̃(m), 1))) + Jk=1
exp(φhk − αp̃(m))
xhj (m)
. (22)
=
Ph
xhk (m)
exp(βV(m, 1)) + Jk=1

Similarly, for all h,
s(m, 1, h, 0) =

exp(βV(m, 1))
.
Ph
xhk (m)
exp(βV(m, 1)) + Jk=1

(23)

Now, specializing the value function (7) to the case of the proposition and separating out the

63

outside option, we can write:
V (m, 1) =

H
X



Ph γ − ch + s(m, 1, h, 0) [V (m, 1) − log (s(m, 1, h, 0))]

h=1
Jh
X

+

s(m, 1, h, j) [φhj − αp̃(m) + V (m̃(m), 1) − log (s(m, 1, h, j))]



j=1

⇒ V (m, 1)−V (m̃(m), 1) =

H
X



Ph γ−ch +s(m, 1, h, 0) [V (m, 1) − V (m̃(m), 1) − log (s(m, 1, h, 0))]

h=1

+

Jh
X


s(m, 1, h, j) [φhj − αp̃(m) − log (s(m, 1, h, j))] ,

j=1

⇒ V(m, 1) =
"

!#
exp(βV(m, 1))
exp(βV(m, 1))
V(m, 1) − log
Ph γ−ch +
PJh
PJh
x
(m)
exp(βV(m,
1))
+
exp(βV(m,
1))
+
hk
k=1
k=1 xhk (m)
h=1
"
!#
Jh

X
xhj (m)
xhj (m)
+
φ
−
,
αp̃(m)
−
log
P Jh
PJh
hj
x
(m)
x
(m)
exp(βV(m,
1))
+
exp(βV(m,
1))
+
hk
hk
k=1
k=1
j=1
H
X



(24)
where the second expression subtracts V (m̃(m), 1) from both sides, and the third expression
substitutes from (22) and (23).
Importantly, the last expression in (23) implicitly defines the function V(m, 1) for m > 0.45
Note that, for m, m0 ≥ p and all h, j, p̃(m) = p̃(m0 ), m̃(m) = m̃(m0 ), and xhj (m) = xhj (m0 )
so V(m, 1) = V(m0 , 1). Applying (22) and (23), s(m, 1, h, j) = s(m0 , 1, h, j) for these cases.
To sign the change in purchase probabilities between the two regions, let V geo (m, 1) =
V geo (m, 1) − V geo (m̃(m), 1), analogously to V(m, 1). Then, V(m, 1) < V geo (m, 1) for m ≥ p
since V geo represents the value with optimal behavior while V represents the value with
suboptimal behavior, both from the point of view of the same (benchmark) agent. From
(22), choice probabilities under the benchmark model are equivalent to probabilities under
the two behavioral models with the substitution of V geo (m, 1) for βV(m, 1). Combining this
with (i) the fact that a decrease in βV increases all inside good choice probabilities, (ii) the
result from Proposition 1 that the benchmark model has the same behavior inside and outside
the doughnut hole, and (iii) the result from part (a) of the proposition that the behavioral
models have the same behavior as the benchmark model inside the doughnut hole, we find
that s(m, 1, h, j) > s(0, 1, h, j) for m ≥ p and for all h, j.
We now prove part (c). Because the last expression in (23), which implicitly defines V, is
45

For m = 0, V(m) = V (0) − V (0), so there is nothing to define.

64

identical for the sophisticates quasi-hyperbolic discounting model and for the price salience
model if m ≥ p, s(m, 1, h, j) will be identical for these two models if m ≥ p and for all h
and j. To sign the difference in purchase probabilities between the naı̈fs and other models,
because (i) choice probabilities for the naı̈fs model use an expression identical to (22) except
for the substitution of V geo for V, (ii) V(m, 1) < V geo (m, 1) for m ≥ p, and (iii) a decrease
in βV increases all inside good choice probabilities, s(m, 1, h, j) will be lower for the naı̈fs
model than for the other models if m ≥ p and for all h and j = 1, . . . , Jh .

Proof of Proposition 3 We prove this proposition by first normalizing the baseline health
cost (for the unique health shock type that we consider) to be c1 = γ − log s(0, 1, 1, 0) and
then expressing the structural parameters as a function of the choice probabilities given this
assumption. Since δ < 1, by Lemma 1 (a), the choice probabilities are invariant to c1 . Thus,
the same formulas hold for any value of c1 , implying that the model is identified without
imposing this assumption.
As in Propositions 1 and 2, with this assumption, c1 is the expected value of optimizing
behavior for one purchase occasion at m = 0, which results in V (0, 1) = 0 and u0 (0, 1, 1) =
−γ + log s(0, 1, 1, 0). This in turn implies that, for j = 1, . . . , J,


s(0, 1, 1, j)
log
= uj (0, 1, 1) − u0 (0, 1, 1) = φ1,j − αp1,j ,
(25)
s(0, 1, 1, 0)
and


uj (0, 1, 1) = log

s(0, 1, 1, j)
s(0, 1, 1, 0)


+ log s(0, 1, 1, 0) − γ = log s(0, 1, 1, j) − γ.

(26)

Note also that for the sophisticate quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, we can write the mean
utility for the outside option as:
u0 (m, 1, 1) = −c1 + βδV (m, 1) ⇒ V (m, 1) =

u0 (m, 1, 1) + c1
.
βδ

(27)

The other models have analogous expressions to (27): for the price salience model, σ substitutes for β and for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting naı̈fs model, V geo substitutes for V .
We now prove identification for the sophisticates model for a given β > 0 (which includes the geometric discounting model). Consider state m0 as defined in the statement of
the proposition. At this state, there is no insurance value from buying drug l and hence
ul (m0 , 1, 1) = ul (0, 1, 1). Using this exclusion restriction and substituting from (26),


s(m0 , 1, 1, j)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)



= uj (m0 , 1, 1) − ul (m0 , 1, 1), ∀j = 0, . . . , J




s(m0 , 1, 1, j)
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
0
⇒ uj (m , 1, 1) = log
+ ul (0, 1, 1) = log
− γ, (28)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)
log

implying that uj (m0 , 1, 1) is known for each j = 0, . . . , J.

65

This then allows us to identify δ given some β > 0. Specifically:
0

0

0

V (m , 1) = s(m , 1, 1, 0)[−c1 + δV (m , 1)] +

J
X

s(m0 , 1, 1, j)uj (m0 , 1, 1)

j=1

−

J
X

s(m0 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m0 , 1, 1, j)) + γ

j=0
0

⇒ V (m , 1) =
PJ
PJ
0
0
0
0
0
j=1 s(m , 1, 1, j)uj (m , 1, 1) −
j=0 s(m , 1, 1, j) log(s(m , 1, 1, j)) − c1 s(m , 1, 1, 0) + γ
1 − δs(m0 , 1, 1, 0)
u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1
=
⇒
βδ
PJ
PJ
0
0
0
0
0
j=1 s(m , 1, 1, j)uj (m , 1, 1) −
j=0 s(m , 1, 1, j) log(s(m , 1, 1, j)) − c1 s(m , 1, 1, 0) + γ
1 − δs(m0 , 1, 1, 0)
⇒ δ = (u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1 )×
" J
#
J
X
X
β
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)uj (m0 , 1, 1) −
s(m0 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m0 , 1, 1, j)) − c1 s(m0 , 1, 1, 0) + γ
j=1

j=0

!−1
+ s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)(u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1 )

s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l)
⇒ δ = log
×
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
" J
 X

J
X
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
0
−
s(m0 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m0 , 1, 1, j))
β
s(m , 1, 1, j) log
0 , 1, 1, l)
s(m
j=1
j=0
#

 !−1
0
s(m
,
1,
1,
0)s(0,
1,
1,
l)
. (29)
+ s(m0 , 1, 1, 0) log(s(0, 1, 1, 0)) + s(m0 , 1, 1, 0) log
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)


The first line of (29) follows because there is no remaining insurance value for the inside
choices after the current choice. The second line follows by rearranging terms. The third line
follows by substituting for V (m0 , 1) from (27), using the fact that β, δ > 0. The fourth line
follows by rearranging terms, and requires that the denominator be non-zero. With β = 1,
this denominator equals V (m0 , 1). For 0 < β < 1 it lies somewhere between βV (m0 , 1) and
V (m0 , 1). Since V (0, 1) = 0, this term would be equal to zero if m0 were equal to 0. However,
since m0 is sufficiently high that there is insurance value from drug k, V (m0 , 1) > 0 implying
that the denominator is positive. Finally, the last line substitutes choice probabilities for the
u terms (from equation 28) and for c1 from its normalized value. Thus, (29) defines δ as a

66

function of choice probabilities conditional on β.
Similarly, we can define α as a function of choice probabilities. Specifically,
uk (m0 , 1, 1) = uk (0, 1, 1) + α(m0 − oopk )
uk (m0 , 1, 1) − uk (0, 1, 1)
⇒α=
m0 − oopk


s(m0 , 1, 1, k)s(0, 1, 1, l)
⇒ α = log
/(m0 − oopk ). (30)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, k)
The second line rearranges terms and the third line substitutes in choice probabilities for
the u terms. Since (30) expresses α in terms of probabilities, it shows that α is identified.
This then allows us to identify φj using (25) for j = 1, . . . , J, implying that the sophisticates
model is identified, given β > 0.
We now prove identification of β for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting sophisticates model,
under a rank condition. Consider the analog of (29) but using m00 (as defined in the statement
of the proposition) instead of m0 . Since both equations equal δ, we can set them equal to

67

each other, obtaining:
(u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1 ) ×
" J
#
J
X
X
β
s(m0 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m0 , 1, 1, j)) − c1 s(m0 1, 1, 0) + γ
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)uj (m0 , 1, 1) −
j=0

j=1

!−1
+ s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)(u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1 )
= (u0 (m00 , 1, 1) + c1 ) ×
" J
#
J
X
X
β
s(m00 , 1, 1, j)uj (m00 , 1, 1) −
s(m00 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m00 , 1, 1, j)) − c1 s(m00 , 1, 1, 0) + γ
j=1

j=0

!−1
+ s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)(u0 (m00 , 1, 1) + c1 )
h
⇒ β = (u0 (m0 1, 1, ) + c1 )(s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)(u0 (m00 , 1, 1) + c1 )
i
− (u0 (m00 , 1, 1) + c1 )(s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)(u0 (m0 , 1, 1) + c1 ) ×
J
J
hX
i
X
(u0 (m00 , 1, 1)+c1 )
s(m0 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m0 , 1, 1, j))−c1 s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)+γ
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)uj (m0 , 1, 1)−
j=0

j=1

!
J
J
hX
i −1
X
s(m00 , 1, 1, j)uj (m00 , 1, 1)−
s(m00 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m00 , 1, 1, j))−c1 s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)+γ
−(u0 (m0 , 1, 1)+c1 )
j=1

"

j=0




s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l)
s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l)
00
⇒ β = log
s(m 1, 1, 0) log
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)



#
0
s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l)
s(m
,
1,
1,
0)s(0,
1,
1,
l)
s(m0 , 1, 1, 0) log
×
− log
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)


 J

s(m00 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l) h X
s(m0 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
0
log
s(m , 1, 1, j) log
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)
j=1


−

J
X

i
s(m , 1, 1, j) log(s(m , 1, 1, j))+s(m , 1, 1, 0) log(s(0, 1, 1, 0))
0

0

0

j=0


− log

s(m0 , 1, 1, 0)s(0, 1, 1, l)
s(m0 , 1, 1, l)s(0, 1, 1, 0)

h X
J

−



00

s(m , 1, 1, j) log

j=1
J
X

s(m00 , 1, 1, j)s(0, 1, 1, l)
s(m00 , 1, 1, l)



!
i −1
s(m00 , 1, 1, j) log(s(m00 , 1, 1, j))+s(m00 , 1, 1, 0) log(s(0, 1, 1, 0))
.

j=0

68

(31)

Thus, provided that the denominator term in (31) is not 0, β is identified, further implying
that all the parameters are identified under this rank condition.
We briefly consider identification for the price salience case. This model is slightly different
than the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model because σ enters into the inside option values
at state m0 , while β did not. Because of this, we employ a different proof order: conditional
on σ, we first show that α is identified and then that δ is identified. Note that:


s(m0 , 1, 1, l) s(0, 1, 1, k)
log
= α(1 − σ)(pl − oopl ) − α(1 − σ)(pk − oopk ) − ασ(m0 − oopk ),
s(m0 , 1, 1, k) s(0, 1, 1, l)
(32)
where the first term in (32) is the extra utility from the lower expected perceived price for
drug l, the second term is the negative of the utility from the lower expected perceived price
for drug k, and the final term is the negative of the utility from the lower actual price for
drug k. We can solve for α here, implying that α is identified conditional on σ.
As in the quasi-hyperbolic discounting case, we can then identify φ1 , . . . , φJ using (25).
We can then evaluate uj (m0 ) for all j = 0, . . . , J using the analog of (28).
An equation analogous to (29) holds, which then allows us to identify δ conditional on
σ. Finally, we can solve for σ with an expression analogous to (31), subject to the analogous
rank condition.
We omit the proof for the quasi-hyperbolic discounting naı̈fs model, which is similar to
the sophisticates model, but using the value function V geo .


Appendix D: Analysis of Threats to Identification of Results in Section 4
We now consider, and eliminate, threats to the identification of our tests in Section 4. First,
one might believe that a drop in spending at the doughnut hole reflects a simple alternate
scenario, where the treatment value of a drug always always lies somewhere between its outof-pocket price and its full price, so that individuals would find it optimal to stop purchasing
drugs in the doughnut hole. If this alternate model were to hold, Assumption 1 would be
violated and many individuals would end the year right at the doughnut hole. This is very
much unlike what we find in Table 1. In addition, this would lead to total year drug spending
“bunching” right after the doughnut hole start. Bunching has been observed in the broad
sample of all Part D enrollees (Einav et al. (2015), Starc and Town (2016)). Figure A3 in
Appendix A considers bunching for the full sample of enrollees in the plans we consider and
in our selected sample of enrollees who reach near the doughnut hole early in the year. While
we observe bunching in the full sample, we do not observe bunching for our sample. This
implies that enrollees continue spending well past the doughnut hole and that there is enough
heterogeneity in drug values that some drugs are worth more than their full price.
Second, one might believe that our results are due to enrollees simply being misinformed
regarding the benefit structure of Part D. Yet, because our data are from the third year of
69

the program, it is unlikely that our results on myopia are driven by a lack of understanding
about the presence of the doughnut hole and its implications. Enrollees are mailed detailed
monthly information that lists their out-of-pocket and total costs for the month, the cost
of their drugs to the plan, as well as the out-of-pocket costs, and explains how far they are
from the doughnut hole. Figure A4 in Appendix A shows an example of the part of the
mailing that pertains to the distance to the doughnut hole. In our view, the frequency and
detail of the information provided suggest that rational enrollees have the opportunity to be
informed about the coverage gap. Moreover, because Medicare enrollee drug consumption is
principally tied to the treatment of chronic conditions, those who reach the doughnut hole
in one year are likely to reach or approach the doughnut hole in the next year. While we
lack data from 2007 for enrollees in our sample, we verified this proposition with national
panel data, from the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Event data.46 Using this dataset,
we examined the probability of reaching the doughnut hole in 2007 for enrollees who would
have been in our sample (because they started a week early in 2008 near the doughnut hole).
We find that 83.4% of these enrollees reached the doughnut hole in 2007, while 16.6% did
not (and we were unable to match the remaining 0.8%). This suggests that, even at the start
of 2008, most enrollees in our sample should have been directly informed about the presence
and attributes of the doughnut hole from their previous experience.
Third, although our testable implications may be somewhat biased because they omit
the presence of the catastrophic coverage region, we can sign the direction of this bias.
Specifically, we will reject the benchmark model if enrollees curtail purchases upon reaching
the doughnut hole. A rational reaction to the upcoming presence of the catastrophic region
would be to increase weekly purchases as the cumulative out-of-pocket spending increases
towards the doughnut hole start. Although we would expect this reaction to be small at the
start of the doughnut hole (since there is some distance to the catastrophic coverage start),
this effect will cause enrollees to increase weekly spending as their cumulative spending
increases. Thus, this effect would work in the opposite direction from our test and thereby
would bias us towards a null finding that the benchmark model is accurate. Note that we
find no evidence of an increase in spending for the range we consider (Figure 4). Moreover,
to the extent that we reject the benchmark model, our finding is conservative.
Fourth, our results are unlikely to be due to cross-year substitution. Cabral (2016) has
found evidence that people move dental services to an earlier year when they have spare
insurance benefits in the current year. But, individuals in our sample have little incentive to
stockpile since they mostly end the year in the doughnut hole. Another possibility is that
they strategically curtail spending during our sample in order to make up that spending in
the following year during the initial coverage region (as shown by Einav et al., 2015)). But,
enrollees in our sample are very likely to hit the doughnut hole in the year after our sample,
which is 2009, implying that this strategy would not add substantial value for enrollees with
δ close to 1.47 Also, most of our enrollees are in plans with deductibles, and it would be
46

This dataset provides a 10% sample of all Medicare eligibles.
To verify this, we again use the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Event national panel data to examine
the probability of reaching the doughnut hole in 2009 for enrollees who would have been in our sample (because
they started a week early in 2008 near the doughnut hole). We find that 76.2% of these enrollees hit the
47

70

medically costly for these enrollees to wait until they are past the deductible for treatment.
Finally, we can understand the extent of cross-year substitution by comparing doughnut hole
spending at the end of 2008 to earlier in 2008, using the fact that it would also be medically
more costly for enrollees to defer expenditures to 2009 from relatively early in 2008 than from
the end of 2008. We regress mean weekly spending on enrollee fixed effects and indicators for
four week intervals, for the part of our base estimation sample that is inside the doughnut
hole. We find that the four-week-indicators for September, October, and November are not
significantly different from the December indicator. We also find qualitatively similar effects
for our structural estimation when we limit our sample to end by November 1, 2008. Together,
these factors suggest that cross-year substitution is limited in our sample.
Finally, our results are unlikely to be due to a variety of other factors. Liquidity constraints cannot explain why people would spend more earlier on but less later. Indivisibility
of drugs is not likely to explain the magnitude of our findings either, since for the types with
the largest drops, such as cholesterol-lowering drugs, patients are better off taking a partial
amount of the drug to none. Precautionary savings due to uncertainty about future medical
shocks also is not likely to explain this pattern, since greater price uncertainty would exist
prior to the doughnut hole to inside the doughnut hole.

doughnut hole in 2009, while 19.1% did not (and we were unable to match the remaining 4.7%).

71

