                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TERMS OF TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES
                   AND LABOR MARKETS ADJUSTMENT
                     IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                       Sebastian Edwards




                     Working Paper No. 2110




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 1986




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the World Bank's
Conference on Adjustment of Labor Markets in LDC5 to External
Changes: 1970-1985, Washington, DC, June 26-27, 1986. I am
indebted to Ruth Klinov, Assar Lindbeck and Al Harberger for help-
ful comments. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation through Grant #SES 84 19932 is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2110
                                             December 1986



             Terms of Trade, Exchange Rates and Labor Markets
                    Adjustment in Developing Countries



                                ABSTRACT

     This paper uses three models of a small open economy to
analyze the effects of terms of trade and exchange rate changes

 (i.e. devaluations) on labor market adjustment. First, a three

goods (exportables, importables, non-tradables), four factors
model is developed and used to investigate how an exogenous

worsening of the international terms of trade affect labor
allocation and wages. Second, a more traditional three goods,
two factors model is used, and its results are compared to those
of the first case. The analysis is carried out under alternative

assumptions regarding wage flexibility: full flexibility,
economy-wide (real) wage rigidity, and sector specific real wage
rigidity. Finally, a three final goods model with imported
intermediate inputs is used to investigate the effects of
devaluations on aggregate and sectoral employment.         Here the
conditions under which a devaluation will be contractionary (i.e.
will result in a reduction of employment) are determined.



                                             Sebastian Edwards
                                             Department of Economics
                                             UCLA
                                             405 Hilgard Avenue
                                             Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                             (213) 825—5304
                                      1




 I. Introduction

      The purpose of the present paper is to provide an analysis of the

 interaction between terms of trade changes, exchange rates (broadly defined)

 and labor markets in developing countries. The discussion focuses on labor

 markets adjustments and emphasizes the role of some rigidities that preclude

 it to adjust smoothly to shocks stemming from the external sector (i.e.

 terms of trade and exchange rates shocks). By necessity a paper like this

has to be selective; the topic is just too broad to be fully covered in one

 (reasonably long) piece. Moreover, the discussion presented here is carried

out mainly from the point of view of the international economics literature;

it surveys the way in which this literature can contribute to our

understanding of how labor markets behave. It also points out some of that

literature's weaknesses and suggests ways in which the traditional trade

models could be refined to deal in a more adequate way with problems related

to labor market adjustments.

     The paper is organized in the following form: Section II uses a three

sector (exportables, importables and nontradables), four factors (labor and

capital specific to each sector) trade model to analyze how the labor market

adjusts to exogenous shocks on commodities relative prices. The analysis

also considers the case when capital is allowed to adjust across sectors.

In Section III this model is used to analyze how economy wide and sector

specific wage rigidities affect labor market adjustment to exogenous shocks.

In the tradition of the international trade literature, the model of

Sections II and III condsider only final goods. This, of course, is in many

ways a limitation, since much of the world's trade corresponds to

intermediate imports. In Section IV, however, the role of imported
                                        2




intermediate imports is considered. Here the three goods four factors model

of Section II is extended. It is assumed that nontradables or home goods

(only) use an imported intermediate import. In addition it is assumed that

an economy wide minimum wage results in initial unemployment. The analysis

then focuses on how aggregate and sectoral unemployment is affected by a

nominal devaluation. In particular, this discussion focuses on the

contractionary devaulation issue, investigating whether devaluations reduce

employment. Finally, Section V contains the conclusions.


II. Terms of Trade. Tariffs, and Labor Market Adjustment in the Open
     Economy

     This section deals with the simple analytics of the interaction between

commodity relative prices and labor market adjustment in a small open

economy. For this we use a fairly standard international trade model with

three final goods --   importables,   exportables, and nontradables -- and we

look at both the long- and short-run labor market reaction to a terms of

trade shock. The discussion is carried out under two alternative

assumptions regarding wages: full flexibility and the existence of a

minimum wage. It is assumed that in the short run capital is sector

specific, while labor can move freely across sectors; in the medium- and

long-run, however, both capital and labor can move across sectors.

Consequently, depending on whether we deal with the short- or medium-run we

have a three goods, four factors model, or a three goods, two factors model.

In order to simplify the discussion, throughout most of the analysis we

follow the international trade tradition and ignore issues related to

capital accumulation. In the first part of the paper (Sections II and III),

we also ignore the existence of imported intermediate inputs. In Section IV

below, however, a model with imported intermediate inputs is fully
                                          3




  developed.

        The analysis presented here is largely positive. The discussion
                                                                          traces
   in detail the effects of
                            an improvement in the terms of trade
                                                                  brought about
   by a decline in the world price of
                                      imports. The results however are very
   similar for the case of
                           policy induced changes in import tariffs. Natural-
  ly, the case of a worsening of the
                                      terms of trade is exactly the opposite of
  what is discussed here.


       11.1 The Economy Under Consideration

       Assume the case of a small
                                    country that produces three goods:
 exportables (X), importables (M)       and nontradables (N). Production is
 carried out using capital and labor. Production functions have
                                                                the conven-
 tional properties and it is assumed that in the short-run
                                                                capital is sector-
 specific, with labor being
                              perfectly mobile between the three sectors.
 Following the traditional international
                                              trade literature, it is assumed that
 the quantities available of each factor are given; their
                                                          supplies are
 completely inelastic. 1

      Imports are initially subject to a tariff, and external borrowing is

not allowed. (This assumption
                                 may be easily relaxed. See Edwards and van
Wijnbergen 1986b). With respect to the labor market, it will
                                                                   initially be
assumed that it is free of distortions.
                                              However, the consequences of
assuming the existence of a minimum
                                      wage, which is binding in the short-run,
will be investigated in Section III below. It is intially
                                                          assumed that the
domestic capital market is free of distortions with the real
                                                             rates of

     'This model departs from the more popular trade
considers three final goods, rather                  models in that it
                                    than two. A shortcoming of this tradi-
tional trade model, however, is that it ignores imported
imports. See, however, the model discussed in Section IV intermediate
                                                          below. On sector-
specific models see, for example Jones
                                       1971; Mayer 1974; Mussa 1974, 1978,
1982; Neary 1978a,b, 1982, Edwards 1986.
                                     4




return on capital being equalized in the long-run, across
                                                            sectors. The

tariff proceeds are returned to consumers via lump sum transfers. Regarding

factor intensity, it will be assumed that importables have the highest

capital/labor ratio, nontradables have the next highest ratio, and

exportables are labor intensive. This assumption is possibly the most

appropriate for the case of the developing countries; moreover this

assumption assures us that the system is stable under sector specific wage

rigidity (Neary 1981).

     11.2. Terms of Trade Shocks. Relative Prices and Structural Adjustment

     In this section the effects of a reduction in the world price of the

country's importables are investigated. It is assumed, for analytical

convenience, that initially there are no quantitative restrictions (or that

they have been already replaced by tariffs), and that the nominal exchange

rate is fixed and equal to one. As noted, it is also assumed that capital

 is sector specific in the short-run, while it can freely move between

 sectors in the long-run. The discussion will first deal with long-run

 effects. Then, the short-run effects and the transition towards the long-

 run will be discussed. The analysis will concentrate on the behavior of

 goods prices, employment allocation across sectors, wage behavior and

 production. In the tradition of standard international trade models it is

 initially assumed that there is no unemployment.   This assumption, however,

 is relaxed later.

 11.2.1 Lone-Run Effects

      In this class of models of a small economy with three goods

 (importables, exportables and nontradables), and the usual competition

 assumptions in the medium and long runs, when all factors can move freely

 across sectors, domestic prices of the three final goods are fully deter-
                                       5




 mined (under non-specialization) by world prices, technology and tariffs.

 Equilibrium can be described in the following way: with no specialization

 in production, world prices of exportables and importables (plus the tariff)

 determine the rewards to both factors of
                                            production; these rewards, on their
 turn and under the assumption of competition,
                                                 determine the price of

 nontradables. Demand considerations for nontradables determine total output

 of nontradables and total factors used in their production. This leaves a

 certain amount of factors that is used in the production of exportables and

 importables in a traditional Heckscher-Ohljn
                                                 (H-c) fashion. In the rest of
 the analysis the price of exportables will be taken to be the numeraire

 (i.e., P — 1).
      The effect of an exogenous shock that reduces the international price

 of M on factor rewards and the relative price of nontradables
                                                                          can be
analyzed using Figure 1, which is the dual to the well-known Lerner-Pearce

diagram.2 The initial equilibrium is given by the intersection of the three

isocosts MM, XX, and NN. These curves present the combinations of wages
and rental rates of capital that result in a constant cost of producing

these goods at the existing technology (see Mussa 1979). The slopes of

these curves are equal to the capital labor ratio, and as may be seen in

Figure 1, correspond to our assumptions of relative capital intensities.

Initially equilibrium is obtained at A with a wage rate (relative to



     2This diagram, and the whole discussion that follows assumed that
                                                                       both
before and after the relative price change there is
                                                       specialization (i.e.
the three goods are produced). This is a reasonable assumption in the
context of our discussion, where the exogenous shocks is a change in the
relative price of exportables to importables. It should be noted that in
other models of 3 goods and two factors it is not so easy to rule out
nonspecialization This is the case, for example, if the importables and
exportables are collapsed into a single good (tradable). This, of course,
is only possible if the relative price between X and M does not change.
                                    6




exports) equal to W and a rental rate equal to r.

    The reduction of the price of M will result in a leftward shift of

the MM curve towards M'M'. This is because now, in order to maintain

equilibrium between domestic costs and the world price of importables, plus

the tariff, lower combinations of wages and rental rates will be required.

New long-run equilibrium will be obtained at B where the new M'M' curve

intersects the XX curve. The NN curve will, consequently, shift back

until it intersects the other two curves at B. Naturally, this backward

shift of the NN curve reflects a reduction in the equilibrium price of

nontradable goods. As the Stolper-Samuelson theorem indicates, the reduc-

tion of the price of M in an economy where exportables are labor

intensive, will result in higher wages and lower rental rates (i.e., W1 >

     and   r1 <   r0).
     The production side of the model, as well as the factors' adjustment,

can be analyzed using a three goods Edgeworth-BowleY box as developed by

Melvin (1968). Figure 2 illustrates the case considered here where export-

 ables are the most labor intensive good. In this diagram nontradables

 isoquants are drawn from origin 0N• At the initial prices the nontradable

 goods market clears at a level of production given by isoquant NN0. The

 capital-labor ratio innontradab1es production is given by the slope of

        Production of exportables is measured from       and that of import-

                                                                     at
 ables by distance OMR. In equilibrium the slope of NN0 isoquant

 equals the slopes of the corresponding isoquants for exportables and

 iniportables, which are tangent at R.

      Since the reduction of the price of M generates an increase in the

 wage rate relative to the rental rate all three sectors will now become more
                          -7




                  Figure




    w
                         NM




        —— a——
Wi

W                                         A
0

                                              xx
                                      I

                               M'M'

                 r1-I.
                                                   r-
              8


            Figure   2—




                          4-0
                           411




pita1




            Labor
        x
                                          9




  capital intensive. This is shown in Figure 2, where the dashed
                                                                 rays depict
  the new (after
                  P reduction) capital/labor ratios. However, in order to
  determine the new equilibrium it is
                                        necessary to know what will happen to
  the demand of nontradables,
                                as a consequence of the reduction in the world
  price of M.

       Where will the new equilibrium point for the production of
                                                                  nontradables
  be located? If total output of N remained constant, the
                                                             new equilibrium
  would be on the
                   N0N0 isoquant. However, given the assumption regarding
  capital-labor ratio and the initial
                                        NN0 isoquant, at point O. Produc-
  tion of importables will be reduced to OAT, and production
                                                               of exportables
 will increase to
                    MxT. This result was obtained under the assumption that
 the quantity demanded of nontradables was not affected by the
                                                                reduction of
 the world (and domestic) price of M. In general, however,
                                                             this will not be
 the case. Moreover, given
                              our assumptions regarding capital/labor intens-
 ity, it is expected that the demand
                                       for nontradab].es will Inrease as a
 result of improvement in the terms of trade. There are two
                                                            reasons for
 this:   (a) As shown in Figure 1, after
                                              the exogenous shock the (relative)
price of nontradables will
                           decline, Producing a substitution effect in
demand towards nontradables;
                             and (b) the improvement in the terms of trade
will generate a positive income
                                effect, as national income at international
prices increases, which will also have a positive effect on the
                                                                quantity
demanded of N. With a higher demand for nontradables,
                                                             long-run equilibrj
in Figure 2 will be on the new capital-labor ratio
                                                   ray to the left of the
NN0 isocost on a point such as          with production of exportables
                                                                          being
equal to OS, production of importables
                                              having been reduced to   OS and
production of nontradables being equal to

     In summary, under our
                             assumptions on capital intensities, the effects
                                     10




of an improvement in the terms of trade, when all factors can move freely

across sectors, will be:   (i) Prices of nontradables, relative to export-

ables will fall; (ii) Wages, relative to all goods, will increase;

(iii) The real rate of return on capital, relative to all goods, will

            (iv) Production of exportables will expand;   (v) Production of
decrease;

nontradables will expand; and (vi) Production of importables will decline.

     These equilibrium price movements give us information on potential
                                    the shocks stemming from abroad. If, for
adjustment problems emerging from

example, under fixed exchange rates nominal prices on nontradables are rigid

downward we may have a problem. This is because according to (i)

will have to decline in order to maintain equilibrium.    Since under the

small country case the world price of exports P     is given, the nominal

price of nontradables would have to decline to attain equilibrium; under

nominal price rigidity this will not happen and unemployment will result.

 Notice, however, that if real wages are rigid downward, no disequilibrium

 situation will emerge in the long-run. This is, of course, because

 according to (ii) real wages will increase in terms of all goods. This,

 however, will not be the case in the short-run as will be shown below.

      It is interesting to note that the discussion presented here can be

 readily applied to the case of a trade liberalization reform aimed at

 reducing taxes on imports. The main difference between the case of a policy

 induced reduction in       (via a lower import tariff) and the exogeneously

 generated reduction in        via a lower P, resides on the magnitude of

 the income effect. For the same change in the domestic price of M the

 exogenous shock generates a higher income effect. See Edwards and van

 Wijnbergen (1986b,c).
                                          11



   11.2.2. Short-Run Effects

       This section investigates the
                                        short-run effects of the terms of trade
  shock under the assumption that
                                     in the short-run capital is sector specific,
  while labor can move freely
                                across sections. In that sense the model
  discussed here can be considered
                                      as having three final goods and four
  factors (capital, labor in    X, labor in M and labor in N.)3
       The initial labor market
                                   equilibrium situation can be illustrated
                                                                              using
  Figure 3.   In this figure, the horizontal axis measures total labor avail-

 able in the economy, while the vertical axis depicts the
                                                          wage rate in terms
 of exportables
                  L.. is the demand for labor by the tradable goods sectors
 and is equal to the (horizontal)
                                  sum of the demand for labor by the export-
 able sector (which is
                         given by Lx in this figure) and the demand for labor
 of the importables sector.
                               LN on the other hand is the demand for labor of
 the nontradable goods sector. The initial equilibrium is
                                                          characterized by a
 wage rate equal to W0, with OTLA labor used in the production of

 exportables, LALB labor used in the production of importables and
                                                                   OLB
 used in the production of nontradab].es

      There are several differences
                                      between this short-run model and the
 long-run model discussed in the
                                   previous subsection. First, since capital
is now sector specific the direct link between tradable
                                                        goods prices and
factors rewards is broken.
                           Stolper-Samuelson theorem does not hold (in the
short-run), and the price of nontradables
                                               will be determined by the
intersection of the demand and
                               supply schedules of these kind of goods.
     In the short run, the reduction
                                     in the price of M, under the

      3The representation used in this model, then, is
three goods case of the Viner-Ricardo models of Jones an  adaptation for a
                                                       (1971), Mayer (1974)
and Mussa (1974). See Edwards (1986) and Edwards and van Wijnbergen
(l986b).
            Tig.ire 3




                   L,-
w
    L

        3


        I

                         (
                         I
                         I
                                           13



   assumption of sector-specific factors,
                                                will generate changes both in the
   domestic price of importables
                                and nontradables (see, for example, Dornbusch
   1974, 1980; Edwards 1986). While
                                    the domestic price of importables will
   unambiguously fall, the behavior of the
                                                price of nontradables will depend on
   the assumption
                    regarding Substitutability and the magnitude of income
   effects. Assuming that the three goods are gross substitutes
                                                                 in consumption
  and production, and that the income effect does not exceed
                                                             the substitution
  effect, it can be shown that
                               as a result of the terms of trade
                                                                  improvement
  the price of nontradables
                            will fall relative to that of exportables and
  increase relative to that of
                                  importables (Edwards 1986).
       The labor market
                          adjustment process is illustrated in Figure 4. The
 reduction in the price of M will result in a lower domestic
                                                               price of
 importables, generating a downward shift of the
                                                  LT curve (with the
 curve constant). In Figure 4 the new
                                            curve will intersect the
 curve at R. However, this is not a final equilibrj
                                                                             L
                                                              situation, since the
 reduction in        will also result in a decline
                                                       in the price of nontradables
 (relative to exports). As a consequence,
                                        LN will shift downward (by j
 than LT) and final hort-run equilibrj will be
                                               achieved at S. In this
 new equiljbri production of exportables has increased -
                                                         -       with   labor used
 by this sector increasing
                             by LALQ. The production of nontradables may
either increase or decrease,
                                 and production of importables will fall. In
the case depicted in
                       Figure 4, labor has moved out of
                                                            the importables goods
sector, into exportables and nontradables sectors.

     What has happened to factors rewards in the short-run?
                                                                  Wages have
declined in terms of the
                           exportable good (from
                                                     W to W1 in Figure 4).
Also, wages decline in terms of
                                   the nontradable good, since the vertical
distance between the    LN and        curves is smaller than the reduction of
                          LL

                      ligure   4




               Il.         LT.

       L,                                            LJ

                                                      L   L


                                                         /
                                                     /
                                                 /
c.J0
             --------
                     -r
t4J1 _——-—— 4-——

                                   /
                     L                 L..F L3
                                          15




   W from W0 to
                    J1. However, wages increase relative to the importable
   good, since the domestic price of
                                     importables has fallen by more than wages.
   In the exportables
                      sector, the real returns to capital
                                                          specific importables
   and nontradables sector could
                                 either increase or decrease.4
        Figure 5 summarizes the adjustment
                                               in production of X, M and   N,
  when capital is sector specific. The initial (pre-shock)
                                                                equi1ibrj is
  given by points A and C, with production of exportab].es
                                                           proportional to
  distance OxA, production of nontradables given by isocost
                                                                         and pro-
  duction of importables
                           proportional to distance GA. Notice
                                                                   that initially
  the nontradable goods
                          sector uses ONKN capital, the exportables sector
  uses OK capital, and the importables will use the rest
                                                                  (KNKx). Since
  in the short-run
                     capital is sector specific these
                                                        amounts of capital will
 also be used by each
                        sector after the tariff reform.
                                                           This means that the
 new short-run equilibri
                             points will necessarily lay   on the KKN and
       lines. The reduction in
                                   P will result in an increase in the use of
 labor (and thus in
                    production, for given amounts of capital) in the export-
 ables and nontradables
                        sectors. This is shown in Figure 5 by the movement
 of the equilibrj points to B and F. The
                                                  new capital-labor ratios are
 now given by the dashed lines,
                                  and as may be seen both the exportable and
nontradable sectors become
                            relatively more labor intensive, while the
importables sector has become
                               more capital intensive. A comparison of
Figures 2 and 5 provides some
                               indication on how the transition
                                                                period will
look like, with factors
                        moving from their post-terms of trade shock short-



     4Formally, the real return on capital specific to the
will decrease in terms of                                    importable sector
                           iniportables, and could either increase or decrease
in terms of the other two
                           goods. With respect to capital specific to the
nontradab].es sector, its rental rate will in terms of
could either increase                                   nontradables, and
                       or decrease in terms of the other two goods.
                                       1
                                    Figure 5'

                  Trade Liberalization Effects in the Short-Run



                                                                  n




Capital




     K
         x




                                     Labor
     0       -*
         x
                                         17




  run allocation towards their long-run allocation.

       In summary, for the general
                                     case with wage flexibility, the short-run
  effects of an improvement in the terms of trade on production, prices, and

  factors rewards are the following:    (i) Production of exportables
  increases;   (ii) Production of importables is reduced;
                                                             (iii) Production
 of nontradables may increase or decrease;
                                               (iv) Wages increase in terms of
  importables and decline in terms of exportables and nontradables;
                                                                        (v) The
 real return of capital in the
                                 exportable sector increases relative to all
 goods; (iv) The real return of capital in the importables sector will

 decrease relative to the importable
                                       good. It could increase or decrease
 relative to the other good; and
                                     (vii) The real return to capital in the
 nontradables sector will increase relative
                                              to nontradable goods, and could
 either increase or decrease relative to the other two goods.

 11.2.3. IhIi.jtion Period After a Terrns of Trade Improvement
      The model used in this section assumes that the main differences

 between short- and long-run effects of
                                          a trade liberalization is that in the
 short-run capital is locked into its sector of origin. As time passes,

however, capital will (slowly) move between sectors. In the present model,

and in order to simplify the
                               exposition, we assume that the movement of
capital does not require the use of
                                       resources. However, the analysis could
be modified by introducing a "moving industry", which uses labor and
                                                                     some
specific factor, as in Mussa (1978).

     The transition period will be basically characterized by factors (both

capital and labor) moving between sectors, until the new long-run

equilibrium (i.e., post-terms of trade shock) capital-labor ratios and level

of production are attained. As discussed in Section 11.2.1, and
                                                                as may be
seen from Figure 3, in the final long-run equilibrium all sectors will be
                                     18




more capital-intensive, with the exportable sector using more capital, in

absolute terms; and with the importable sector using less capital in

absolute terms than prior to the external shock. As may also be seen from

Figure 3, the nontradable goods sector could use either a larger or small

absolute amount of capital than before the reduction in P.

     The nature of factors movements during the transition period can be

seen in Figure 6, which combines Figures 3 and 5.   Initial equilibrium is

given by points A and G. Short-run equilibrium is given by points B

and F, while long-run equilibrium will be attained in points H      and C.

In order to avoid cluttering the diagram, only the post-terms of trade

improvement capital-labor ratios have been drawn.   The arrows between points

B and C and F and H, respectively, show the way resources will move

during the transition. As may be seen in Figure 6, for the particular case

considered here, the transition will be characterized by:    (i) Capital

labor will move out of the importable goods sector; (ii) Capital and labor

will move into the exportable goods sector;   (iii) Capital will move into

the nontradable goods sector, and labor will move      of the nontradable

goods sector.

      Table 1 summarizes the movement of resources and factor prices that

 follow an exogenous improvement of the terms of trade. Column (1) in Panel

 A depicts the movement of resources in the short-run. Column (2) shows how

 resources move in the long-run, when compared with the initial situation.

 This column is a summary of the situation described in the Melvin-Edgeworth-

 Bowley box in Figure 3.   Finally, in column (3) the movement of resources

 during the transition period is presented. Panel A of this table is quite

 revealing, since it clearly points out toward potential sources of labor

 market disequilibria and adjustment costs following an exogenous shock
                           Figures
           Transition   After Trade Liberalization



                                                     n
Capital




    4'


    0-I-
     x                       Labor
                                       20




                                     TABLE 1

         Short- and Long-Run Resource and Factor Rewards Movements

                 Following A Positive Terms of Trade Shock




A. Factor Movements
                                                       (2)                (3)
                          (1)
                                                                 Long-Run vs.
                  Short-Run vs.               Long-Run vs.        Short-Run
                Initial Situation           Initial Situatifl    (Transition)
Sector
                                               K             L    K             L
                 K               L

Exportables
                 -               t             t             t    t             t



                                               4                  4
                  -
Importables

Nontradables      -              t             t                  t             4




B.   Changes in Factor Rewards
                      a                            b                  b         w
                  r              w             r             w    r


                                               4             t    4             t
                  t              4
Exportables
                                 t             4             t
Importables       4

                                                             t        4         t
                                 4
Nontradables         t




 Notes: aNotice that since capital is sector specific in the short run the
 real return to capital can move in different directions in the different
 sectors. (The arrows in this panel refer to the real return to capital in
 terms of that sector's price -- see the text.)

          b1 the medium and long run capital can move across sectors.
                                        21



  stemming from the external sector. As
                                             may be seen, equilibrium will require
  that labor moves into the nontradab].e
                                           sector in the short run and out of it
  in the longer run.   If, however, there are rigidities this movement of labor
 in and then out of the importable
                                     sector may be quite costly in term of
 adjustment. This analysis also raises the
                                                question largely ignored until
 now, of the role of expectations in labor market
                                                      adjustment. If the terms
 of trade shock is perceived
                               as being only temporary, our short run case will
 be more relevant.


 III. Terms of Trade Shocks in the Presence of Labor Market Rigidities

      The discussion presented above followed the more traditional models of

 international trade where all factor
                                        prices, including wages, are assumed to
be perfectly flexible. That, of course, is a simplifying assumption which

does not correspond to reality in many of the LDCs. In most developing

countries in fact, there are minimum wage laws, or other types of

rigidities, that either affect the whole
                                             economy or cover only some parts of
it. In the last ten years or so a number of trade models that in fact

assume some type of factor price rigidities
                                                have been developed (see Brecher
1974a,b; Bruce and Purvis 1984). These models have been useful and have

added considerable realism to the analysis. Most of them, however, have

concentrated on the case of two goods only. In this section we extend the

previous model and discuss the effects of a terms of trade shock under two

alternative types of wage rigidities, stemming from the existence of

exogenously imposed minimum wages. The analysis will concentrate mainly on
                                    22




the short-run case where capital is locked into its sector of origin.5


111.1 Economy Wide Wage Rigiditi
     Consider first the case of an economy-wide minimum wage.      Assume, in

                                                      that this minimum wage is
order to facilitate the diagramatical exposition,

expressed in terms of exportables, and that its initial level corresponds to
                                                              That means that
that wage that intially corresponds to full employment.
                                                                 While this
before the terms of trade shock, there is no unemployment.

                                             the exposition, it is quite
simplifying assumption greatly facilitates

inessential.
                                                        expressed in terms of
     It is easy to see from Figure 4 that if wages,

exportables are inflexibly downward and capital is sector specific,

unemployment will result as a consequence of the shock that reduces the

relative price of M. In terms of Figure 4, the magnitude of this

unemployment will be equal to distance FG.     This is basically a short-run

 adjustment cost, which will tend to disappear as capital moves between

 sectors in the medium- and long-run.6 In general, in the presence of sector

 specific capital and wage rigidity, a short-run disequilibrium situation

 will emerge as a result of the terms of trade shock.     The extent of this

 disequilibrium situation will depend on whether wages are inflexible in

 terms of exportables, as was assumed above for expository reasons, or if



      5As shown above, under our assumptions regarding capital intensity, in
 the long run a terms of trade improvement generates an equilibrium increase
 in real wages. Thus in the long run a minimum wage in real terms will
 become less binding after an external shock that reduces
                                                  .       .
      6
       See Neary (1982) and Edwards (1982) for discussions regarding trade
                                                    is interesting to note
 liberalization, sticky wages and unemployment. It
 that an effect of this type can be used to analytically derive short-run
                                 liberalization process, as is done by Khan
 output losses following a trade
 and Zahler (1983). For a synthesis on this type of literature see the
 recent comprehensive survey by Neary (1985).
                                          23



   they are inflexib].es in terms of
                                       importables or in terms of an index of M,
  X and N. The reason for
                                this, of course, is that if wages are inflexible
   in terms of the importable
                                no unemployment will result since real wages in
  terms of M go up!      If, on the other hand, real
                                                       wages are inflexible
  measured in terms of price
                              index, unemployment may result if the weight of
  importables in the price index
                                  is sufficiently small.  Edwards (1982) has
  shown that if the
                    weight of exportables is
                                              "sufficiently" large a Positive
  terms of trade shock will indeed
                                    result in short run unemployment. A

  "sufficiently large" weight of exportables is defined as a >

  PMFLL/(PXFLL+PMFL)     where FLL is the second derivative of the production
  function relative to the amount of labor. 7

      It is interesting to note that if instead of
                                                     a terms of trade shock,
 the decline of      is due to a tariff reduction
                                                    liberalization reform, this
 possible short run unemployment
                                  effect may call for a second-best argument
 for gradual reduction in
                           tariffs. This would be the case, for example, if
only the maximum amount of
                             capital that can move across sectors in each
period is small compared to the
                                  total desired capital reallocation given the
relative price changes.8
                           However, the first best policy, of
                                                               course, would
be to remove the minimum
                          wage distortion.

     What happens in the long run in this case with
                                                        an economy minimum wage?
As time passes capital can move across sectors, and
                                                       a steady flow of capital
out of the importable sector
                                will take place. As shown in section II above,
as long as there is no
                         specialization in production, in the long run the
Sto].perSue1son result will hold.
                                       When P declines, real wages in terms

     7This
         assumes that the wage rate is fixed
includes M and X. If N is added a similarin terms of an index that
                                             expression is obtained
    8See Edwards (1982).
                                    24



                                                                inflexible
of all goods will go up, rendering the preexisting (downward)

real wage redundant. As capital is reallocated out of M, there will be

forces that will reduce the unemployment created on impact until it

completely disappears. In this case unemployment will only be a short run

phenomenon. The long run will be characterized by full employment and

higher real wages. Naturally, this result would not hold if the terms of

trade shock is negative (i.e., increase in        In that case with an

economy wide minimum wage, the long run equilibrium would be characterized

by positive unemployment.

111.2 Sector Specific Wage Rigidity

     In most countries, however, minimum wages don't usually cover all

sectors, and are generally applied only to the urban sector. The analysis

of the labor market adjustment to external relative price shocks in the

presence of sector specific minimum wages can get quite complicated. In

what follows, we look in detail at the case where the minimum wage applies

to the importable sector. This in fact is consistent with the stylized fact

that in most developing countries minimum wage legislation cover the

manufacturing sector only. Throughout the discussion that follows, and

mainly to facilitate the diagrammatical exposition, we maintain the assump-

 tion that the minimum wage is expressed in terms of the exportable good.    We

 then briefly discuss the directions in which the analysis is affected when

 we assume that the minimum wage is expressed in terms of other goods.

      Consider now the case of a binding minimum wage in the importables

 sector only. In order to analyze this case we have to somewhat modify our

 diagrams; this may appear at first messy but it is actually quite useful.

 Figure 7 is similar to Figure 3, except that now we measure total labor used

 in the importables sector starting from the righthand side origin °M• The
             25




          FIGURE 7




 L,c+ç
                                              L,1
                                                  I
                                              I


                                                        Wri

                                          /
                                          I
                                      /
                                / /
                          /   /
                          S

LM

     I                S


     $
     I
                     I
                     S
     S
     S
                     I
                     I
     I               I
     I               ft




     Lx                                               0.1
                                        26




vertical righthand side axis measures the wage rate in the importables

sector. The lefthand side vertical axis, on the other hand, measures wages

in the other two sectors. The wage rate WM is the minimum wage in the

importable sector (i.e., manufacturing); LM is then employment in this

sector. Curve qq is a rectangular hyperbole known as the Harris-Todaro

locus, along which the following equation is satisfied:


               WW
               N xL+UWM,
                                                      0
where U is the equilibrium rate of unemployment.          In the absence of a

minimum wage, equilibrium is attained at point S. With a minimum wage,

however, the intersection of (L+LN) with qq gives us the wage rate in

the uncovered sectors, employment in each sector, and total unemployment.

ORLX is total employment in the exportable sector; distance Lx(L+L.)

measures employment in nontradables; distance (Lx+LN)L. is the initial

equilibrium level of unemployment; and, as noted, OMLM is employment in

the covered sector.1°

     The short run (i.e. ,   with   immobile capital across sectors) effects of a

terms of trade shock that reduces the world price of the importable good are

illustrated in Figure 8. As a result of the decline in the world price of


     9This formulation, of course, follows from Harris and Todaro's (1970)
classical article on migration. See also Harberger (1971). For the use of
this discussion in the context of a two sectors economy see Corden and
Findlay (1975) and Neary (1981). Notice that for exposition purposes we
have assumed that the wage rate in M is fixed with respect to exportables.
See Neary (1981) for an illustration of what will happen if this assumption
 is changed.

     10Notice that there is an important difference between this type of
model of minimum wages where total availability of labor to the economy is
given and those models where there is an aggregate upward sloping supply of
labor. On this last type of model see A. Cox Edwards (1986), and Edwards
and Cox Edwards (1986).
                    27



              FIGURE 8




14,Wx                                     hi,1

                         1:;
        L—x
                          I




                I




                               —a,,
               L,              1-il L'H
                                    28




M the demand for labor in that sector shifts downward. At the given mini-

mum wage, WM, the total demand for labor in the importable sector will

decline. The new demand for labor in the importable sector (not drawn)

intersect WMT at A. Now labor demanded by M is reduced to OMLM.

Naturally, a new rectangular hyperbola q'q' goes through A.

     What will happen to wages and employment in the uncovered sector, and

to unemployment? In order to analyze this assume first that the price of N

remains constant. This assumption is relaxed later. Under a constant

curve (L+L) remains at its original location and point B, given by the
                                                      equilibrium, which is
intersection of q'q' and (L+L) give us our new

characterized by a lower wage in the uncovered sectors and higher employment
                                             the improvement in the terms of
 in N and X. However, as discussed above

 trade will affect N' and (Lx+L) will not remain constant. Under the
 assumptions discussed in Section 11.2 above, the improvement in the terms of

 trade generates a reduction in N' which is, however, smaller than the

 decline in       As a result of this in the final short-run equiliurn (Lx+LN)

 will shift downward to (L2(+L)' which is not drawn.    The

 intersection of this new (Lx+L.N)' and the q'q' rectangular hyperbola

 give us the final equilibrium when capital is locked in its sector of

 origin, depicted in Figure 8 by point C.    Under our assumptions the post

 terms of trade shock equilibrium is characterized by: (i) lower employment

 in the sector covered by the minimum wage (importables);     (ii) lower wages

 in the uncovered sector, expressed in terms of exportables; (iii) either

 higher or lower equilibrium unemployment;   (iv) either lower or higher

 employment in nontradables; (v) higher employment and production
                                          29



  inexportables)

      Not surprisingly this case of
                                        partial minimum wage coverage generates
 very different results than the case of an economy wide minimum wage discus-

 sed above. First, we now have an increase in production and employment in

 exportables. Second it is possible that under
                                                    our partial coverage case
 employment in nontradables will also increase.      Also, in this case a
 positive terms of trade shock
                                 may generate smaller unemployment in the short
 run, whereas in the case of an economy wide minimum wage greater

 unemployment always resulted in the short run as a consequence of a decline

 in P. This illustrates an important result: in the presence of labor

 market distortions exogenous shocks usually considered beneficial may

 generate nontrivial (short run) unemployment problems.

     What will happen in the long run in this case with sector specific

minimum wage? In the short run, after the world price of imports has
                                                                     gone
down, the real return to (sector
                                   specific) capital will be different across
sectors. The terms of trade shock reduces the return to capital in the

manufacturing (importables) sector and increases it in the exportables and

nontradab].es sector. Of course, this situation with different real returns

to capital cannot go on in the long
                                        run. As time goes by, capital will be
reallocated, moving out of the manufacturing and into the other sectors. In

terms of Figure 8, this means that         will shift down -- and with it the

rectangular hypoerbola qq - -   while   the demand for labor in the uncovered
sectors will shift upwards. Moreover, we know that these curves will shift

in a way such that the final outcome will be
                                                characterized by a higher wage


          this setting unemployment is given by U —  (WM/'WN - 1). Since
L., declines and WM/WN goes up, it is not posssible o know a priori in
which way U will go. The final direction will depend on the elasticities
of Lx I. and L.
                                    30




in the absence of wage rigidities. The final long run equilibrium will have

to satisfy both the condition that the return to capital is equalized across

sectors and that the labor market is in equilibrium, in the sense that WN =

   = (LM/(LM+U))WM.   As capital is reallocated, employment in M declines

and employment in X and N increases in relation to their short run

levels depicted in Figure 8. However, it is not possible to know priori

whether in the long run the wage rate in the uncovered sectors   N and X

will be higher or lower than their initial level. This will depend on the

elasticities of substitution and on the relation between the slope of the

LM curve and the qq     and N.


IV. Imported Intermediate Inputs. Devaluation and Employment

     In the preceding sections we have expanded the standard trade model to

the case of three goods, and four factors to analyze the effects of external

shocks on the sectoral allocation of employment, wages and unemployment.

Following the traditional approach the discussion above assumed away the

existence of imported intermediate inputs and ignored any complications

stemming from macroeconomic aspects. Recently, however, a more macro-

oriented literature that analyzes the relation between devaluations and

aggregate employment has emerged. In this literature external shocks not

only affect the sectoral allocation of a given total level of employment but

 can also affect the total level of employment. Moreover, according to this

 literature, and contrary to the traditional view, devaluations will likely

 result in a drop in employment and output (van Wijnbergen 1986). In this

 section we discuss this issue in some detail. For this purpose we first

 formally develope a stylized model of a small open economy that produces

 three goods, and uses imported inputs in the production of home or
                                      31




  nontradable good. We then discuss briefly the existing empirical evidence

  in this area.


       IV.l Devaluation. Azregate Output and Employment

       In this section we develop a model to analyze the effects of nominal

 devaluations on aggregate output and employment in a small country. The

 model analyzes the case of an economy that produces three goods and uses

 imported inputs in the production of the nontradables, and is
                                                                 sufficiently
 general as to include the models of Cooper (1971b),
                                                       Krugman and Taylor
 (1978), Hanson (1983) and Branson (1986) as special cases. Although the

 analysis concentrates on the case of a devaluation, the model can easily

 handle the case of a terms of trade shock.

      Consider, as in Section II, a small country that produces exportables,

 importables and nontradable goods. The capital stock is sector specific and

 fixed during the relevant run discussed here)2   The production of

nontradables requires the use of labor, (specific) capital and an imported

input. However, in order to simplify the exposition it is assumed that

exportables and importab].es are produced using capital and labor only. It

is also assumed that this country has a stock of foreign debt, whose nominal

value in foreign exchange is equal to D*. As is usually the case in the

developing countries it is assumed that due to institutional reasons the

labor market does not clear, and that the behavior of nominal wages is

governed by an indexation rule that ties changes in wages to changes in the

price level.

     In order to simplify the exposition, and to focus on the effects of

devaluations on output and employment, it is assumed that world prices of X


          will become apparent below the assumption of mobile capital will
greatly complicate the analysis.
                                                32




and M are constant. As will be seen below, however, the model can be eas-
                                              of changes in the external terms of trade
ily manipulated to analyze effects

on output and employment.

         The model is given by equations (1) through (9):


                                                                    ei*D*
                                                         li     -                  (1)




                                                        G                          (2)
                     Hd —
                                M X
                              H[Y              'H1 +


                     HS =     k[I + (l-p)V]                                        (3)


                                                                                   (4)
                     V L 1)
                          —
                              4 l-9)                                               (5)


                     MS =
                              4 l6)                                                 (6)



                     W =                                                            (7)
                              C0 exp(wP)


                               a1      a2           (l-a1-a2)                       (8)
                              H (eP)        (ePM)

                                                                                    (9)


 where the following notation is used.

 y            =   real   income in terms of home goods;

 HS,Hd            supply and demand for nontradables;

 KS           = supply of exportable goods;
     S        =
 M                supply of importables;
 I            = imported intermediate input

 V            =   value   added in the nontradables good sector;

              = world prices of exportables, importables and intermediate goods

                  expressed in terms of foreign exchange;
                                          33




 e
              nominal exchange rate, expressed as units of domestic currency

              per unit of foreign currency;
          =   price   of nontradable goods

 i*           world interest rate

 D*       =   stock   of foreign debt in foreign currency
 B        =   nominal stock of base money, assumed to be equal to nominal stock

              of money;

 C            real government expenditure in terms of home goods;

  WLx,LM = labor used in home, exportable and importable        sectors;

 KH,&X, capital stock in H, X and M sectors;
 P            price level.



      Equation (1) is real income in terms of home goods. Equation (2) is

 the demand function for nontradables, which is composed of the private

 sector demand H plus the government's demand C.          It is assumed that the
private sector demand for H depends on real income, relative prices and

the real stock of money. Equation (3) is the production function for H

goods. It is a CES function with an elasticity of substitution between

value added and imported inputs equal to       a —   (l+p)1.   Equation (4) speci-
fies that value added in the nontradables
                                               sector is produced using Cobb-

Douglas technology, and that the capital stock in that sector is fixed.

Equations (5) and (6) are the production functions for X         and M, which
are assumed to be Cobb-Douglas. Equation (7) is the indexation rule, and

establishes that nominal wages are adjusted in a proportion w of

inflation, This equation assumes that due to institutional reasons (Unions

and so on) the labor market does not clear. If, on the contrary we assume

full flexibility in the labor market this equation should be replaced by a
                                            34




labor supply equation. Equation (8) is the definition of the price level.

From (7) and (8) we get that nominal wages are adjusted according to the

following rule: W W1PH +        w2, where 0
                                                        1.   Finally, equation

(9) establishes that in equilibrium the nontradable goods market clears.

     This model is quite general and differs from previous work in various

respects. First, contrary to Cooper (l97lc), Krugman and Taylor (1978) and

Hanson (1983), the current model specifically includes a supply side. In

the models of Krugman and Taylor (1978), Taylor (1978), and Hanson (1983),

the supply side is replaced by the assumption of markup pricing in the

nontradables good sector (see below). Second, contrary to Krugnian and

Taylor (1978), Gylfason and Schmidt (1983), Gylfason and Radetzki (1984),

Hanson (1983), and Branson (1986) in the current model households are

allowed to consume all three goods. Third, the current model also

incorporates the existence of external debt. In the discussion that follows

it will be pointed out how this model can be simplified to generate as spec-

ial cases the approaches previously discussed in the literature.

     Our interest is to find out the effect of a devaluation (i.e. ,   increase

in e) on total employment and output in this economy. For this purpose we

first derive the demand for labor functions.

Assuming profit maximization and perfectly competitive firms we can obtain

 from equations (3), (4), (5) and (6) the demand functions for imported

 inputs and labor in each sector:

                I =


                L.d =
                      AO(PH/ePI)a

                          Al(PH/W)1"
                                       H,

                                                 /1   Hl',                 (10)


                                                                           (11)



                L = O(eP/W)X,                                              (12)


                      =                                                    (13)
                          6(ePM/W)M,
                                                35



  where A0 and A1 are constants.

        In order to find out how changes in              e affect total real output and
  employment, it is first necessary to investigate the way in which devalua-

  tions affect the nontradable goods market.
                                                          From equations (1), (2), (7) and
  (11), and using expressions for the supply functions of X and M obtained

 from (5), (6), (12), and (13), we can derive the following equation for the

 rate of change of the demand for H (where as customary, X =
                                                                                 (dX/dt)(l/X).
                                  A         A        A
                   H —
                         D1   + D2PH + D3B ÷ D4C                                          (14)

 where the D's are given by:


 D1    Q{(AX4AM) + (xEx÷AMEM)(lw2) -                         - )i(1)   -
                                                                           AD]

 D2    Q[(AX+AM) -               + '" ÷ XX+6MAMl - A1(1) -
                                                                             AD)]

 D3

 D4    G/HQ

 and

Q /{l-(l - (AX+AMAD))].
       Where   —
                   (H1'/H)1y    for (He/H) ratio of private to total demand for
H and where    '7y is the income elasticity of demand for H.
                                                                             AX,AM, AI,.AD
are ratios of exports, imports, imported inputs and debt payments to total

real income (i.e.,       Ax —
                                (ePx)/(Py)).         i and M are the price elasti-
cities of demand for H with           respect to H'X and HM' and
consequently are negative.             and M are the price elasticities of
supply for X and M (i.e.,               —   /(1-O) >0, EM — 51(1-5)>0).              JA   is

the demand elasticity of H with respect to real cash balances. Stability

requires that Q > 0. Moreover, in order for the (total) demand elasticity

of H with respect to its (nominal) price to be negative it is needed that:

[(AxfAM)(lwl) -                 + (/i/)J > AD ÷ (l-a)A1. In fact, throughout the
                                         36




rest of the analysis we will assume that this is indeed the case.

       As may be seen from equation (14), when there is a devaluation (i.e.,

an increase in e ), the demand for nontradables is subject both to
                                                     effects. Moreover, it is
expenditure reducing and expenditure switching

clear from equation (14) that with other things given, a (nominal)

devaluation can either generate an increase or decline in the demand for

nontradables, depending on whether [(AM+Ax)(lw2) +              +            -



                   A1(1-u) + AD. If D1 < 0,   then the expenditure reduction

effect dominates. Notice however, that given our assumption that D2 < 0,

the more plausible case will indeed be that D1 > 0.

In this case the expenditure switching effect will dominate and the

devaluation will result in a higher demand for H. With respect               to D3 and
                                                                                     will
       with other things given, higher money and government expenditures

generate increases in the demand for H.

        It is interest to note that equation (14) includes, as special cases, a

number of previous models. For example ,        if     =
                                                           €M
                                                                    =
                                                                        w2       AD = 0

 and       =   v    (i.e., there is markup pricing for home goods), equation (14)

 corresponds to Hanson's model. Moreover, if in addition we assume that

               0 equation (14) becomes equivalent to the model by Krugman and
 AM
 Taylor (1978)

        Let us now turn to the supply side for home goods.      From the first

 order conditions (10) and (11) we obtain expressions for I and L.H, and

 using the wage indexation equation (7) to eliminate W, to finally obtain

 the following equation for changes in the supply for nontradable goods.

                        =                                                             (15)
                            S1PH   + S
 where:
                                             37




                 s1   - i- {- (a(l--y)+-y)        +



                S2         {a(l7)+7}    22 +
      From (15) it is possible to see that, with other
                                                       things given, an
 increase in H generates an increase in the supply of home goods, while a

 devaluation will shift the aggregate supply curve upward and to the left.

 The channel through which this happens is the effect of the devaluation on

 the price of the imported intermediate input.

      Combining (14) and (15) we can obtain final expressions for H and




                  —                        ____          ____    C
                      {D2S2..Dlsl}                                            (16)




                      -
                          {i}          {DSl}          {D:S2} G                (17)


From (16) it follows that:

                (H/s)       0

               (fi/)      > 0

               (H/C) > 0.

Whether a devaluation will reduce or not output of home goods will depend on

(D2S2-D1S1)   0. A sufficient condition for having a contractionary

devaluation is that         <   0.   That is the case where a devaluation shifts

back both demand and supply for H. However, under the more plausible case

where the expenditure switching effect dominates in (14) (i.e.,           > 0),
and a devaluation increases the demand for nontradables, there will be two
                                         38




forces that will operate in the opposite
                                              directions. In this case the

effect of a devaluation on H will be ambiguous.        In fact they will pretty

much be an empirical question.

     The effects of a devaluation on the levels of sectoral employment is

obtained from equations (11), (12), (13), (16) and (17):

                                                            -    W2] > 0      (18)
                     [(D2s2)(D2S2)lSl + (l-w1)a(S2-D1)


                                                                      0
               Lx/       [(l-wl)       (-)(12) 1;1 [S2l)]
                                                 -                            (19)




                     =
                         [(1-wi)
                                   +
                                       (-)(l2)   -

                                                     --) [)]          0.      (20)




     Again, the signs of these elasticities are ambiguous; the final effect

of a devaluation on employment will depend on the relative strength of the

different effects involved. These, in turn will be a function of the

different elasticities. While the inability to determine unequivocally
                                                                  useful in that it
 these signs is somewhat frustrating, this analysis is very

 makes clear that contrary to the more traditional views, in more realistic

 models with imported intermediate inputs and foreign debt, a devaluation can

 be contractionary, and reduce the level of employment.         Whether this is

 indeed an important case is an empirical question.      In the next section we

 briefly review the existing attempts to empirically test whether

 devaluations are contractionary or expansionary.
                                                      be easily extended to the
      Notice that the analysis presented here can

 case of a terms of trade shock. In particular an increase in the world

 price of the intermediate import will be in many ways (but not all) similar

 to the devaluation case discussed here.
                                           39



        IV.2. Devaluation and Economic
                                           Activity: The Empirical Evidence
       As shown above, there are a number of channels through which

  devaluations can negatively affect the level of aggregate output and

  employment in an open economy. In spite of the renewed theoretical interest

  on the possible contractionary effects of
                                                devaluations, the empirical
  analysis has been somewhat sketchy. Moreover all of these studies have

  looked at the effects of devaluations
                                            on aggregate real output, rather than
  on employment)-3

       A number of studies have used
                                         cross country data to simulate the
  effects of devaluations on real
                                    output. Gylfason and Schmidt (1983) have
 constructed a small macroniode]. with
                                         intermediate goods, where a devaluation
 has two conflicting effects:     on one hand it generates an expansion
                                                                          through
 aggregate demand; on the other hand, a devaluation
                                                        results, through its
 effect on the cost of imported
                                  intermediate inputs, in an upward shift in
 the aggregate supply schedule.     The final effect of a devaluation can be
 either expansionary or contractionary. Cylfason and Schmidt
                                                              empirically
 analyze the implications of their model
                                         by imputing plausible values to the
 corresponding parameters for a group of five
                                                 developed countries and five
developing countries. With the exceptions of the U.K. and Brazil their

results suggest that, as postulated by the more traditional views,

devaluations have a positive overall
                                         effect on aggregate output.
     Conolly (1983) considered a group of 22
                                                 countries and regressed for the
cross-country data set the change in the rate of real growth on the change

in the nominal exchange rate. The coefficient obtained was positive and



      13The reason for this, of course, is that for the
the data on aggregate output are much more reliable thandeveloping countries
                                                          the
data.                                                         employment
                                        40



                                             support to the hypothesis of expans-
marginally significant, providing some
                                  Conolly argues that his results are subject
ionary devaluations. However,
                                             countries that devalue do so after
to a selectivity bias, since typically

having entered into a recession.
                                                 a model for a small country,
      Gylfason and Risager (1984) developed
                                                   interest payments on the
which stresses the effect of devaluations on
                                             data they find that while devalua-
foreign debt. Using imputed parameter
                                        developed countries, in developing
tions are generally expansionary in
                                                       However, a problem with
countries they are likely to be contractionary.
                                                   used in the simulation are
 this type of approach is that the parameters
                                             and are likely to be inconsistent
 obtained from very different sources,

 among themselves.

       Gylfason and Radetzki (1985) developed a small macromodel to
                                                  real output, the current account,
 investigate the effects of devaluations Ofl

 and real wages. They show that in a world with no capital movements, in

 order for a devaluation to result in higher real output, real wages neces-

 sarily have to fall. They then show that if a devaluation is accompanied by
                                                                        with
 an inflow of foreign funds, it is possible for real output to increase
                                         Radetzki use a group of 12 poor
 unchanged real wages. Gylfason and

 countries to simulate their model. As in other papers, in the simulation
                                      for the parameters. Their results suggest
 analysis they use imputed values
                                         with nominal wages constant and no
  that, for their group of countries,
                                       will result in a decline of real GNP of
  capital inflows a 10% devaluation

  0. 5%.

                                                             simulation models to
           Other authors have constructed country-specific

  analyze the effectiveness of devaluations as stabilization policy tools.
                                                  constructed a small simulation
  Branson (1986), for example, has recently
                                            41



  model for Kenya to investigate these issues. His results
                                                           suggest that,
  contrary to the traditional view, a devaluation will have important

  contractionary effects in the Kenyan
                                            economy. Taylor and Rosenweig (1984),
  on the other hand, built a fairly
                                      large computable general equilibrium model
  for Thailand, and simulated the effects of a number of policy
                                                                measures,
  including a devaluation, on the Thai economy. Their results indicate that a

  devaluation of the baht of 10% will have
                                                 an expansionary effect and will
  generate an increase in real GDP of 3.3%.

         Other studies have discussed the
                                            output effects of devaluations in a
 less formal way. Cooper (l971a), in his well-known study, analyzed 24

 devaluations that took place between 1953 and 1966. After looking at the

 behavior of the principal
                             components of aggregate demand he concluded that
 "devaluation itself often initially tends to depress economic
                                                               activity in
 the devaluing country, contrary to what has normally been expected"
                                                                           (p.
 504). Krueger (1978) analyzed output behavior during the periods surround-

 ing major devaluation episodes in the
                                            countries considered in the NBER
 project on trade liberalization. She found that in most cases devaluations

had been associated with expansions in the level of real
                                                               activity. Also,
the numerous studies that have
                                  investigated the effects of IMF stabilization
programs on output hav looked at real activity behavior before and after

major devaluations. Most of these studies have used a "before" and "after"

approach and found that nominal devaluations had
                                                       not been accompanied, or
followed, by major declines in real
                                      activity (Gylfason 1983; Khan and Knight
1985).

     In his general empirical analysis of devaluation Edwards (1987) looked

in detail at the
                   contractionary devaluation issue. This is done in two

ways. First, the real activity aspects of the 30
                                                       devaluations episodes used
                                        42



                               scrutinized. The behavior of a nunther of key
in his analysis were closely
                                              three years before the devaluation
variables in the period elapsed between
                                                analyzed for all 30 devaluation
and three years after the devaluation was
                                                                 these
episodes. Since there are no reliable data on employment for all

countries, the emphasis was placed on real aggregate output, aggregate gross

investment and real growth. It was found that, by and large, the evidence
                               which variable one looked at, some countries
was mixed, and depending on
                                                                       in
experienced a fall in real activity and others experienced an increase

the level of aggregate output.

     Of course, as with some of the other papers, a problem with this type

of analysis is that it concentrates on the behavior of the key variables
                                             without taking into account the
 "before" and "after" the devaluation,
                                        external events. This problem was avoid-
possible role of other policies or

 ed by the second approach taken in this study: an equation for aggregate
                                estimated for a group of 12 countries, using
 output in an open economy is

 pooled data.   (See also Edwards l986c.) In addition to the possible effect
                                                     incorporates the role of
 of the exchange rate on output, this equation
                                   and exogenous terms of trade changes.        From
 monetary policy, fiscal policy

 this regression analysis it was found that, keeping other things constant,
                                                effect in the short run. In the
 devaluations have a small contractionarY
                                               to be neutral, and don't affect the
 long run, however, devaluations appear
                                                                       of
 level of aggregate activity, or aggregate employment. Regarding terms
                                              studies, it was found that when
 trade effects, as with other previous

 correcting for other variables there were no statistically significant

 effects on the level of real output.


 V. SummrY and    Concluding Rernarks
                                         43




       This paper has provided a selective survey of several issues related to

  the reaction of labor markets in
                                     open economies, emphasizing the role of
  terms of trade and exchange rate disturbances.
                                                      In Section II a three-good

  trade model was developed to investigate how sectoral labor allocation and

 wages react to shocks on world terms of trade. The analysis looked at both

  the short- and, long-run and in the tradition of standard trade theory

 assumed that total labor supply is
                                      given. Assuming flexible wages it is
 shown that in the short run labor will
                                          move to a particular sector, only to
 move out of it in the longer run. This
                                              brings up the issue of transaction
 costs and the role of expectations in
                                         determining labor movements. Section
 III introducee wage rigidities in the form of either an economy-wide minimum

 wage or a sector specific minimum wage. It was shown that even if

 importables are capital intensive, and the minimum wage is expressed in

 ternis of the exportable good, a positive ternis of trade shock will generate

 unemployment in the short run. The labor market reaction will depend,

 however, on coverage of the minimum wage.

      In Section IV a model of a small
                                         economy that produces three goods and
uses imported intermediate inputs in the production of nontradables was

developed to investigate the effects of devaluation on employment. It was

shown that, contrary to the traditional view, in this setting devaluations

can result in a contraction in output and
                                               employment. Whether this

contractionary result will actually take place will depend on a number of

parameters, including the elasticity of substitution between importables and

value added, and the importance of foreign debt. In this section we also

review the empirical literature on the relation between devaluations, terms

of trade and aggregate activity.
                                       44



                                   REFERENCES



Branson, William H. "Stabilization, Stagflation and Investment IncentiVeS
   The Case of Kenya 1975-80" in S. Edwards and L. Ahmed (eds.) Economic
   Adjustment and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries. University of
   Chicago Press, 1986.

Brecher, R.A. "Minimum Wage Rates and the Theory of International Trade."
   Qterly Journal of Economics (1974):          98-116.

Bruce, N. and D. Purvis. "The Specification of Goods and Factor Markets in
   Open Economy Macroeconomic Models" in R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen (eds.)
   Handbook of International Economics. North Holland, 1984.

Cooper, Richard. "Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries" in G. Ranis
   (ed.) Government and Economic Development. New Haven, CT: Yale
   University Press, 1971a.

_________        "Currency Depreciation in Developing Countries." Princeton
   Essays in International Finance 86 (l97lb).

Conolly, Michael. "Exchange Rates, Real Economic Activity and the Balance
   of Payment" in E. Classen and P. Sahlin (eds.) Recent Issues in the
   Theory of Flexible Exchange Rates. North-Holland, 1983.

Corcien, W.M. and R. Findlay. "Urban Unemployment, Intersectoral Capital
   Mobility and Development Policy." Economica 42 (1975): 59-78.
                                                                    in a
_________ and J.P. Neary. "Booming Sector and DeIndustrialiZaStiOfl
    Small Open Economy." Economic Journal (1982): 825-48.

Dorribusch, R. "Tariffs and NonTraded Goods." Journal of International
   Economics (1974): 117-185.

                 Open Economy Macroeconomics. Basic Books 1980.

Edwards, A. Cox. "Economic Reform, External Shocks, and the Labor Market:
   Chile 1974-83." Paper presented at World Bank Conference on Labor Market
   Adjustments to Foreign Shocks, June 1986.

Edwards, Sebastian. "Minimum Wages and Trade Liberalization: Some
   Reflections Based on the Chilean Experience." Working Paper No. 230,
   Dept. of Economics, UCLA, l982a.
                                                                            the
 ___________ •   "The Liberalization of the Current and Capital Accounts of
    Balance of Payments" in A. Choksi and D. PapageorgiOn (eds.) Economic
    Liberalization in Developinz Countries (Oxford: Blackwell l986a).

                   Devaluations Contractionary?" Review of Economics and
 __________ • "Are
    Statistics (August 1986).
                                      45



  __________ • "Economic Liberalization and the Real Exchange Rate in
     Developing Countries" Paper presented at the Carlos Diaz Alejandro
     Memorial Conference, Helsinki, August 1986.

  __________ • Exchanze Rates in Developing Countries. (MIT
                                                            Press,
     forthcoming 1987).

 _________ and A. Cox-Edwards. Monetarism and Liberalization:
                                                                 The Chilean
    Experimen (Ballinger, 1987).
 _________ and S. van Wijnbergen. "Structural
                                              Adjustment and
    Disequj1jbrj" in H. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan (eds.) Handbook of
    ye1opment Economics. North Holland Publishing Co., 1987).

 Cylfason, T. "Credit Policy and Economic
                                           Activity in Developing Countries:
    An Evaluation of Stabilization Programs
                                            Supported by the IMF 1977-79."
    lIES Seminar Paper 268, University of Stockholm (1983).

 __________ and M. Schmid. "Does Devaluation Cause
    Journal of Economics (1983).                   Stagflation?" Canadian

 _________ and 0. Rislaer. "Does Devaluation
                                             Improve the Current Account."
    European Economic Review 25 (1984), 37-64.

 __________ and M. Radetzki. "Does Devaluation Make
                                                    Sense in the Least
    Developed Countries?" lIES Seminar Paper 314, University of Stockholm
    (1985).

 Hanson, J. "Contractionary Devaluation, Substitution in Production and
    Consumption, and the Role of the Labor Market." Jurna1 of International
    Economics 14 (February 1983), 179-89.

Harberger, A.C. "On Measuring the Social Opportunity Cost of Labor." .ILQ
   Review  (1971).

Harris, J. and M.P. Todaro. "Migration,
                                        Unemployment and Development: A
   Two Sector Analysis." American Economic Review (1970).

Jones. R.J. "A Three Factor Model in
                                     Theory, Trade and History" in J.
   Bhagwati (ed.) Iae Balance of Payments Growth
                                                    (North-Holland, 1971).
Khan, Mohsin and Roberto Zahler. "The Macroeconomic
                                                    Effects of Changes in
   Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A
                                          Simulation Analysis." ThIF Staff
   Papers (June 1983): 223-82.

Krugman, P. and L. Taylor. "Contractionary Effects of Devaluation."
   Journal of International Economics 8 (August 1978): 445-56.

Mayer, W. "Short Run and Long Run Equilibrium for
                                                  a Small Open Economy."
   Journal of Political Econorny (1974).

Melvin, James. "Production and Trade with Two Factors and Three Goods."
   American Economic Review (1968): 1249-268.
                                    46




Mussa, M.L. "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
   Factor Specificity." Journal of Political Economy (1974).
                                                                  Model."
_________ •   "Dynamic Adjustment in the HeckscherOhlifl-Samuels0
   Journal of Political Economy (1978;): 1191-203.
                                                            Geometric
__________ • "The Two Sectors Model in Terms of its Dual: A
   Exposition." Journal of International Economics (November 1979):
   513-26.

                         Policy and the Adjustment Process" in J. Bhagwati
__________ • "Government
   (ed.) Import Competition and Response. (University of Chicago Press,
   1982): 73-120.

__________   "The Adjustment Process and the Timing of Trade Liberalization"
   in A. Choksi and D. Papageorgion (eds.) Economic Liberalization lfl
   Developing Countries (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986).
Neary, Peter. "Short-Run Capital specificity and the Pure Theory of
   International Trade." Economic Journal 88 (1978): 448-510.

__________   "Dynamic Stability and the Theory of Factor-Market
   Distortions." American Economic Review (1978): 671-82.

__________   "Capital Mobility, Wage Stickiness and the Case for Adjustment
   Assistance" in J. Bhagwati (ed.) Import Competition and Response
   (University of Chicago Press, 1982).

__________   "International Factor Mobility, Minimum Wage Rates and Factor
   Price Equalization: A Synthesis." Quarterly Journal of Economics
    (1985).

 van Wijnbergen, Sweder. "Exchange Rate Management and Stabilization
    Policies in Developing Countries" in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds.)
    Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries
    (University of Chicago Press, 1986).
