                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND FINANCIAL FRICTIONS:
                        A MACRO-DEVELOPMENT PERSPECTIVE

                                         Francisco J. Buera
                                         Joseph P. Kaboski
                                          Yongseok Shin

                                        Working Paper 21107
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21107


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve
System. This is a draft working version of a paper prepared for the Annual Review of Economics,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115348.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21107.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Entrepreneurship and Financial Frictions: A Macro-Development Perspective
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 21107
April 2015
JEL No. L26,O1,O11,O15,O16,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

We review both the theoretical and empirical literature on entrepreneurship and financial frictions,
with an emphasis on the heterogeneous and dynamic micro-level implications of financial frictions
for macro development.


Francisco J. Buera                               Yongseok Shin
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                  Department of Economics
230 South La Salle Street                        Washington University in St. Louis
Chicago, IL 60604                                One Brookings Drive
fjbuera@gmail.com                                St. Louis, MO 63130
                                                 and NBER
Joseph P. Kaboski                                yshin@wustl.edu
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu
1    Introduction
Entrepreneurs—individuals developing private firms—are central actors in modern economies.
The anemic growth of firms and their plants is one of the unfortunate features of underde-
veloped economies (Hsieh and Klenow, forthcoming). Poor countries also have low levels
of financial development, with much less access to formal financial services, such as savings
accounts or bank loans, and measures of external finance to GDP that can be an order of
magnitude smaller than those of advanced economies (King and Levine, 1993; Banerjee and
Duflo, 2005). A common explanation for the poor performance of entrepreneurs in developing
economies is their inability to obtain credit to expand their scale of operation.
    The issues involving entrepreneurship and financial frictions are wide-ranging, and the
literature is vast. For the purpose of this review, we necessarily narrow our focus. We con-
centrate on two issues that have received attention in both the theoretical and empirical
literature more recently. First, there is a great variety of entrepreneurs, who differ consid-
erably in the productivity of their enterprises and the optimal scale of the technologies or
sectors in which they operate. Financial frictions have different implications, depending on
the type of entrepreneurs and the distribution of entrepreneurs across various types. Second,
financial frictions have implications for firms’ growth dynamics. These dynamics matter for
both the aggregate and individual consequences of financial frictions and they can also be
used to evaluate models. Indeed, an advantage of focusing on these two topics is that they
are natural areas in which the lessons from theory and empirics can be closely linked.
    One of the primary tasks of a literature review is to propose an organization of the
literature. We have decided to do so thematically, rather than paper by paper. That is,
starting with a representative model in the literature, we evaluate various ideas or lessons.
We then discuss the literature in terms of its contribution to and harmony or variance with
these ideas or lessons. We attempt to address the most relevant theoretical, quantitative,
and empirical work, both from the micro and macro literature.
    Taking the literature as a whole, we note several key findings. First, productivity varies
widely across entrepreneurs, with the most productive entrepreneurs making a sizable share
of investments. Small relaxations of financial constraints tend to promote entry among
entrepreneurs of marginal productivity and smaller scale enterprises that do not exhibit
much growth after entry. It is more productive entrepreneurs whose enterprises expand
more significantly in response to the relaxation of financial constraints. Second, financial
frictions have a greater impact on entry in large-scale sectors, where production technologies
require large setup costs. This distortion of entry into large-scale sectors or investment in
large scale technologies can lead to substantial productivity losses and exacerbate inequality.
In fact, a small relaxation of financial constraints across all sectors may end up tightening
(through general equilibrium effects) the financial constraints that potential entrepreneurs in
large-scale sectors face, while increasing access to large loans can only help them. Third, the
saving and investment behavior of both existing and potential entrepreneurs is important for
understanding the impacts of financial frictions. Saving rates are higher among both active

                                              2
entrepreneurs (especially new, highly productive ones) and soon-to-be entrepreneurs. Over
time, through savings, entrepreneurs can escape financial constraints, and the eventual self-
financing of investment through savings can undo much, though not all, of the long-run and
aggregate consequences of external financing constraints. This is especially true for small-
scale technologies. Finally, quantitative models that incorporate heterogeneity and forward-
looking dynamic saving decisions can lead to individual poverty traps, but not aggregate
poverty traps. Aggregate output, while lowered by financial frictions, is not dependent on
initial conditions such as inequality, for example. Financial innovation can make progress
in eliminating or lessening the individual poverty traps in a stationary equilibrium, in ways
that a one-time wealth redistribution can not.
    Our narrow focus nevertheless relates to a much broader literature on entrepreneurship
and financial frictions.1 The role of entrepreneurs has been shown to be a potential expla-
nation for the large concentration of wealth observed in the right tail of wealth distributions
(Cagetti and De Nardi, 2006; Quadrini, 2000). Given the success of models of entrepreneur-
ship and financial frictions in producing reasonable wealth distributions vis-à-vis the data,
these models have been used to analyze the impacts of tax policy (Amand, 2012; Cagetti
and De Nardi, 2009; Kitao, 2008; Lee, 2012; Meh, 2005; Scheuer, 2014). They have also been
used to analyze business cycle fluctuations, particularly in the aftermath of the 2008 financial
crisis (Achdou et al., 2014b; Buera et al., 2014a; Buera and Moll, 2012; Bassetto et al., 2013;
Kiyotaki and Moore, 2012; Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones, 2014), where private entrepreneurs
play a special role relative to corporations because of the interaction of consumption, saving,
and risk that is linked with investment.2 There is also a literature that focuses on the con-
sumption smoothing and self-insurance behavior of entrepreneurs (Angeletos, 2007; Buera
and Shin, 2011; Karaivanov and Townsend, 2014; Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002).
Although incomplete insurance markets are clearly one important form of financial frictions,
we do not consider insurance markets. A literature exists on the role of both formal and
informal insurance in entrepreneurial activities, but much of the work focuses on agricultural
investments (Braverman and Stiglitz, 1986; Cai et al., 2009; Cole et al., 2013; Karlan et al.,
2012; Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2012). Financial frictions can lead to a relationship between
wealth and entrepreneurship as noted by the seminal work of Evans and Jovanovic (1989).
This relationship and the welfare consequences of the nepotistic management it can engender
have also been examined (Caselli and Gennaioli, 2013; Bloom et al., 2013).
    We organize our discussion as follows. In the next section, we introduce a simplified
benchmark model and use it to fix ideas and discuss alternative formulations. In Section 3,
we review the importance of heterogeneity in the productivity and scale of entrepreneurial
establishments for understanding the impact of financial frictions. Section 4 evaluates the
   1
    Some of these macroeconomic issues are covered in Quadrini (2009)’s excellent review article.
   2
    These contrast with models in which financial constraints apply to firms that either do not have en-
trepreneurs or have entrepreneurs with linear preferences. In such models, investment and production deci-
sions are not directly linked to consumption and saving decisions—e.g., Arellano et al. (2012), Cooley et al.
(2004), Khan and Thomas (2013), Jermann and Quadrini (2012).



                                                     3
dynamic implications of financial frictions for entrepreneurship, starting with entry and
age-dependent growth, before finally evaluating poverty traps and policy implications. We
conclude in Section 5 and suggest areas for future research.


2    Benchmark Model
In order to fix ideas and develop intuition, we sketch a model following Buera and Shin
(2013) and Buera et al. (2011) with heterogeneous producers and dynamic decisions regarding
entrepreneurship and investment. Although the concepts are more general, fixing ideas and
notation will allow us to more easily illustrate these concepts. We also discuss alternatives
to the assumptions in the model.
    Consider an economy populated by individuals who are heterogeneous in terms of their
productivity as entrepreneurs z. As entrepreneurs, they use capital and hire labor to produce
a common final output according to a diminishing returns to scale production function zk α lθ ,
with α + θ < 1. The entrepreneurial productivity follows a Markov process.
    Individuals choose their consumption, c, next period’s asset holding, a0 , and whether
to be an entrepreneur, e ∈ {0, 1}, in every period. Operating a technology may entail a
fixed cost (κ units of output), and entrepreneurs must also choose the levels of their capital
k and labor input l. For simplicity, we assume that financial wealth can be accumulated,
but all capital is rented at the competitive rate of rt + δ through an intermediary using a
within-period capital rental or “credit” contract, and this contract is subject to a quantity
limit. Taking the path of interest rate rt and wage wt as given, the problem of an individual
with wealth a and entrepreneurial productivity z at time t is summarized by the following
Bellman equation:

                                     c1−σ
      vt (a, z) =     max                 + βEz0 [vt+1 (a0 , z 0 ) |z]
                c,a0 ,k,l≥0,e∈{0,1} 1 − σ

      s.t. c + a0 ≤ e[zk α lθ − κ − (rt + δ) k − wt l] + (1 − e)wt + (1 + rt ) a
      and k + (1 + rt ) κ ≤ k̄t (a, z; φ) .

    One can easily consider the decisions of a single individual taking prices as given, whether
it is a small open economy where the interest rate is fixed but the wage is determined by
market clearing in the labor market, or a fully general equilibrium, where the interest rate
must clear the market for capital. Although the idiosyncratic shocks in the model will yield
plenty of churning in any given equilibrium, one can consider either a stationary equilibrium
where aggregates and prices are nonetheless constant over time or a dynamic equilibrium
where they transition over time.
    This simple yet flexible model has key features that are important for understanding the
relationship between entrepreneurship and financial frictions.
    First, the choice of whether to be an entrepreneur is endogenous and therefore responds
to financial frictions, comparative advantage in entrepreneurship (i.e., productivity), and

                                                 4
equilibrium prices. One alternative is to assume an exogenous division between workers and
entrepreneurs (i.e., entrepreneurs and workers as two separate types) as done in Erosa and
Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008) and Moll (2014), for example. When the occupation of individuals
is exogenously fixed, financial frictions and interventions can lead to strong movements in
some variables (e.g., entrepreneurs’ profits). These movements may be an overstatement,
however, and the inelastic occupation choice certainly precludes any analysis of the impacts
on entry decisions and the number of entrepreneurs. The opposite extreme is to follow
Hopenhayn (1992) and assume that the supply of firms is perfectly elastic as in, for example,
the models of Melitz (2003), who studies the productivity gains of openness along entry
and exit margins, or Barseghyan and DiCecio (2011), who evaluate the productivity effects
of entry costs. Although entry requires resources in these models, entrepreneurial ability
itself is not a scarce resource ex ante. The distribution of productivity that all entering
entrepreneurs draw from is invariant and independent of the number of entrepreneurs. In
these models, prices may respond too little (and indeed there is no ex ante entrepreneurial
rent) to financial frictions, but entry and the number of firms in an economy may respond
too strongly.
    Relative to these models, our assumption of a finitely elastic supply of entrepreneurs
enables us to capture the impact of financial frictions on the number and the productivity
distribution of active entrepreneurs and the returns to entrepreneurship. Finally, we model
the entrepreneur-worker occupation as a discrete choice. Although there is ample evidence
that people and certainly households, especially those in developing countries, often have
multiple sources of income even over relatively short periods (Townsend, 2010), any element
of fixed costs in changing activities will add a discrete nature to the time allocation problem.
    Second, individuals are heterogeneous not only in their wealth but also in their en-
trepreneurial productivity, and this productivity is persistent. Earlier papers examining
entrepreneurship and financial frictions, such as those of Aghion and Bolton (1997), Baner-
jee and Newman (1993), and Piketty (1997), abstracted from such heterogeneity, but this
dimension is important to understand the different ways in which financial frictions affect
individuals as we discuss in the next section. Heterogeneity will also aid quantitative as-
sessment, as it allows theory to be more easily mapped to data. Note that the current
idiosyncratic productivity of individuals is known to them. This again distinguishes the
model from the above papers, where heterogeneity in entrepreneurial productivity arises
after entry. The choice of becoming an entrepreneur is therefore made with some knowl-
edge of one’s own productivity and allows for interesting selection into entrepreneurship, the
empirical observation of which we will discuss.
    Of course, although useful, the simplifying assumption of full knowledge is an abstrac-
tion. This abstraction has been relaxed in Nyshadham (2014), who notes that transitions in
and out of entrepreneurship are common in Thailand and empirically examines the process
by which agents learn about their productivity as entrepreneurs relative to their productivity




                                               5
as workers (in agriculture).3 Fully exogenous productivity is another simplifying assump-
tion. Cole et al. (2012), Lopez-Martin (2013), and Midrigan and Xu (2014) are examples of
preliminary attempt to endogenize entrepreneurial productivity—modeled as the choice of
technologies—in the presence of financial frictions, but this is an area where more research
is certainly needed. At a very minimum, however, the modeling of capital in the production
function captures some role of productivity-enhancing endogenous investment.
    Third, and related, the entrepreneurship choice is dynamic in that people can decide
to become entrepreneurs at any point in time, and they can make forward-looking decisions
about their saving behavior. Again, this distinguishes the model from those with one or two-
period-lived agents, where people make one-time decisions about entrepreneurship (Amaral
and Quintin, 2010; Banerjee and Newman, 1993). Moreover, the saving decisions here are
modeled differently from the popular warm-glow bequest motives (Banerjee and Newman,
1993; Caselli and Gennaioli, 2013; Ghatak and Jiang, 2002; Giné and Townsend, 2004; Jeong
and Townsend, 2008, 2007; Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt, 2000), in that they respond to changes
in incentives to save or invest. Models with two or three-period-lived agents preclude rich
saving behavior or quantitative predictions that can be easily assessed with data from short-
term experiments. All of this will be crucial to our examination of firm dynamics in Section
4.
    Fourth, we model a production function with smooth decreasing returns to scale. This
diminishing returns to scale technology is essentially a span-of-control model of Lucas (1978),
where the distribution of entrepreneurial productivity is the key determinant of the firm
size distribution. Other variants that allow for easier analysis have been proposed in the
literature. First, in models with monopolistic competition and constant returns to scale,
downward sloping demand determines optimal firm size. These models have a large degree of
isomorphism with competitive span-of-control models, and even their calibrated quantitative
versions yield similar results (Hopenhayn, 2014). In a sense, Banerjee and Newman (1993)
and Erosa and Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008) model an extreme form of diminishing returns,
since firms had hard constraints on scale—two people in the case of Banerjee and Newman.
Alternatively, Moll (2014) assumes constant returns to scale technologies, which means a
nontrivial distribution of firm size depends on the presence of financial frictions. If κ > 0,
the benchmark model yields U-shaped average cost curves with a region of increasing returns
to scale. With κ > 0, we consider variations in efficient scale across industrial sectors in
Section 3.2.
    Finally, as shown by the second constraint of the benchmark individual problem, financial
frictions are modeled as limits to the amount of physical capital that entrepreneurs can rent.
This upper bound k̄ (a, z; φ) potentially depends on the entrepreneur’s asset a, productivity
z, and a parameter φ indexing the strength of financial institutions. The assumption is that
   3
     Nyshadham (2014)’s treatment of financial frictions is rather stylized, abstracting from endogenous
wealth dynamics and self-finance. If it takes time for entrepreneurs to learn their true talent, self-finance
will be a better substitute for credit to the extent that positive signals and the availability of internal funds
are correlated. A richer model of learning and wealth dynamics is needed to explore this conjecture.



                                                       6
k̄ is (weakly) increasing in a, z, and φ. We set up the model such that, as φ varies from zero
to one, it spans the spectrum from financial autarky to perfect credit markets. Buera et al.
(2011) show how this can be developed from a simple limited-enforcement problem.
     The constraint has flexibility and buys simplicity, but it does rely on some important
assumptions. Notice first that working capital for labor payments does not need to be
financed. If it did, financial constraints could potentially have more bite, since labor input
choices would also be potentially distorted.
     As an example of its flexibility, note that if the borrowing constraint does not respond to z
and is linear in a, then it simplifies to the simple collateral constraint of Evans and Jovanovic
(1989) and Buera and Shin (2013). Such a constraint might arise if z were unobservable or if,
under limited enforcement, the intermediary could not pursue income sources of the borrower
in the event of default. Under the latter assumption, Banerjee and Newman (1993) and
Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt (2000) derive simple linear collateral constraints. In such cases,
financial frictions generally have stronger impacts on more productive firms and therefore
aggregates, since available credit is independent of entrepreneurial productivity but capital
demand is increasing in it.
     If the borrowing constraint that the intermediary offers is increasing in both a and z, this
implies that both are at least partially observable to the intermediary. It is less controversial
to assume that lenders have some knowledge of borrowers’ assets, but in practice financial
intermediaries generally try to assess future cash flow/ability to pay (z) in addition to ex-
isting assets (a). Brooks and Dovis (2013) refer to the dependence on existing assets as a
“backward-looking” financial constraint and dependence on future cash flow as a “forward-
looking” constraint. They use firm-level data and a trade liberalization episode in Colombia
as an experiment to test whether debt limits respond to future profit opportunities and they
answer in the affirmative. Aguirre (2011) also considers forward looking constraints and
shows that financial frictions tend to bind less when individuals or countries are far from
their steady state.
     As stated, the credit constraint is agnostic about the underlying reason that entrepreneurs
face financial frictions, except to the extent that we assume no variation in interest rates
across them. Of course, there are many potential reasons for financial frictions, including
moral hazard, adverse selection, contracting problems such as limited commitment, lim-
ited enforcement, or costly state verification, and these reasons are not necessarily mutually
exclusive. The classic paper of Evans and Jovanovic (1989) estimated a structural model
of limited liability. Paulson et al. (2006) use structural techniques on panel data in rural
and semi-urban Thailand to distinguish whether entrepreneurs face frictions stemming from
limited liability, moral hazard, or some combination. They note that with limited liabil-
ity, increases in wealth increase available borrowing, as we assumed, and eventually relax
constraints. With moral hazard, increases in wealth lead to less borrowing and all bor-
rowers remain constrained. The authors identify moral hazard as the dominant source of
constraints, and they are able to reject the hypothesis that limited liability alone can explain


                                                7
the Thai data.4
    The constraint is also purely static. One aspect is that long-term contracts are ruled
out. Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004) solve a firm’s dynamic contracting problem over
time under limited commitment, while Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006) address dynamic
contracts with i.i.d. private information. Cole et al. (2012) consider the case with persistent,
but partially absorbing, private information, where lenders have the option of paying a cost
to verify these reports, as in Townsend (1979)’s costly state verification. Another aspect is
that the constraint does not rely on the history of default. If credit history affected access
to loans, entrepreneurs would build dynamic strategies into their borrowing and repayment
decisions. Karaivanov and Townsend (2014) extend the analysis in Paulson et al. (2006)
to dynamic environments, testing alternative dynamic mechanism design models with finan-
cial/information constraints. The strength of the static constraint is of course simplicity, and
can be justified in an environment with limited commitment if agents cannot be excluded
from entering into new debt contracts (Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010; Buera et al., 2011).

2.1     Perfect Credit Benchmark
The equilibrium under a perfect credit market provides a benchmark for models with financial
frictions. Under perfect credit, the use of capital is independent of entrepreneurs’ wealth and
capital is efficiently allocated across entrepreneurs, with their marginal product of capital
equalized to the user cost of capital, rt +δ. Labor is likewise efficiently allocated. Substituting
in the unconstrained capital and labor choices given rt and wt , the occupation choice is simply
that an individual becomes an entrepreneur if and only if his profits exceed the forgone wage
as a worker,

                                              α
                                            1−α−θ             θ
                                                             1−α−θ
                        1            α                 θ
      (1 − α − θ) z   1−α−θ                                           − κ ≥ wt .
                                  rt + δ               wt

The left-hand side (entrepreneurial profits) depends on productivity z but is completely
independent of wealth. Threshold productivity levels therefore exist, such that only those
whose productivity is higher than the threshold choose entrepreneurship. The dotted line
in Figure 1 illustrates the occupational choice graphically in wealth-productivity space. The
vertical threshold line shows that the occupational choice is independent of wealth.

                                              FIGURE 1 HERE
   4
     Karlan and Zinman (2009) run an experiment using consumer loans to workers in South Africa to identify
the importance of moral hazard and adverse selection. They randomized interest rates at various stages.
They found strong evidence for moral hazard and evidence for adverse selection among female borrowers.
These results for consumer loans are therefore consistent with those from Paulson et al. (2006).




                                                             8
3       Heterogeneous Entrepreneurship
The recent literature has emphasized that not all entrepreneurs or businesses are alike.
Heterogeneity matters in thinking about which entrepreneurs are likely constrained and
what the aggregate and distributional consequences of these constraints are. Entrepreneurs
differ in important ways both in their inherent productivity and in the scale of production
dictated by the technology they use or the sectors they enter. We discuss each in turn.

3.1     Heterogeneous Productivity
The classic paper of Lucas (1978) placed heterogeneity in entrepreneurial productivity at
the forefront of understanding entrepreneurship and firm size distributions.5 An early paper
with financial frictions, Evans and Jovanovic (1989), emphasized the considerable variance
in entrepreneurial ability as an important finding.
    Nevertheless, many earlier contributions that introduced financial constraints into en-
trepreneurship decisions assumed that all entrepreneurs had the same technology and were
equally productive. Banerjee and Newman (1993) and Piketty (1997) are two well-known
examples. The idea in these models is that the impact of financial frictions on occupa-
tional choice has implications for not only inequality but also aggregate output. In these
papers, unless fixed costs played a prohibitive role, an equal distribution of wealth would be
income-maximizing, since it would allow entrepreneurs to maximize their total production by
equalizing marginal products (Piketty) or maximizing entry into entrepreneurship (Banerjee
and Newman).
    An exercise in Banerjee and Duflo (2005) took the homogenous productivity model to
the data with the implicit assumption that variation in firm size and marginal products is
solely explained by variation in wealth rather than inherent productivity. Their calibrations
find it difficult to simultaneously generate large losses in aggregate output from financial
frictions and a realistic firm size distribution.
    The quantitative work by Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and the empirical work of Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) showed that, on its own, the distribution of capital and labor across es-
tablishments was not enough to understand the importance of resource misallocation: When
they looked at the distribution of resources in conjunction with the underlying distribu-
tion of heterogeneous productivity, they found that misallocation had important negative
consequences for aggregate productivity. Financial frictions are one important source of
misallocation. Compared with other sources of misallocation, it is one that is relatively well
understood and well measured.

Partial Equilibrium We demonstrate the role of entrepreneurial productivity heterogene-
ity and financial frictions in misallocation by considering the entrepreneur’s problem under
    5
    Similarly, Roy (1951) viewed heterogeneity in productivity to be important in understanding occupa-
tional choice and income inequality.


                                                  9
binding credit constraints. We first consider partial equilibrium, where we keep the interest
rate and wage constant.
    If the credit constraint is binding—i.e., k = k̄ (a, z; φ)—the marginal product of capital is
higher than it otherwise would be, and so is the average marginal product of capital, which
now exceeds r + δ. Using randomized grants to entrepreneurs in Sri Lanka, McKenzie et al.
(2008) find average annual real returns to capital of 55–63 percent, substantially higher than
the sum of real market interest rates of 12–20 percent and depreciation. Moreover, they find
higher returns to capital for those with fewer assets, which is consistent with the model,
where k̄ increases with a. Using similar techniques, McKenzie and Woodruff (2008) find
large returns to capital among small-scale retailers in Mexico, 20–30 percent per month or
three to five times market interest rates. Similarly, the increase in profits that Fafchamps
et al. (2011) measure in response to their randomized grants to micro-entrepreneurs in Ghana
implies very large returns to capital, 7–10 percent and roughly 25 percent per month for cash
and in-kind grants, respectively.6
    Now consider how the marginal product of capital varies across entrepreneurs of different
productivity, z. For any given capital input, the marginal product of entrepreneurs should be
increasing in z. Moreover, in the case of a pure collateral constraint where k̄ does not increase
with z, it is also true that, for any given wealth level, the marginal product of constrained
entrepreneurs should be higher, the higher their productivity. McKenzie and Woodruff’s high
returns in Mexico are concentrated among entrepreneurs who self-report they are “financially
constrained.” Additional evidence on this is presented in de Mel et al. (2008), who find larger
impacts on profits for those with higher cognitive ability, measured by schooling completion
or a quick digit recall diagnostic score. Also, Fafchamps et al. find larger returns for
women whose businesses were already more profitable. It is unlikely that these results were
driven by more skilled entrepreneurs or more profitable businesses having less baseline capital
(an omitted control in these studies), and hence these results are fairly strong evidence of
productivity leading directly to higher returns to capital. Nonetheless, a cleaner empirical
specification, motivated by the model, would be to evaluate how the marginal product of
capital varies with productivity or profitability conditional on baseline capital and likewise
how the marginal product of capital varies with baseline capital conditional on productivity or
profitability. Indeed, Fafchamps et al. find larger impacts on profits for businesses with more
capital. This finding is likely driven by the analysis confounding capital and productivity,
which are likely positively correlated. Using data in Thailand, Paulson and Townsend (2004)
run regressions with ability (education) and wealth using self-reports of being “financially
constrained,” and find a relationship that is consistent with the theory.
    The importance of financial frictions for the occupational choice decision also varies by
entrepreneurial productivity, z. Even under credit constraints, entrepreneurial profits are
increasing with productivity. First, there is the direct effect that a higher productivity
   6
    In a much smaller study in Ghana, Karlan et al. (2014) find only short-lived increases in scale and no
increase in profits, however.



                                                   10
increases profits for any given level of capital. Second, if the partial derivative of k̄ with
respect to z is strictly positive, it means that, for any given level of wealth, more productive
entrepreneurs have access to more capital from intermediaries. Thus, entrepreneurial profits
are larger for more productive entrepreneurs. Although for any given wealth level, the most
productive entrepreneurs are likely to be constrained at the intensive margin (i.e., choice
of capital input), those likely to be constrained at the extensive margin (i.e., occupational
choice) are the marginal entrepreneurs. We illustrate this with the dashed line in Figure
1, which shows the impact of introducing the k ≤ k̄ constraint in partial equilibrium, i.e.,
keeping wages and interest rates at the level of the perfect credit benchmark.
    At very high levels of wealth, the constraint does not bind, and so occupational choice is
undistorted for the very wealthy. Similarly, occupational choice is unaltered for the most pro-
ductive entrepreneurs. Instead, it is the low-wealth, marginal-ability entrepreneurs whose
occupational choice is impacted. The constraint, in partial equilibrium, acts to increase
the average ability of active entrepreneurs, although it also lowers the total number of en-
trepreneurs.
    In partial equilibrium, the impacts of tighter credit constraints on firm size are therefore
ambiguous. On the one hand, the composition of entrepreneurs shifts to higher average
productivity, and labor demand is increasing in productivity. On the other hand, tighter
constraints lower the capital used by anyone for whom the constraint is binding.

General Equilibrium The solid line in Figure 1 shows how the effects of financial con-
straints change in general equilibrium. Recall that in partial equilibrium, financial con-
straints make some poor, marginal-ability entrepreneurs switch their occupation from en-
trepreneur to worker. Thus, the demand for workers declines, while the supply increases. In
equilibrium, a lower wage is necessary to clear the labor market. Similarly, the demand for
capital is constrained and accordingly declines—the supply of capital can increase as we will
see in Section 4. As a result, the interest rate and the cost of capital go down. The lower wage
and interest rate increase the profitability of entrepreneurship, shifting the thresholds for en-
trepreneurship to the left. Relative to the perfect credit benchmark, some low-productivity,
high-wealth individuals enter, replacing poor, marginal-productivity entrepreneurs. These
low-productivity, high-wealth entrepreneurs are unconstrained at the intensive margin.
    In general, in this one-sector model, the net effect of financial frictions on entrepreneurship
rates (i.e., the number of entrepreneurs divided by the population size) is ambiguous. In
Moll (2014), financial frictions unambiguously lead to an increase in the entrepreneurship
rate in general equilibrium. Recall that Moll assumes constant returns to scale in order
to enable analytical tractability. This assumption leads to only one firm producing in the
absence of financial frictions; without diminishing returns, the most productive entrepreneur
hires all the capital and labor in the economy. Introducing financial frictions prevents this,
lowering the interest rate and wage in general equilibrium in order to induce more entrants.
With diminishing returns the opposite result can be obtained, as existing unconstrained


                                                11
entrepreneurs absorb some of the excess capital and labor.
     Returning to the illustrative model, note that the wealthy may actually benefit from
financial constraints: They are likely to be entrepreneurs, and lower wages and capital rental
rates translate into higher entrepreneurial profits. (For those who are net savers rather than
borrowers, the lower interest rates hurt their interest income.) Erosa and Hidalgo Cabrillana
(2008) see in this a political economy explanation for why the wealthy have incentives to
oppose financial system reforms.
     At the same time, lower input prices mean a larger unconstrained scale of production
for all entrepreneurs. The region of high-productivity, low-wealth entrepreneurs who are
constrained in their use of capital is larger in general equilibrium with the lower input
prices. Indeed, high-productivity, low-wealth individuals who remain as entrepreneurs are
more constrained than they would have been in partial equilibrium, while the high-wealth,
low-productivity entrepreneurs who enter because of the lower input prices tend to be un-
constrained. Commensurate with the lower interest rate, these unconstrained entrepreneurs
have a lower marginal product of capital than in the partial equilibrium. Overall, the dis-
persion of marginal product of capital across entrepreneurs is greater in general equilibrium,
reflecting greater misallocation of capital among entrepreneurs.
     The impacts of financial frictions on aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) poten-
tially come from three fronts. First, capital is misallocated among the active entrepreneurs
because their marginal products are not equalized. At this intensive margin, financial fric-
tions lower TFP, especially in general equilibrium. The impact at the extensive margin,
i.e., the change in aggregate TFP that comes from changing the set of active entrepreneurs,
consists of two channels: the number and the composition of entrepreneurs. Ceteris paribus,
in general equilibrium, TFP is increasing in the number of entrepreneurs: A larger num-
ber of entrepreneurs implies that entrepreneurs operate at smaller scales on average, and
given diminishing returns to scale technology, this shows up as higher TFP. If fixed costs are
non-zero, e.g., a positive opportunity cost of their time, the efficient scale of production is
bounded away from zero and TFP is non-monotonic in the number of entrepreneurs. The
composition of entrepreneurs also changes with financial frictions, as discussed above. Here,
the presence of low-productivity entrepreneurs induced into entry because of the lower factor
prices in general equilibrium contributes to larger TFP losses than in partial equilibrium.
     In sum, in general equilibrium, we see wealthy, low-productivity entrepreneurs enter and
poor, marginal-productivity entrepreneurs exit because of credit constraints. Similarly, the
regions of constrained entrepreneurs expand among existing entrepreneurs, but a new region
of unconstrained entrepreneurs arises. Finally, as for productivity, we see a greater dispersion
in marginal product of capital across agents leading to larger misallocation of capital at the
intensive margin. Relative to partial equilibrium, there are more entrepreneurs, who are less
talented on average, and there is more misallocation of capital among them.
     Whether there are more or fewer constrained entrepreneurs in general equilibrium de-
pends on the joint distribution of wealth and entrepreneurial productivity. Similarly, in


                                              12
comparing the financially constrained economy in general equilibrium with the perfect-credit
benchmark, whether active entrepreneurs are more or less talented on average and whether
there are more or fewer entrepreneurs also depend critically on the wealth-productivity dis-
tribution. These are quantitative questions that need to be addressed using both data and
models.

Quantitative Results and Empirics A great deal of work has gone into quantifying
the relationship between financial intermediation and the number of entrepreneurs, en-
trepreneurial productivity, and aggregate TFP. Although exogeneity and controls are elusive,
raw cross-country empirics provide some insight. In the cross-section of countries, compa-
rable data directly measuring entrepreneurship are limited, but wealthier countries tend to
have larger firms (measured by employment) on average, which likely implies lower rates
of entrepreneurship. Likewise, financial intermediation is highly correlated with measured
TFP in the cross-section of countries (Buera et al., 2011; Greenwood et al., 2013; King and
Levine, 1993).
    Model-based work tends to have the common feature of relying critically on the properties
of the cross-sectional distribution of entrepreneurial productivity and wealth in equilibrium.
For example, to quantify the impacts in Figure 1, one needs to integrate over this joint
distribution and make projections for any changes in the distribution induced by financial
frictions. Typically, the productivity distribution is pinned down by the firm dynamics
and firm size distribution in the data, while wealth distributions, which are an endogenous
outcome of individual saving behavior in the face of credit constraints, target key moments
of the empirical income and wealth distribution.
    Recent steady state evaluations of the potential impacts of financial frictions—for ex-
ample, Buera et al. (2011), Buera and Shin (2013), Midrigan and Xu (2014), and Moll
(2014)—all allow individuals to make optimal saving decisions. For the negative impact
of financial frictions on aggregate TFP, they find numbers between 20 and 30 percent in
closed-economy, one-sector models.7 With a model similar to the one in Section 2, Buera
and Shin (2013) and Buera et al. (2011) use the U.S. as a benchmark and identify the dis-
tribution of productivity from the U.S. establishment size distribution and the frequency of
shocks to productivity from the U.S. data on exit rates of establishments. In a one-sector
version of their model, they find that financial frictions can reduce aggregate TFP by 30
percent. Rates of entrepreneurship respond non-monotonically to the degrees of financial
frictions, and the effects are quantitatively small. Midrigan and Xu model the decision to
enter a “modern”, capital intensive sector by paying a one-time sunk cost, but abstract from
capital in the traditional sector. They choose this cost and the productivity shock process
to match the average establishment size and the autocorrelation of establishment growth
rates in panel data from Korea. In the closed economy version of their model, they find
   7
     Earlier steady-state evaluations included Caselli and Gennaioli (2013), who evaluated the impact of
nepotistic entrepreneurial dynasties in a model with warm-glow preferences, and Amaral and Quintin (2010),
who quantified impacts in an overlapping-generations model with three-period life-cycles.


                                                   13
that overall financial frictions can reduce TFP by 25 percent, 10 percentage points of which
come from the intensive-margin misallocation of capital among entrepreneurs. They find
that financial frictions greatly reduce the fraction of producers in the modern economy, a
measure of entrepreneurship rates. Moll uses micro panel data of Chilean and Colombian
manufacturing plants to measure productivity directly and then estimates the distribution
and autocorrelation of shocks to productivity. He concludes that financial frictions can lower
TFP by 20 percent.
    Model-based studies have analyzed the impacts of relaxing borrowing constraints over
time as well. Notably, Giné and Townsend (2004) apply the model of Lloyd-Ellis and Bern-
hardt (2000) to the Thai experience with financial deepening. Following Lloyd-Ellis and
Bernhardt, they model entrepreneurial productivity as heterogeneous entry costs. They use
detailed micro data on entry into entrepreneurship and wealth holdings to estimate the pro-
ductivity and wealth distributions, which are assumed to be uncorrelated with each other.
An exogenous quadrupling in the fraction of population served by financial institutions is
found to increase entrepreneurship rates by 4 percentage points. Jeong and Townsend (2007)
evaluate the impacts on TFP during the same Thai growth experience. They find that 70
percent of the overall Thai TFP growth from 1976 to 1996 can be explained by financial deep-
ening. Buera and Shin (2013) also look at time-series data for numerous miracle economies,
but rather than looking at the impacts of financial deepening, their emphasis is on the tran-
sition dynamics after growth-enhancing reforms in environments where financial frictions are
prevalent. Using a model similar to the one in Section 2, they find that a model economy
with financial frictions converges to the new steady state slowly after a reform that trig-
gers efficient reallocation of resources: The transition speed is half that of the conventional
neoclassical model. Furthermore, in their model economy, investment rates and total fac-
tor productivity are initially low and increase over time, consistent with the experience of
miracle economies.8

3.2     Heterogeneous Scale
We now consider a version of the model with two sectors that differ in their fixed cost κ.
One can think of the two sectors as being either two different technologies for producing
the same good—e.g., traditional vs. modern as in Banerjee and Newman (1993), Midrigan
and Xu (2014), and Kaboski et al. (2014)—or two different industries where production is
best done with, respectively, small-scale technologies (e.g., services and non-tradables) and
large-scale technologies (e.g., manufacturing and tradables) as in Buera et al. (2011). Buera
and Kaboski (2012) show that services and manufacturing differ in their optimal scale of
production. Holmes and Stevens (2014) show that the manufacturing sector itself can be
split into large-scale plants producing standardized goods and small-scale plants making
   8
     Buera and Fattal-Jaef (2014) show that some of the features of the data of miracle economies can also
be explained by a related model of entrepreneurship and endogenous innovation, while abstracting from
financial frictions.



                                                   14
custom or specialty goods. How one views the distinction would influence how one models
the demand for the two outputs. In the modern vs. traditional, the elasticity of substitution
of demand could be infinite, while in the case of manufacturing vs. services it is generally
low. The latter interpretation leads to interesting relative price movements across sectors.
    Scale differences that arise from fixed or setup costs are of particular interest. First, these
costs may need to be financed. Rajan and Zingales (1998) emphasize differences in external
financial dependence across industries, which Buera et al. (2011) link to scale differences at
the broad sectoral level. Moreover, they show that even at a more disaggregate level, scale
varies considerably across industries and is predictive of industry TFP gaps in countries
with lower levels of financial development. Second, fixed or entry costs are important non-
convexities that can give rise to interesting investment dynamics and even poverty traps,
as we examine in Section 4. This is a point stressed by Banerjee and Newman (1993) and
Banerjee and Duflo (2005).
    Quantitatively, if we consider the large-scale sector to be the industrial sector, large-
scale entrepreneurs are few in number. First, the share of manufacturing or tradables in
total employment is not particularly large in most countries (Buera and Kaboski, 2012).
Moreover, the fact that establishments and firms in these sectors are large (i.e., have many
employees) immediately implies that the number of establishments and firms must be small.

Partial Equilibrium The impacts of financial frictions in a large-scale sector are quali-
tatively similar, but quantitatively stronger, since the profitable scale of operation is bigger
and fixed costs need to be financed as well. This is true at both the intensive and extensive
margins. For instance, because of the fixed cost and, hence, the large profitable scale, it takes
longer for poor entrepreneurs to self-finance away from financial constraints. Moreover, the
region of poor, marginal-ability entrepreneurs who are now excluded from entrepreneurship
is larger, given the difficulties of financing the fixed costs and the efficient amount of cap-
ital. This last point is illustrated with the dashed lines in Figure 2. In the left panel, we
illustrate the occupational choice in the small-scale sector, which basically reproduces the
occupational choice map in Figure 1. The right panel shows the occupational choice map in
the large-scale sector. One-time sunk entry or setup costs lead to even larger impacts than
per-period fixed costs, even if they had the same net present value, because of the difficulty
of larger financing needs upfront (Buera et al., 2011; Midrigan and Xu, 2014).

                                      FIGURE 2 HERE

    When the investment involves implementing a modern technology rather than a tra-
ditional technology, entrepreneurial productivities in these two technologies are generally
assumed to be highly correlated. In such cases, the interesting margin is entrepreneurs’
choice of large-scale vs. small-scale technology, not one of worker vs. entrepreneur. How-
ever, if the large-scale and small-scale investments represent different industrial sectors (e.g.,
manufacturing vs. services), an entrepreneur’s productivity in the two sectors may be less

                                                15
correlated. Here, for most individuals, the real decision is either large-scale entrepreneur
vs. worker or small-scale entrepreneur vs. worker. In other words, an entrepreneur’s sector
choice is mostly undistorted, while whether he should be an entrepreneur at all may well be.

General Equilibrium In general equilibrium, there are now three prices to consider: the
wage, interest rate, and the price of large-scale output relative to small-scale output—when
the two are not perfect substitutes. Again, in order to clear the labor and capital markets in
general equilibrium, the wage and interest rate must fall with financial frictions. Moreover,
because the large-scale sector is more distorted, the relative price of large-scale output must
increase in order to clear the goods markets. The lower input prices induce entry into
both sectors, while the rising relative price of the large-scale sector reinforces entry into the
large-scale sector but depresses entry into the small-scale sector, all compared with partial
equilibrium.
    TFP losses are larger overall, compared with the results of one-sector models, and this is
driven by disproportionate losses in the large-scale sector. Buera et al. (2011) find aggregate
TFP losses of 36 percent from financial frictions in a model with large-scale and small-scale
sectors. (In a comparably calibrated one-sector model with fixed costs, the losses are only
30 percent.) In the small-scale (i.e., service) industry, sector-level TFP is reduced by up to
25 percent when moving toward financial autarky, and almost all of this distortion comes
from the intensive margin. In the large-scale (i.e., manufacturing) industry, the losses are
much larger, up to 55 percent, and the majority (over 30 percentage points) comes from the
extensive margin. The importance of productivity losses from distorted entry in the large-
scale sector is another chief takeaway. Midrigan and Xu (2014) find similarly that distorted
adoption of modern technologies requiring a large setup cost can lead to sizable TFP losses.
    Changes in aggregate and sector-level TFP can be mapped into changes in relative prices,
and Buera et al. (2011) can explain 25 percent of the observed relationship between relative
prices and financial development observed across countries. The change in relative prices can
further impact output if investment goods disproportionately consist of the large-scale sector
output. Erosa and Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008) also address this channel, as a theoretical point,
while Castro et al. (2009) give a related explanation emphasizing that investment sectors
are more financially dependent because of their higher cyclical volatility. The higher relative
price of investment goods has been linked to lower capital stocks in poor countries (Hsieh
and Klenow, 2007; Jones, 1994).
    The larger reduction in TFP also leads to a larger reduction in the wage, which then
impacts entrepreneurship decisions by raising entrepreneurial profits and lowering the oppor-
tunity cost of entrepreneurship. Unlike in the one-sector model, the two-sector model gives
a clear implication for the impact of financial frictions on entrepreneurship rates: There are
more entrepreneurs in financially underdeveloped economies, which is overwhelmingly be-
cause of higher entrepreneurship rates in the small-scale sector, where entry costs are small.
Moving from perfect credit to financial autarky increases the rate of entrepreneurship by


                                               16
roughly 30 percent in Buera et al. (2011), whereas it was relatively flat in their one-sector
model. However, these effects could only explain a small part of the overall differences in
entrepreneurship rates between developed and developing countries. Negative labor shocks
have been used in other models to induce higher rates of entrepreneurship that match the
data (Buera et al., 2012; Allub and Erosa, 2014). In general equilibrium, when financial
frictions are severe, the higher rates of entrepreneurship raise the importance of small-scale
vs. large-scale decisions, with potentially distorted sector choices among entrepreneurs.

Empirics Empirical studies have emphasized the importance of considering the hetero-
geneity among entrepreneurs. Using data in the U.S., where firms are relatively large, Hurst
and Pugsley (2011) show that only a quarter of new entrepreneurs desire to eventually “be
big” and expect to have at least 10 employees after five years. Even fewer bring new ideas to
the market. These patterns vary across industrial sectors, however, with construction and
traditional service industries constituting most of the small-business owners. These sectors
have higher fractions of entrepreneurs who do not hire any other employee than manufac-
turing, information technology, agriculture, mining, and utilities.
    Paulson and Townsend (2005) evaluate the change in the number and composition of
entrepreneurs during and immediately after the 1997 Thai financial crisis. The crisis was
accompanied by an increase in the entrepreneurship rate from 11 percent to 30 percent in
Thailand. Businesses started during the crisis required a median setup cost of just $50, much
lower than the median of $1, 470 before the financial crisis. (The latter is more or less the
median annual income of nonbusiness households before the crisis.) Many of these new busi-
nesses were started by households with lower education levels and, even after the crisis, they
had less business investment and earned lower profits than the typical new business in the
pre-crisis period. These findings not only underscore the heterogeneity in types of businesses,
but also mesh with the assumption that high entrepreneurship rates in developing countries
are driven at least partly by need (i.e., lack of decent employment opportunities). Across a
broad set of countries, Poschke (2013) finds that “out of necessity” entrepreneurs constitute
nearly 30 percent of entrepreneurs and even more in poorer and high entrepreneurship coun-
tries. On average, they are less educated than the average entrepreneur, and their firms are
smaller with lower growth rates.
    Finally, Buera et al. (2011) provide some evidence on the impact of financial frictions on
firm size. They find that industries that are small-scale in the U.S., such as transportation
and retail, are even smaller scale in Mexico, while industries that are large-scale in the U.S.,
e.g., heavy manufacturing, are actually even larger scale in Mexico. In a general equilibrium
model, average scale in a sector is inversely related to the number of entrepreneurs, so this
would be consistent with financial frictions in Mexico leading to fewer, larger entrepreneurs
in large-scale sectors, but more, smaller entrepreneurs in small-scale sectors.
    McKenzie and Woodruff (2006) attempt to directly measure the importance of non-
convex returns to capital using ENAMIN data, a non-experimental small-firm dataset in


                                              17
Mexico. They emphasize that the setup costs are relatively small, with at least 25 percent
of firms using less than one-month’s median earnings as setup capital. They also estimate
marginal returns to capital that fall monotonically with the level of assets: high for small
firms but comparable to market returns for larger firms. They interpret this as evidence
against the importance of non-convex entry costs. A limitation of the analysis, however, is
that the survey includes only small firms. Non-convex costs may well be important in the
choice of industry—e.g., services over manufacturing, where measured setup costs and scale
are larger. Similarly, financial frictions may also distort the choice of production technology,
e.g., small-scale handicraft vs. large-scale manufacturing, and the small-scale businesses in
the survey may precisely be those who opted out of non-convex investments.
    Recent experimental work by McKenzie (2014) examines the impact of large grants given
to entrepreneurs in Nigeria. The paper is exciting because a randomization component
was built into the business plan contest for the funds, and winners received an average of
$50, 000, or roughly 100 times the size of the grants discussed in Section 3. Grants were
given to both new and existing businesses. Preliminary results from this ongoing research
are that after two years, the grants significantly increased entrepreneurial activity, including
entry, survival, employment, and profits. The probability of new firms having at least 10
workers increased by 29 percentage points, or roughly 4 times as high. Still, implicit rates of
return on the grant were not particularly high, 4-15 percent by the end of the second year.
    These results might challenge the idea that non-convexities are important, but the theory
also suggests another explanation. First, entrepreneur heterogeneity may be quite impor-
tant. In Figure 2, individuals who are financially constrained constitute a small fraction
of the population, especially if the optimal number of large-scale producers is small. If
additional loans were offered at market interest rates, then only the few poor, high-ability
entrepreneurs would apply. Grants, however, may attract a much broader sample of the
productivity distribution. Although McKenzie’s grantees were highly selected, only about
the top-third of applicants, screening may not have been particularly informative, as returns
were uncorrelated with business plan contest scores. Alternatively, lower measured returns
after a year or two may underestimate true returns because of unmeasured investments, such
as changing business practices and innovation (both of which increased significantly) that
may pay off in the longer term.


4     Self-Financing and Dynamic Implications
The extent to which wealth may cause entrepreneurship or entrepreneurship may lead to
greater wealth is debated, and the model with financial frictions can provide useful insights.
As shown in Figures 1 and 2, in the presence of financial frictions, wealth is an important
determinant of occupation choice. At the same time, the higher returns to entrepreneurship
and capital that stem from financial constraints, along with the fact that wealth can be
leveraged as collateral to relax these constraints, give additional incentives to save. Financial


                                               18
frictions therefore have implications for saving and wealth dynamics before and after entry
and, in turn, for firm growth.
    Firm growth rates and firm size distributions vary across countries. For example, not
only the average firm size but also the average growth rates of firms are strikingly smaller
in India and Mexico than in the U.S., as shown by Hsieh and Klenow (forthcoming). We
explore the dynamic implications of financial frictions with a view to explaining such facts.
    Self-financing motives rely critically on the persistence of entrepreneurial or firm produc-
tivity. Pawasutipaisit and Townsend (2011) find that returns on assets among rural Thai
entrepreneurs are highly persistent. Midrigan and Xu (2014) find the same for employment
and capital of Korean manufacturing plants, while Moll (2014) finds high persistence in the
estimated TFP of Chilean and Colombian manufacturing plants. The term “productivity”
or “ability” is therefore appropriate for describing the persistent trait impacting profitability,
scale, and measured TFP.
    There is ample evidence for the self-financing motive of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs in
the U.S. have substantially higher wealth-to-income ratios than non-entrepreneurs—8.1 for
entrepreneurs in 1989 vs. 3.6 for non-entrepreneurs. These stark differences remain even after
controlling for lifecycle dynamics and income (Gentry and Hubbard, 2004; Quadrini, 1999).
These higher wealth ratios reflect a combination of higher saving rates and higher returns
on saving. Gentry and Hubbard show that roughly half of entrepreneurs’ wealth is directly
business assets. Quadrini shows that entrepreneurs target higher wealth-to-income ratios. In
Thailand, Pawasutipaisit and Townsend (2011) show both saving rates and levels of saving
are significantly higher for households with higher returns on business assets and higher
measured TFP. Together, saving rates and returns on assets explain roughly 80 percent of
the variation in wealth dynamics in their seven-year panel.

4.1    Dynamics of Entry
We now focus on new entrants rather than continuing entrepreneurs. The emphasis on
financial frictions and entry patterns dates back to at least Evans and Jovanovic (1989),
who estimate a structural model using U.S. data from the NLSY. Through structural es-
timation, they interpreted the observed positive correlation between wealth and entry into
entrepreneurship—even after controlling for the potential correlation between wealth and
heterogeneous productivity, which they find to be negative—as evidence of financial fric-
tions bearing on that decision.
    Follow-up work in the U.S. has refined these results and their interpretation. Using
PSID, NLSY and HRS data, Hurst and Lusardi (2004) provide several pieces of evidence
against the importance of borrowing constraints in the U.S., attributing the wealth and
entrepreneurship correlation to variation in ability, preference, and family background. First,
they point out that the relationship between wealth and entry is relatively flat except at high
levels of wealth, beyond the 97th percentile of the wealth distribution. Even for businesses
in sectors with high startup costs (i.e., non-service, non-construction), they find wealth only

                                               19
matters at high levels, above the 90th percentile. Quadrini (1999) shows that households
accumulate more assets leading up to entry into entrepreneurship. Buera (2009) writes
down an explicit dynamic model of self-financing saving behavior both in anticipation of
and after entry. Consistent with that model, he shows that among younger households,
the saving rates of future entrepreneurs are higher than those of existing entrepreneurs and
non-entrepreneurs. The model also predicts that entry should be non-monotonic in wealth:
High-wealth individuals who have not yet entered tend to have low ability, so the probability
they enter is lower. Buera finds evidence for this hump shape among the young, while
Mondragon-Velez (2009) finds hump shapes more broadly within education and age cells.
    Financial frictions are likely to be more important for entry in developing countries.
In Thailand, a country with an imperfect yet relatively well-developed financial system,
Townsend and his coauthors have detailed evidence on business starts and entry in rural
and semi-urban regions. Paulson and Townsend (2005) find that both wealth and access to
finance are important determinants of starting businesses before the 1997 financial crisis but
not afterward, which they interpret as a sign that financial frictions got reduced over time.
Nyshadham (2014) also finds that wealth is not an important determinant of occupational
choice in the post-crisis period.
    Broader representative datasets are scarce unfortunately in other developing countries. In
a stationary environment, exit rates must equal entry rates. Hsieh and Klenow (forthcoming)
show that in India, exit rates are relatively low (less than 5 percent) and flat as a function
of age, except for the very old firms (35 years or more) exhibiting higher exit rates. In the
U.S., in contrast, exit rates are higher for young firms and decline with age, especially over
the first 15–20 years. The same pattern exists in Mexico, although it is steeper with even
higher exit rates at younger ages relative to the U.S. but lower exit rates at older ages. Low
exit rates in India may reflect low entry rates, which is consistent with financial constraints,
since wealth moves more slowly than entrepreneurial productivity. A declining age-exit rate
profile may be indicative of binding financial constraints and lower profitability for young
firms. It may also reflect imperfect knowledge about one’s own entrepreneurial productivity
or firm-level learning curves.

4.2    Self-Financing and Firms’ Age-Growth Profile
Another implication of financial frictions at the intensive margin is that they are particularly
important for younger businesses, because, if productivity is stable over time, entrepreneurs
can accumulate wealth and self-finance away from financial constraints. If productivity is
subject to large transitory shocks and therefore is not persistent enough, this age dependence
is weaker and financial frictions may matter even for older firms. The importance of post-
entry self-financing and the age-dependence of financial frictions has been stressed by many
authors intuitively (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Gentry and Hubbard, 2004), theoretically
(Buera, 2008; Banerjee and Moll, 2010), and in quantitative work (Buera and Shin, 2013;
Buera et al., 2011; Midrigan and Xu, 2014).

                                              20
    Related, Cooley and Quadrini (2001) emphasize that financial frictions provide a theory
for why young firms grow faster conditional on size. The left panel of Figure 3 illustrates
this last point for the model in Buera et al. (2011).

                                           FIGURE 3 HERE

     The idea that financial frictions bind early on is a feature of the static constraint and
short-term borrowing in the model of Section 2. This feature extends to models with dynamic
contracts as well, however. Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004) solve the optimal dynamic
contract in the presence of limited enforcement, showing how firms are constrained but only
in the short run. Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006) show a similar result for dynamic contracts
under iid asymmetric information (moral hazard on the part of the entrepreneur). Cole et al.
(2012) analyze the case with persistent private information and costly state verification.
Intermediaries have incentives to relax constraints over time, but the constraints dictate
the types of technology and the growth paths that firms can choose. More severe financial
frictions can dictate that technologies with higher short-term payoffs, at the expense of
longer-term performance, be chosen.
     Midrigan and Xu (2014) analyze age-growth profiles of Korean manufacturing plants to
empirically evaluate the importance of credit constraints at the intensive margin. Consistent
with theory, they find that output, labor, and capital growth is roughly 10 percent (not
percentage points) faster for plants less than 5 years old relative to plants more than 10 years
old. These differences are small relative to predictions from models without an equity market
for firms, however, so Midrigan and Xu deduce that firms enter close to their desired size.
They also estimate that productivity is highly persistent. They therefore attribute relatively
small costs to credit constraints at the intensive margin among plants in the modern sector,
five percent from moving to financial autarky in an open economy and 10 percent in a closed
economy. They cannot speak to potential losses in the traditional sector, however, since the
traditional technology abstracts from capital.
     The relationship between financial frictions and the relative growth of young vs. old firms
is non-monotonic though. When financial markets are very underdeveloped, an increase in
the amount of financial resources allows young firms to leverage more and grow faster.
Eventually, as financial markets become very developed, new firms will enter very close to
their unconstrained scale. In this case, an additional amount of financing will only result in
an increase in the initial scale and lower growth thereafter.9 This non-monotonic relationship
is illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3. The non-monotonicity is particularly important in
the large-scale sector (solid line), where the entry of wealthy-but-unproductive entrepreneurs
is more pronounced. These wealthy-but-unproductive entrepreneurs enter close to their
unconstrained scale and, hence, exhibit little growth.
   9
    More formally, if we assume entrepreneurs save a constant fraction s of their profits, a0 = s[maxk≤λa zk α −
(r + δ)k], then the growth rate of the capital input is an increasing function of λ provided the collateral
constraint is binding in the second period and a decreasing function otherwise.


                                                      21
    If self-financing can undo much of the impacts of financial frictions, especially for small
investments at the intensive margin, it is puzzling that the empirical work reviewed in Section
3.1 finds high returns on small grants to small-scale entrepreneurs. If entrepreneurs can save,
why are these small, high-return investments not realized in the absence of these grants? One
possibility is that agents face obstacles to saving, either due to their particular environments
(e.g., high crime, informal tax on savings from relatives, friends or spouses) or their own
impatience (e.g., hyperbolic discounting). In such environments, commitment devices for
saving can be beneficial. The role of these in entrepreneurial activities has been examined
both empirically (Dupas and Robinson, 2013; Fafchamps et al., 2011; Greaney et al., 2013)
and theoretically (Kaboski et al., 2014).

4.3     Poverty Traps
The possibility that financial frictions can lead to poverty traps by distorting entrepreneurs’
entry decisions has been shown formally in various settings, e.g., Aghion and Bolton (1997),
Banerjee and Newman (1993), Ghatak and Jiang (2002), and Piketty (1997).10 These models
led not only to individual poverty traps but also to aggregate poverty traps. Initial distribu-
tions affected aggregate dynamics through their general equilibrium impacts. In the Banerjee
and Newman or Ghatak and Jiang models, the equilibrium wage is low if the distribution of
income allows few agents to afford the fixed costs needed to become modern entrepreneurs.
The low wage leads to high entrepreneurial profits, so inequality and low output become
mutually perpetuating. In the Aghion and Bolton and Piketty models, it is the interest rate
that drives the poverty trap. In the former, if wealth is too concentrated and few people
can initially afford to undertake entrepreneurial investments, the supply of capital is high
relative to the constrained demand and the interest rate is low. If savings rates are also low,
the low interest rate can limit the ability of individuals to save their way out of poverty over
time. Piketty’s mechanism is similar, except that here the set of entrepreneurs is fixed and
the impact on the interest rate all comes from the intensive margin.11
    Qualitatively, the mechanisms emphasized in the above papers (lower interest rates and
wages from constrained entrepreneurial borrowing) are present in the benchmark model of
Section 2, and with the self-financing motive, the impact on interest rates can in fact be
exacerbated. The model also contains non-covexities in production, which can generate
multiple equilibria. Nonetheless, when mapped to the data, the quantitative versions of
these models do not lead to aggregate poverty traps—e.g., Giné and Townsend (2004) and
Buera et al. (2011). Instead, these mechanisms lead to slower convergence to a unique
stationary equilibrium, the main point of Buera and Shin (2013).12 The difference comes
  10
     See Matsuyama (2011) for an excellent review of related results.
  11
     In these models, financial constraints arise from and exacerbate the moral hazard problem of en-
trepreneurs. Ghatak et al. (2001) study a setting in which financial frictions can actually be efficiency-
enhancing because rents to future entrepreneurship motivate young workers and help alleviate moral hazard
in the labor market.
  12
     See also Moll (2014) for a theoretical analysis of this point.


                                                   22
from many of the simplifying assumptions invoked in the above literature in order to yield
tractable analytical results. For example, Aghion and Bolton or Piketty lack an extensive
margin for capital that would soften the impact of the wealth distribution on the interest
rate. Similarly, Banerjee and Newman and Ghatak and Jiang lack an intensive margin in the
demand for labor that would make the equilibrium wage respond continuously. Any labor
market at all in Piketty’s model would completely eliminate the impact of financial frictions.
Similarly, some of these models lack productivity shocks that satisfy a mixing condition for
the distribution of wealth and ability that favors uniqueness. Most important and relevant
to the earlier discussion, each of the models exogenously imposes saving rules on individuals
through warm-glow bequest motives and abstracts from any self-financing motive among
entrepreneurs.13
    The model of Section 2 does have individual-level poverty traps, however: Individuals
with identical productivity can converge toward different wealth levels (and occupational
choice) depending on their initial wealth. Here the self-financing motive drives the poverty
traps. Buera (2008) and later Banerjee and Moll (2010) show this formally. Initial wealth
determines how quickly self-financing would materialize, and individuals do not find it opti-
mal to save for too long. Given the lower interest rates, those with no intention of becoming
entrepreneurs instead dissave.
    The solid lines in Figure 2 demonstrate how the saving/dissaving threshold varies with
wealth and productivity, and how they differ by the scale of investment needed to operate in
the sector (left and right panels). Those to the right (left) of the solid lines save (dissave).
Especially in the large-scale sector (right panel), even among high-productivity individuals,
the wealthy save while the poor dissave. The dashed lines are the occupational choice
thresholds discussed earlier. The intersection of the occupational choice and poverty trap
lines indicates that there are workers who are saving to eventually escape poverty and become
entrepreneurs, while there are rich entrepreneurs who will eventually become poor. Of course,
idiosyncratic shocks to productivity can alter these dynamics, so that these “poverty traps”
are not absorbing states in the long run.

4.4     Policies
The productivity losses and poverty traps that arise from financial frictions motivate anti-
poverty policy interventions. Programs that grant assets to the poor may help them escape
poverty traps. Microfinance has been promoted as a means of promoting entry and expansion
of businesses. We discuss each in turn.

Asset Grant Programs If the poor have high returns but lack sufficient resources to
invest, one possible solution is to simply increase their resources through grants. Uncondi-
  13
    This discussion is based on our experience solving a large class of quantitative models of entrepreneurship
with financial frictions. This leaves the door open to a more exhaustive search over the parameter space of
these models that may uncover regions with aggregate poverty traps. This exploration would be a valuable
addition to the literature.

                                                      23
tional grants targeted toward the very poor have become an increasingly common policy,
particularly a program called the Ultra Poor Program (UPP), which started in Bangladesh
but has spread to many other countries.14 Using a randomized control trial in Bangladesh,
where the grants were between one and three times annual wages, Bandiera et al. (2013)
find that the grants increased entrepreneurship (mainly in livestock rearing) rates by 15 per-
centage points and earnings by 33 percent. These impacts persist (or even grow somewhat)
4 years after treatment, and the increase in earnings amounts to about a 20 percent annual
return on the grants.15 In India (West Bengal), 18 months after randomized grants, Banerjee
et al. (2011) find that consumption of recipients increased 25 percent and assets are higher,
among adults who do report earning income from their activities. Higher incomes appear
to derive from enterprises operated by the household, but they find no significant effect on
non-farm economic activity. Related impacts were measured in other studies with the excep-
tion of Morduch et al. (2012), who find no impact on consumption, income, or assets after
12 months.
    Buera et al. (2014b) simulate the long-run impact of asset grants in general equilibrium.
They find that the positive initial impacts on entrepreneurship, earnings, and aggregate
TFP are all short-lived in their simulations. They explain that quantitatively the impacts
are small and short-lived unless carefully targeted, because fewer than one in five recipients
are in the region of high entrepreneurial productivity and low wealth, in which grants alter
their occupational choice, and less than one percent are shifted over the savings threshold of
Figure 2.
    In a world with aggregate poverty traps, one-time redistributions can have long-run
consequences, but if a unique stationary distribution exists, the impacts are temporary
(Aghion and Bolton, 1997). In Buera et al. (2014b), convergence is relatively rapid, in
part because the low equilibrium interest rates imply that most recipients have a strong
incentive to dissave. Within 10 years, the distribution of wealth is indistinguishable from
the original distribution. Bleakley and Ferrie (2013) find no impact on the left tail of the
wealth distribution, but impacts on the right tail 18 years after sizable, randomized grants
from the Cherokee land lottery in the 19th century U.S. From the standpoint of quantitative
theory, it is the long-lasting impacts on the right tail that are puzzling, which may be
reconciled with large fixed costs.

Microfinance Microfinance is another popular program designed to address financial con-
straints. Although mission drift is a practical problem, in principle, microfinance makes
small amounts of credit available to the broad population, including households in the left
tail of the wealth distribution. The programs are funded through governments, NGOs, and
even for-profit financial institutions. The one well-established success of most microfinance
  14
     These countries currently include Ghana, Haiti, Honduras, India (3 programs), Ethiopia, Pakistan, Peru,
and Yemen
  15
     The experiment is not purely a grant program, however, since recipients also receive health care, training,
and access to saving services.


                                                      24
institutions is high repayment rates relative to predecessor programs that provided credit to
the poor.
    In the micro-development literature, microfinance has been evaluated many times, in-
cluding both convincing IV approaches and a multitude of recent randomized control trials.
These have included rural and urban settings in Bangladesh (Pitt and Khandker, 1998),
Bosnia-Herzegovina (Augsburg et al., 2015), Ethiopia (Tarozzi et al., 2015), Kenya, Tanza-
nia, Uganda (Greaney et al., 2013), India (Banerjee et al., 2015a, 2014a; Field and Pande,
2008; Field et al., 2013), Mexico (Angelucci et al., 2015), Mongolia (Attanasio et al., 2015),
Morocco (Crepon et al., 2015), the Philippines (Karlan and Zinman, 2010), and Thailand
(Kaboski and Townsend, 2011, 2012). It has been difficult to generalize findings, but a few
key messages emerge.16 First, take-up rates are usually fairly low. Second, none of the micro-
finance programs report miracles of large, dramatic or sustained increases in entrepreneur-
ship, investment, income or consumption. Third, as first shown by Kaboski and Townsend
(2011), impacts are heterogeneous across households (Angelucci et al., 2015; Banerjee et al.,
2015a, 2014a; Crepon et al., 2015). Fourth, impacts across the programs themselves vary
substantially. This is likely due in part to variations in the environments and measurement,
but some of it is explicitly due to program details (Attanasio et al., 2015; Field and Pande,
2008; Field et al., 2013; Greaney et al., 2013). Finally, there is mixed evidence on the extent
to which microfinance is used for business activities rather than for consumption or consump-
tion smoothing, but several studies have found impacts on entrepreneurship, investment, and
business income (Attanasio et al., 2015; Banerjee et al., 2014a,b; Field et al., 2013; Greaney
et al., 2013).
    Buera et al. (2012) assess both the micro and macroeconomic effects of microfinance in the
context of an entrepreneurship model like that presented in Section 2. In understanding the
microeconomics, only a small segment of the population borrows, unless microfinance can be
used for consumption or labor market distortions cause an overabundance of entrepreneurs of
necessity, as in Poschke (2013). This is consistent with Kaboski and Townsend (2011)’s find-
ing that few people have lumpy high-yield investment opportunities that are inframarginal
to small loans. Banerjee et al. (2014a) find substantial long-term impacts on earnings, but
only for established entrepreneurs. Second, entrants tend to be marginal borrowers. Banerjee
et al. (2015a) also find a decline in the quality (profitability, size) of the median entrepreneur.
    On the macro side, Buera et al. (2012) show that the chief macroeconomic impact of
microfinance is to increase the opportunity cost of work and therefore the wage. Relative to
the small segment of the population directly accessing microfinance, a much larger fraction of
the poor gain from the rising wage.17 The higher wage effectively redistributes from wealthy
entrepreneurs to poorer workers, and microfinance actually has much more substantial long-
  16
     A special volume presents a subset (six) of these randomized control trials in a way that allows for
improved comparability of outcomes across studies. Banerjee et al. (2015b) discuss some common lessons.
  17
     Kaboski and Townsend (2012) find a positive and substantial impact of microfinance on wages in rural
Thai villages. Focusing on a smaller intervention, Crepon et al. (2015) do not find an impact on wages in
rural Moroccan villages, however.



                                                   25
term redistribution impacts than one-time transfer programs. However, the redistribution
depresses aggregate capital accumulation. With financial frictions, entrepreneurs tend to
have high saving rates (for self-financing reasons) and workers largely dissave (given the low
equilibrium returns on saving in financially underdeveloped economies). The redistribution is
essentially from high savers to low savers, which depresses aggregate saving and investment.
On net, although the welfare for most increases with the introduction of economy-wide
microfinance, aggregate output is largely unaffected. Finally, heterogeneity in scale again
plays a role: Microfinance decreases the relative price of small-scale output and increases
the relative price of investment goods produced with large-scale technologies. Relative to
micro loans, larger “macro” loans that enable entry into the large-scale sector would lower
the relative price of investment goods and increase capital accumulation.


5     Concluding Remarks and Directions for Future Re-
      search
In this paper, we have reviewed the recent quantitative macro literature studying how en-
trepreneurship and financial markets interact, with a special emphasis on developing coun-
tries. While some of these studies already explicitly connect the structure of micro-founded,
macro models with the findings of empirical micro-development studies, we hope that this
review highlights the potential large gains from trade between the micro-development liter-
ature and the macro-development literature. The wealth of recent micro-experimental evi-
dence provides invaluable information with which we can evaluate the predictions of macro
models, while quantitative theory is a natural guide to interpreting and extrapolating the
micro-evidence.
    The importance of heterogeneity in quantitative theory motivates several avenues for
future empirical work. More work needs to be done to empirically examine the relation-
ship between financial frictions and firm size, firm age, industry or technology proxies for
non-convexities. Much empirical work has started with the presumption that the smallest
or newest firms are the most constrained, but heterogeneity in productivity and technology
could undo this. Natural or randomized experiments that trace out the impact of large
wealth changes would therefore be informative about the importance of technological non-
convexities that we have highlighted as key model ingredients. The work by Bleakley and
Ferrie (2013) and McKenzie (2014) are recent examples in this direction. Since there could
be important challenges to implementing experiments that are large scale in nature, an al-
ternative would be to do more structural or case studies of particular industries/technologies
in developing countries.
    An important lesson of dynamic quantitative models of entrepreneurship with financial
frictions is that self-finance is a powerful, although not perfect, substitute to credit, especially
when technological non-convexities are not important. More evidence testing empirically this
mechanism would be very welcome. For instance, one can envision the random introduc-

                                                26
tion of a capital-intensive new technology and study its adoption over time in the spirit of
the recent study by Atkin et al. (2014). Finally, in a world of heterogeneity, the growth
patterns of very large firms are of particular importance (see for example, Luttmer (2011)).
It underscore the insights that more representative panel firm data in developing countries,
especially data sets capturing larger and/or fast growing firms, would enable.
    In our review of the macro-quantitative literature we discuss various studies exploring a
host of different mechanisms, e.g., multi-sector models, setup costs, innovation and forward
looking borrowing constraints. A fruitful direction for future research is to quantitatively
assess models that incorporate a rich class of mechanisms, quantifying the relative importance
of each and any potential complementarities. The challenge to implementing this line of
research is the substantial computational burden associated with exploring a rich class of
models. Recent continuous-time methods developed by Achdou et al. (2014a) to analyze
models with heterogeneous agents and financial frictions seem like promising tools.




                                             27
References
Achdou, Y., S. Ahn, J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2014a): “Heteroge-
 neous Agent Models in Continuous Time,” Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

——— (2014b): “Wealth Distribution and the Business Cycle: The Role of Private Firms,”
 Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.

Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1997): “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Develop-
 ment,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151–172.

Aguirre, A. (2011): “Contracting Institutions and Economic Growth,” Working Papers
 Central Bank of Chile 643, Central Bank of Chile.

Albuquerque, R. and H. A. Hopenhayn (2004): “Optimal Lending Contracts and
 Firm Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 285–315.

Allub, L. and A. Erosa (2014): “Financial Frictions, Occupational Choice, and Economic
 Inequality,” Universidad Carlos III.

Amand, M. (2012): “Wealth Taxation and Entrepreneurship,” HEC Lausanne.

Amaral, P. and E. Quintin (2010): “Financial Intermediation and Economic Develop-
 ment: A Quantitative Assessment,” International Economic Review, 51, 785–811.

Angeletos, G.-M. (2007): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Investment Risk and Aggregate Sav-
 ing,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10, 1–30.

Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): “Microcredit Impacts: Evi-
 dence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
 Banco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151–82.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2012): “Financial frictions and fluctuations
 in volatility,” Staff Report 466, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Atkin, D., A. Chaudhry, S. Chaudhry, A. Khandelwal, and E. Verhoogen
 (2014): “Organizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball
 Producers in Pakistan,” Unpublished manuscript, UCLA.

Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
 (2015): “The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mongo-
 lia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90–122.

Augsburg, B., R. De Haas, H. Harmgart, and C. Meghir (2015): “The Impacts
 of Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina,” American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 7, 183–203.

                                         28
Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman (2013):
 “Can Basic Entrepreneurship Transform the Economic Lives of the Poor?” Economic
 Organisation and Public Policy Discussion Papers Series 43, STICERD.

Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. G. Kinnan (2014a):
 “Does Microfinance Foster Business Growth? The Importance of Entrepreneurial Hetero-
 geneity,” MIT.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2015a): “The Miracle of
 Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 7, 22–53.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and R. Hornbeck (2014b): “Bundling Health Insurance
 and Microfinance in India: There Cannot Be Adverse Selection If There Is No Demand,”
 American Economic Review, 104, 291–97.

Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015b): “Six Randomized Evaluations
 of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps,” American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 7, 1–21.

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2005): “Growth Theory through the Lens of Develop-
 ment Economics,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf,
 Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 1A, 473–552.

Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Chattopadhyay, and J. Shapiro (2011): “Targeting
 the Hardcore Poor: An Impact Assesstment,” Unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts
 Institute of Technology.

Banerjee, A. V. and B. Moll (2010): “Why Does Misallocation Persist?” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 189–206.

Banerjee, A. V. and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
 Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274–298.

Barseghyan, L. and R. DiCecio (2011): “Entry costs, industry structure, and cross-
 country income and TFP differences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 146, 1828–1851.

Bassetto, M., M. Cagetti, and M. D. Nardi (2013): “Credit Crunches and Credit Al-
 location in a Model of Entrepreneurship,” NBER Working Papers 19296, National Bureau
 of Economic Research, Inc.

Bleakley, H. and J. P. Ferrie (2013): “Up from Poverty? The 1832 Cherokee Land
 Lottery and the Long-run Distribution of Wealth,” NBER Working Papers 19175, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


                                         29
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2013): “Does
 Management Matter? Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128,
 1–51.

Braverman, A. and J. E. Stiglitz (1986): “Landlords, tenants and technological inno-
 vations,” Journal of Development Economics, 23, 313–332.

Brooks, W. and A. Dovis (2013): “Credit Market Frictions and Trade Liberalization,”
 University of Notre Dame.

Buera, F. J. (2008): “Persistency of Poverty, Financial Frictions, and Entrepreneurship,”
 Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.

——— (2009): “A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Constraints: Theory
 and Evidence,” Annals of Finance, 5, 443–464.

Buera, F. J. and R. Fattal-Jaef (2014): “The Dynamics of Development: En-
 trepreneurship, Innovation, and Reallocation,” Unpublished manuscript, The World Bank.

Buera, F. J., R. Fattal-Jaef, and Y. Shin (2014a): “Anatomy of a Credit Crunch:
 From Capital to Labor Markets,” NBER Working Papers 19997, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research, Inc.

Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2012): “Scale and the origins of structural change,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 147, 684–712.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale
 of Two Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101, 1964–2002.

——— (2012): “The Macroeconomics of Microfinance,” NBER Working Papers 17905, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

——— (2014b): “Macro-perspective on Asset Grants Programs: Occupational and Wealth
 Mobility,” American Economic Review, 104, 159–64.

Buera, F. J. and B. Moll (2012): “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,” NBER
 Working Papers 17775, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2011): “Self-insurance vs. self-financing: A welfare analysis of
 the persistence of shocks,” Journal of Economic Theory, 146, 845–862.

——— (2013): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A Quantitative Explo-
 ration,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 221 – 272.

Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2006): “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth,”
 Journal of Political Economy, 114, 835–870.

                                           30
Cagetti, M. and M. De Nardi (2009): “Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and
 Wealth,” American Economic Review, 99, 85–111.

Cai, H., Y. Chen, H. Fang, and L.-A. Zhou (2009): “Microinsurance, Trust and
 Economic Development: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Field Experiment,” NBER
 Working Papers 15396, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Caselli, F. and N. Gennaioli (2013): “Dynastic Management,” Economic Inquiry, 51,
 971–996.

Castro, R., G. L. Clementi, and G. Macdonald (2009): “Legal Institutions, Sectoral
 Heterogeneity, and Economic Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 76, 529–561.

Clementi, G. L. and H. A. Hopenhayn (2006): “A Theory of Financing Constraints
 and Firm Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 229–265.

Cole, H. L., J. Greenwood, and J. M. Snchez (2012): “Why doesnt technology flow
 from rich to poor countries?” Working Papers 2012-040, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
 Louis.

Cole, S., X. Gine, J. Tobacman, P. Topalova, R. Townsend, and J. Vickery
 (2013): “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India,” American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 104–35.

Cooley, T., R. Marimon, and V. Quadrini (2004): “Aggregate Consequences of Lim-
 ited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 817–847.

Cooley, T. F. and V. Quadrini (2001): “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,”
 American Economic Review, 91, 1286–1310.

Crepon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, and W. Pariente (2015): “Estimating the Impact
 of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
 Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 123–50.

de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008): “Returns to Capital in Mi-
  croenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
  1329–1372.

Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2013): “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from
 Health Savings Experiments,” American Economic Review, 103, 1138–71.

Erosa, A. and A. Hidalgo Cabrillana (2008): “On Finance as a Theory of TFP,
 Cross-Industry Productivity Differences, and Economic Rents,” International Economic
 Review, 49, 437–473.



                                           31
Evans, D. S. and B. Jovanovic (1989): “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
 under Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 808–827.

Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. R. Quinn, and C. Woodruff (2011): “When
  is capital enough to get female microenterprises growing? Evidence from a randomized
  experiment in Ghana,” NBER Working Papers 17207, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Field, E. and R. Pande (2008): “Repayment Frequency and Default in Microfinance:
  Evidence From India,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 501–509.

Field, E., R. Pande, J. Papp, and N. Rigol (2013): “Does the Classic Microfinance
  Model Discourage Entrepreneurship among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from India,”
  American Economic Review, 103, 2196–2226.

Gentry, W. M. and R. G. Hubbard (2004): “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving,”
 The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 4, 1–57.

Ghatak, M. and N.-H. Jiang (2002): “A simple model of inequality, occupational choice,
 and development,” Journal of Development Economics, 69, 205–226.

Ghatak, M., M. Morelli, and T. Sjostrom (2001): “Occupational Choice and Dy-
 namic Incentives,” Review of Economic Studies, 68, 781–810.

Giné, X. and R. M. Townsend (2004): “Evaluation of Financial Liberalization: A Gen-
 eral Equilibrium Model with Constrained Occupation Choice,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 74, 269–307.

Greaney, B., J. P. Kaboski, and E. V. Leemput (2013): “Can Self-Help Groups
 Really Be “Self-Help”?” NBER Working Papers 18970, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc.

Greenwood, J., J. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2013): “Quantifying the Impact of Fi-
 nancial Development on Economic Development,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16,
 194–215.

Holmes, T. J. and J. J. Stevens (2014): “An Alternative Theory of the Plant Size
 Distribution, with Geography and Intra- and International Trade,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 122, pp. 369–421.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”
 Econometrica, 60, 1127–50.

——— (2014): “Firms, Misallocation, and Aggregate Productivity: A Review,” Annual
 Review of Economics, 6, 735–770.


                                          32
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. Klenow (2007): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 97, 562–585.

——— (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 124, 1403–1448.

——— (forthcoming): “The Life-Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,” Quarterly Journal
 of Economics.

Hurst, E. and A. Lusardi (2004): “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and En-
 trepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 319–347.

Hurst, E. and B. W. Pugsley (2011): “What do Small Businesses Do?” Brookings
 Papers on Economic Activity, 43, 73–142.

Jeong, H. and R. M. Townsend (2007): “Sources of TFP Growth: Occupational Choice
  and Financial Deepening,” Economic Theory, 32, 197–221.

——— (2008): “Growth and Inequality: Model Evaluation Based on an Estimation-
 Calibration Strategy,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12, 231–284.

Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
  American Economic Review, 102, 238–71.

Jones, C. I. (1994): “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 34, 359–382.

Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-
 Experimental Microfinance Initiative,” Econometrica, 79, 1357–1406.

Kaboski, J. P., M. Lipscomb, and V. Midrigan (2014): “The Aggregate Impact of
 Household Saving and Borrowing Constraints: Designing a Field Experiment in Uganda,”
 American Economic Review, 104, 171–76.

Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend (2012): “The Impact of Credit on Village
 Economies,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 98–133.

Karaivanov, A. and R. M. Townsend (2014): “Dynamic Financial Constraints: Dis-
 tinguishing Mechanism Design From Exogenously Incomplete Regimes,” Econometrica,
 82, 887–959.

Karlan, D., R. Knight, and C. Udry (2014): “Consulting and Capital Experiments
 with Microenterprise Tailors in Ghana,” Unpublished manuscript, Yale University.

Karlan, D., R. D. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry (2012): “Agricultural Decisions
 after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints,” NBER Working Papers 18463, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                         33
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2009): “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information
 Asymmetries With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment,” Econometrica, 77, 1993–2008.

——— (2010): “Expanding Microenterprise Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply De-
 cisions to Estimate the Impacts in Manila,” Unpublished manuscript, Yale University.

Khan, A. and J. K. Thomas (2013): “Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an
 Economy with Production Heterogeneity,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 1055 – 1107.

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993): “Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth: Theory
 and Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, 513–542.

Kitao, S. (2008): “Entrepreneurship, taxation and capital investment,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 11, 44–69.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (2012): “Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,”
 NBER Working Papers 17934, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Lee, S. Y. (2012): “Entrepreneurs, Managers and Inequality,” Working Papers 12-15, Uni-
  versity of Mannheim, Department of Economics.

Lloyd-Ellis, H. and D. Bernhardt (2000): “Enterprise, Inequality and Economic
  Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 67, 147–168.

Lopez-Martin, B. (2013): “From Firm Productivity Dynamics to Aggregate Efficiency,”
 Unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota.

Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1978): “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
 Economics, 9, 508–523.

Luttmer, E. G. J. (2011): “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 78, 1042–1068.

Matsuyama, K. (2011): “Imperfect Credit Markets, Household Wealth Distribution, and
 Development,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 339–362.

McKenzie, D. (2014): “Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Exper-
 imental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition,” Unpublished manuscript, World
 Bank.

McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2008): “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
 and Access to Finance in Mexico,” World Bank Economic Review, 22, 457–482.

McKenzie, D. J., S. de Mel, and C. Woodruff (2008): “Returns to Capital in
 Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 123, 1329–1372.

                                           34
McKenzie, D. J. and C. Woodruff (2006): “Do Entry Costs Provide an Empirical Basis
 for Poverty Traps? Evidence from Mexican Microenterprises.” Economic Development and
 Cultural Change, 55, 3–42.

Meh, C. (2005): “Entrepreneurship, Wealth Inequality, and Taxation,” Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 8, 688–719.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695–1725.

Midrigan, V. and D. Y. Xu (2014): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-
 Level Data,” American Economic Review, 104, 422–58.

Mobarak, A. M. and M. Rosenzweig (2012): “Selling Formal Insurance to the Infor-
 mally Insured,” Working Papers 97, Yale University, Department of Economics.

Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo
 Capital Misallocation?” American Economic Review, 104, 3186–3221.

Mondragon-Velez, C. (2009): “The probability of transition to entrepreneurship revis-
 ited: wealth, education and age,” Annals of Finance, 5, 421–441.

Morduch, J., S. Ravi, and J. Bauchet (2012): “Failure vs. Displacement: Why An
 Innovative Anti-Poverty Program Showed No Net Impact,” Discussion Paper Series 32,
 PRIMCED.

Moskowitz, T. J. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2002): “The Returns to Entrepreneurial
 Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Review, 92, 745–
 778.

Nyshadham, A. (2014): “Heterogeneity in the Returns to Investment in Poor Villages,”
 University of Southern California.

Paulson, A. and R. Townsend (2005): “Financial Constraints and Entrepreneurship:
  Evidence from the Thai Financial Crisis,” Economic Perspective, 29, 34–48.

Paulson, A. L. and R. M. Townsend (2004): “Entrepreneurship and Financial Con-
  straints in Thailand,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 10, 229–262.

Paulson, A. L., R. M. Townsend, and A. Karaivanov (2006): “Distinguishing Lim-
  ited Liability from Moral Hazard in a Model of Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 114, 100–144.

Pawasutipaisit, A. and R. M. Townsend (2011): “Wealth accumulation and factors
  accounting for success,” Journal of Econometrics, 161, 56–81.


                                          35
Piketty, T. (1997): “The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with
  Credit Rationing,” Review of Economic Studies, 64, 173–189.

Pitt, M. M. and S. R. Khandker (1998): “The Impact of Group-Based Credit Programs
  on Poor Households in Bangladesh: Does the Gender of Participants Matter?” Journal of
  Political Economy, 106, 958996.

Poschke, M. (2013): “Entrepreneurs Out of Necessity: A Snapshot,” Applied Economics
 Letters, 20, 658–663.

Quadrini, V. (1999): “The Importance of Entrepreneurship for Wealth Concentration and
 Mobility,” Review of Income and Wealth, 45, 1–19.

——— (2000): “Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility,” Review of Economic Dy-
 namics, 3, 1–40.

——— (2009): “Entrepreneurship in macroeconomics,” Annals of Finance, 5, 295–311.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1998): “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
 Economic Review, 88, 559–586.

Rampini, A. A. and S. Viswanathan (2010): “Collateral, Risk Management, and the
 Distribution of Debt Capacity,” Journal of Finance, 65, 2293–2322.

Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
 with Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707–720.

Roy, A. D. (1951): “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic
 Papers, 3, pp. 135–146.

Scheuer, F. (2014): “Entrepreneurial Taxation with Endogenous Entry,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 6, 126–63.

Shourideh, A. and A. Zetlin-Jones (2014): “External Financing and the Role of
  Financial Frictions over the Business Cycle: Measurement and Theory,” Unpublished
  manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.

Tarozzi, A., J. Desai, and K. Johnson (2015): “The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence
 from Ethiopia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 54–89.

Townsend, R. M. (1979): “Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state
 verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 265–293.

——— (2010): Financial Systems in Developing Economies: Growth, Inequality and Policy
 Evaluation in Thailand., Oxford: Oxford University Press.



                                          36
                     10
                                                    perfect credit
                     9                              imperfect credit (PE)
                                                    imperfect credit (GE)
                     8

                     7

                     6
       wealth/wage




                     5

                     4

                     3

                     2

                     1

                     0
                      0   2        4             6           8              10
                              unconstrained profit/wage




Figure 1: Occupational Choice Map. Those to the right (left) of the respective line choose
to be entrepreneurs (workers). We follow the parametrization and calibration in Buera and
Shin (2013). In particular, for the cases with financial frictions we assume a simple collateral
constraint k ≤ a/(1 − φ), with φ = 0.26. The dotted and dashed lines use the prices in the
stationary equilibrium with perfect credit. The horizontal axis shows the productivity as the
ratio of unconstrained entrepreneurial profits to wage, calculated using the prices from the
stationary equilibrium with perfect credit. The veritcal axis measures the wealth-to-wage
ratio, again, using the wage in the stationary equilibrium with perfect credit. The solid line
is calculated using the prices in the stationary equilibrium with φ = 0.26.




                                                     37
                             Small Scale Sector                  Large Scale Sector
                     15                                  15
                                                                          worker/entrepr.
                                                                          disaving/saving


                     10                                  10
       wealth/wage




                     5                                   5




                     0                                   0
                     −5          0         5        10   −5          0         5        10
                          unconstrained profits/wage          unconstrained profits/wage




Figure 2: Occupational and Saving Map, Small and Large Scale Sectors. Those to the right
(left) of the respective dashed line choose to be entrepreneurs (workers). We follow the
parametrization and calibration in Buera et al. (2011). In particular, the financial friction
arises endogenously from a limited commitment problem parametrized by the share of profits
that can be recovered by the lender upon default, φ. We use φ = 0.12, which implies a ratio
of external finance to GDP of 0.3, the typical value for a low-income country, and the prices
in the corresponding stationary equilibrium. The horizontal axis measures the productivity
as the ratio between the unconstrained profits in the sector and the wage. The vertical axis
measures the wealth to wage ratio.




                                                                   38
                 0.8                                                                            0.4
                                                       growth differential 1−5 vs. 11+ years


                                 small scale sector
                 0.7             large scale sector                                            0.35
                 0.6                                                                            0.3
average growth




                 0.5                                                                           0.25
                 0.4                                                                            0.2
                 0.3                                                                           0.15
                 0.2                                                                            0.1
                 0.1                                                                           0.05
                  0                                                                              0
                   0   10       20        30      40                                              0              0.5          1
                            age (years)                                                                contract enforcement




Figure 3: Employment Growth by Age. We follow the parametrization and calibration in
Buera et al. (2011). In particular, the financial friction arises endogenously from a limited
commitment problem parametrized by the share of profits that can be recovered by the
lender upon default, φ. In the left panel we use φ = 0.12, which implies a ratio of external
finance to GDP of 0.3, the typical value for a low income country, and the prices in the
corresponding stationary equilibrium.




                                                                                                      39
