                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    QUANTITATIVE MODELS OF WEALTH INEQUALITY:
                                    A SURVEY

                                         Mariacristina De Nardi

                                         Working Paper 21106
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21106


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2015




I gratefully acknowledge support from the ERC, grant 614328 “Savings and Risks” and from the ESRC
through the Centre for Macroeconomics. I thank Marco Bassetto, Neele Balke, Margherita Borella,
Marco Cagetti, Helen Koshy, Tim Lee, Cormac O’Dea, Vasia Panousi, José-Victor Ríos-Rull, and
Neng Wang for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the federal government,
or the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mariacristina De Nardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Quantitative Models of Wealth Inequality: A Survey
Mariacristina De Nardi
NBER Working Paper No. 21106
April 2015, Revised June 2015
JEL No. D14,D31,E21,H2

                                            ABSTRACT

While in the data wealth is concentrated in the hands of a small number of rich people and the saving
rate of the rich is high, many models used for quantitative policy evaluation fail to match these facts.
In addition, some of the models that succeed in matching these facts have radically different policy
implications, depending on the nature and strength of the saving motives assumed. This paper surveys
the savings mechanisms proposed so far (preference heterogeneity, transmission of bequests and human
capital across generations, entrepreneurship, and high earnings risk for the top earners) and argues
that more work is needed to understand wealth inequality and the saving motives behind it, and to
evaluate policy more reliably.


Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London
and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org
1    Introduction

Wealth is much more unequally distributed than labor earnings and income,
and the wealthy keep saving at high rates. What do we know about the
determinants of this high wealth concentration and saving behavior? The
answer to this question is important for two reasons. First, there is much
debate about why some people are rich and some people are poor. Second, both
the redistributive and aggregate consequences of government taxes and transfer
programs crucially depend on the type and strength of people’s saving motives.
Dynamic quantitative models of wealth inequality can help us understand and
quantify the determinants of the outcomes that we observe in the data and to
evaluate the consequences of policy reform.
    This survey ﬁrst discusses the workhorse framework that is often used to
study wealth inequality, the Bewley [12] model, which features an incomplete
markets environment in which people save to self-insure against idiosyncratic
earnings shocks. In the basic Bewley model, precautionary savings are the
key force driving wealth concentration. However, the nature of precautionary
savings implies that households save to self-insure against earnings risk but
that, as a result, the saving rate decreases and then turns negative when one’s
net worth is large enough relative to one’s labor earnings. Hence, the saving
rate of the wealthy in these models is negative. In contrast, in the U.S. data for
instance, rich people keep saving at high rates, which explains the emergence
and persistence of their very large estates. The basic version of the model thus
fails to generate the high concentration of wealth in the hands of the richest
few because it misses the fact that rich people keep saving.
    The survey then moves onto discussion previous work that has uncovered
forces that, when introduced into a Bewley model, keep the saving rates of the
wealthiest high and thus generate higher wealth concentration in the hands of
a small fraction of households. These forces include heterogeneity in patience,
transmission of bequests and human capital across generations, entrepreneur-
ship or high returns to capital coupled with borrowing constraints, and high
earnings risk for the top earners.

                                        2
    Finally, the survey shows how diﬀerent policy implications can be in an
environments in which the rich save for diﬀerent reasons and argues that more
work is needed to evaluate both previously uncovered and new explanations,
both individually and jointly, and to quantitatively assess their importance.
It also provides a number of avenues that can lead to fruitful research.
    The rest of this survey is organized as follows. Section 2 brieﬂy discusses the
main facts about wealth inequality. Section 3 formalizes two versions of the Be-
wley model (ﬁrst in an inﬁnitely-lived framework and then in an overlapping-
generations framework), discusses the main intuition behind saving motives,
and then highlights the quantitative implications in terms of wealth inequality
and saving behavior. Section 4 studies the eﬀects of allowing for heterogenous
preferences and, in particular, for heterogeneous patience. Section 5 discusses
an economy in which there are intergenerational transmission of human capi-
tal and both accidental and voluntary bequests. Section 6 analyzes the role of
entrepreneurship in an environment in which an entrepreneur can have very
high returns from running a ﬁrm but faces borrowing constraints. Section 7
highlights the eﬀects of introducing large earnings risk for the top earners.
Section 8 concludes by summarizing what we have learned so far and points
to directions for future research.


2    Some key facts about wealth inequality

Key facts about the distribution of wealth have been highlighted in a large
number of studies, including Wolﬀ [102] and [101], Kennickell [66], and Cagetti
and De Nardi (in an older survey of both data and models [25]).
    The most striking aspect of the wealth distribution in the United States is
its degree of concentration. Over the past 30 years or so, households in the top
1% of the wealth distribution have held about one-third of the total wealth in
the economy, and those in the top 5% have held more than half. At the other
extreme, many households (more than 10%) have little or no assets.
    While there is agreement that the share held by the richest few is very
high, the extent to which the shares of the richest have changed over time

                                        3
(and why) is still subject of some debate (Piketty [86], Saez and Zucman [95],
Bricker et al. [16], and Kopczuk [69]). Understanding why wealth inequality
changes over time in a dynamic quantitative model is very important, but
understanding the determinants of inequality at a point in time is a good
precursor to studying the evolution of inequality over time. Hence, in this
survey, we focus on understanding how wealth inequality arises in steady-state
dynamic quantitative models.1
     An important related observation is that the concentration of wealth is
much higher than that of earnings and income (Dı́az-Giménez et al. [35] and
Budria et al. [91]). For example, in 1992 the Gini indexes for labor earnings,
income (inclusive of transfers), and wealth were, respectively, .63, .57, and .78
(Dı́az-Giménez et al. [35]), while in 1995 they were .61, .55 and .80 (Budria et
al. [91]).
     Economic models have had diﬃculties in quantitatively generating the ob-
served degree of wealth concentration from the observed income inequality.
The question is what mechanisms generate saving behavior that leads to a
distribution of asset holdings consistent with the data. In addition, the corre-
lation between labor earnings, income, and wealth is positive, but well below
one. Consistent with these ﬁndings, Hendricks [59] ﬁnds that the correlation
coeﬃcient between lifetime earnings and wealth at retirement (0.61) is much
less than unity.
     Several studies have documented signiﬁcant diﬀerences in saving behav-
ior across various groups that might help shed light on the previous facts on
wealth. (See Browning and Lusardi [18] for a review of the literature.) In par-
ticular, Dynan et al. [41] show that in the U.S., higher-lifetime-income house-
holds save a larger fraction of their income than lower-lifetime-income house-
holds. De Nardi et al. [38] show that, among the elderly, people with higher
lifetime income not only reach retirement with more wealth, but also run down
their net worth during the retirement period more slowly, and that the patterns
   1
    For an interesting modeling of how consumption and income (but not wealth) inequality
evolve over time, see Kruger and Perri [71]. For empirical papers studying changes of earn-
ings processes over time, see, among others, DeBacker et al. [32], Sabelhaus and Song [94],
and Dynan et al. [42].

                                            4
of out-of-pocket medical spending help account for the high wealth holdings
of the higher income people during the retirement period. Quadrini [87] doc-
uments that entrepreneurs, who tend to be among the richest households,
exhibit higher saving rates. Buera [19] and [20] ﬁnds high saving behavior for
entrepreneurs, both before and after entering entrepreneurship, thus indicating
that people might save to both enter and expand one’s business.
    The extent to which rich households stay rich and poor households stay
poor over time, or mobility in both earnings and wealth, is an additional impor-
tant dimension to keep in mind when thinking about cross-sectional inequality
at a point in time. Hurst et al. [62] use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) data to analyze wealth mobility between 1984 and 1994 and document
that most of the mobility occurs in the mid-range deciles, while the top and
bottom ones show high persistence. Using the same dataset, Quadrini [87]
studies the wealth mobility for entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs, suggest-
ing that entrepreneurs are more upwardly mobile. Unfortunately, the PSID
does not allow us to study what happens at the top percentiles. Some progress
has been made by Guvenen et al. [51] by analyzing administrative data for
earnings in the U.S. Still, the question of how volatile and persistent are earn-
ings and wealth of the super-rich remains open to investigation and likely to
be of crucial importance in aﬀecting their saving behavior.
    These facts not help inform about potential saving motives, but also help
discipline their strength and dynamics over time. At least a subset of these
facts will be used in turn, together with other facts, to discipline each of the
quantitative models that we now move to analyzing.


3       Basic Bewley models, saving behavior, and wealth
        inequality

Bewley models are incomplete-market models in which households are often
ex-ante identical,2 in the sense that they face the same stochastic processes,
    2
    See Ljungqvist and Sargent [80] for an overview of Bewley models (sometimes also called
Aiyagari-Bewley-Huggett-İmrohoroğlu models), including properties and solution methods.

                                            5
but are ex-post heterogeneous, because they receive diﬀerent sequences of re-
alizations of the shocks. An exogenously speciﬁed earnings process is typically
the source of these shocks, and its properties are usually estimated from micro-
level data on earnings. Aiyagari [2] and Hansen and İmrohoroğlu [52] provide
early general equilibrium versions of Bewley models.
    While computing transitions is sometimes feasible, these models are usually
solved for stationary equilibria. Since it is assumed that there is no aggregate
uncertainty, in a stationary equilibrium there is a constant distribution of peo-
ple over state variables, hence the economy is time-invariant. However, people
move up and down the distribution and thus face considerable uncertainty at
the individual level.
    These models endogenously generate diﬀerences in asset holdings and hence
some wealth concentration as a result of the household’s desire to save and the
realization of the exogenous shocks.

3.1   A basic infinitely-lived Bewley model

Consider a Bewley model populated by a continuum of inﬁnitely-lived agents
with preferences             {∞              }
                               ∑
                           E       β t u(ct ) ,
                                     t=1

where u(ct ) is a constant relative-risk aversion utility function.
    The labor endowment of each household is given by an idiosyncratic labor
productivity shock z, which assumes a ﬁnite number of possible values and
follows a ﬁrst order Markov process with transition matrix Γ(z). There is only
one asset, a, that people can use to self-insure against earnings risk.
    A constant-returns-to-scale production technology converts aggregate cap-
ital (K) and aggregate labor (L) into aggregate output (Y ).
    During each period, each household chooses how much to consume (c) and
save for next period by holding risk free assets (a′ ). The household’s state
See Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull [89] for a discussion about why we need incomplete-market
models to study wealth inequality.


                                           6
variables are thus denoted by x = (a, z), where a is asset holdings carried into
the period and z is the labor shock endowment.
   The household’s recursive problem can thus be written as
                                 {                            }
                                            [               ]
                    V (x) = max′
                                   u(c) + βE V (a′ , z ′ )|x
                                (c,a )


subject to
                                c + a′ = (1 + r)a + zw

                                     c ≥ 0,       a′ ≥ a,

where r is the interest rate net of taxes and depreciation, w is the wage, and
a is a net borrowing limit.3
    At every point in time, this model economy can be described by a proba-
bility distribution of people over assets a and earnings shocks z.
    A stationary equilibrium for this economy is a set of consumption and sav-
ing rules, prices, aggregate capital and labor, and an invariant distribution of
households over the state variables of the system such that: i. Given prices,
the decision rules solve the household’s recursive problem. ii. Aggregate capi-
tal is equal to total savings by the households in the economy, while aggregate
labor is equal to total labor supplied by the households in the economy. iii.
The interest rate and the wage rate equal the marginal product of capital, net
of depreciation, and the marginal product of labor. iv. The constant distribu-
tion of people is induced by the law of motion of the system (determined by
the exogenous earnings shocks) and by the endogenous policy functions of the
households.
    A version of this model is quantiﬁed by Aiyagari [2], who adopts a yearly
labor earnings following a ﬁrst-order autoregressive process in logs, with an
autocorrelation of 0.6 and a standard deviation of the innovations of 0.2. This
results in an unconditional coeﬃcient of variation of 0.31. These ﬁgures are
based on estimates from Abowd and Card [1], who use micro-level panel data
to compute their estimates. These ﬁgures are also consistent with the ﬁnd-
   3
    See Ljungqvist and Sargent [80] for an excellent discussion of ad-hoc borrowing limits,
as opposed to “natural” borrowing limits in Bewley models.
                                              7
ings of Heaton and Lucas [54], who use data from the PSID. Aiyagari also
considers a process with twice the standard deviation of the innovation for
earnings, which results in an unconditional coeﬃcient of variation of 0.63; this
is a much higher variability process than typically estimated in the literature.
These continuous stochastic processes are discretized into Markov Chains using
quadrature methods to solve the model. Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull [89] summa-
rize the implications of this model and these two earnings parameterizations,
which also correspond to diﬀerent levels of cross-sectional earnings inequality.


                                  % wealth in top
                          Gini   1% 5%       20%
                          U.S. data, 1989 SCF
                          .78 29       53      80
                          Aiyagari Baseline
                          .38 3.2 12.2        41.0
                          Aiyagari higher variability
                          .41 4.0 15.6        44.6

Table 1: A Bewley model with inﬁnitely-lived agents. Data from the 1989 Survey
of Consumer Finances (SCF) in the top line of data and corresponding simulated
models in the bottom two lines of data.


    Table 1 reports values for the wealth distribution. The ﬁrst line refers to
data from the 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) and shows that, in the
data, wealth is highly unevenly distributed. The Gini coeﬃcient is 0.8 and the
wealthiest 1% of people hold 29% of net worth, while the wealthiest 5% hold
53% of total net worth. The second line of data refers to the baseline Aiyagari
calibration of an inﬁnitely-lived Bewley model, while the last line increases
earnings volatility as done by Aiyagari. Comparing these lines makes it clear
that this version of the model comes nowhere near to matching either the
concentration of wealth in the hands of the richest few or the main features
of the wealth distribution, including the Gini coeﬃcient. For instance, the
richest 1% of people in these versions of the model hold, at most, 4% of total
                                       8
net worth, compared with over one-third in the data, and the Gini coeﬃcient
generated by the model is half the one in the data.
    The key force driving savings in this framework is that households wish to
hold a buﬀer stock of assets to self-insure against earnings ﬂuctuations (Car-
roll [28]). Workers that experience a high earnings shock during the current
period and have low assets, save because they are experiencing a high earnings
shock and want to smooth their consumption over time. In contrast, workers
that experience a high earnings shock during the current period but have high
assets dissave, and the richer they are, the higher their rate of dissaving. Thus,
once a buﬀer stock of wealth is reached, the agents don’t save any more. For
this reason, the model is not capable of explaining why rich people keep saving
at very high rates. An implication of this result is that what matters in gener-
ating wealth dispersion are temporary diﬀerences in earnings, not permanent
ones and that given that households save against idiosyncratic shocks, intro-
ducing ex-ante heterogeneity (for diﬀerent skills or education levels) does not
help in generating more concentration of wealth, because it does not change
the nature of uncertainty that people face (see Quadrini and Rı́os-Rull [89] for
more details).

3.2   A basic overlapping-generations Bewley model

Huggett [60] studied wealth inequality in an overlapping-generations Bewley
model, in which during each period a continuum of agents are born. These
agents live at most N periods and face an age-dependent survival probability
st of surviving up to age t, conditional on surviving up to age t − 1. The
demographic patterns are assumed to be stable, hence age t agents make up a
constant fraction µt of the population at every point in time.
    All agents value consumption as follows
                            { N                     }
                              ∑ (            )
                          E      β t Πtj=1 st u(ct ) ,
                               t=1

where u(ct ) is the constant relative-risk aversion ﬂow of utility from consump-
tion, and the expected value is computed with respect to the household’s
                                        9
earnings shocks.
    The labor endowment of each household is given by a function e(z, t), which
depends on the agent’s age t and on an idiosyncratic labor productivity shock
z, which assumes a ﬁnite number of possible values and follows a ﬁrst-order
Markov chain with transition matrix Γ(z).
    There are no annuity markets.4 People save to insure against earnings
risk, for retirement, and in case they live a long life. People who die pre-
maturely leave accidental bequests. Thus, compared with the previous frame-
work, the one with inﬁnitely-lived agents, two more saving motives are present:
to smooth consumption during retirement and to self-insure against longevity
risk. In principle, these additional saving motives could generate more wealth
inequality and higher saving rates than the previous version of the model.
    As in the inﬁnitely-lived version of the Bewley framework, there is a constant-
returns-to-scale production technology that converts aggregate capital (K) and
labor (L) into output (Y ).
    Similarly, during each period each household chooses how much to consume
(c) and save for next period by holding risk free assets (a′ ). At each age t, the
household’s state variables are (a, z), where a is asset holdings carried into the
period and z is the labor shock endowment.
    The household’s recursive problem can be written as:
                                 {                                       }
                                                [                      ]
               V (a, z, t) = max
                               ′
                                  u(c) + βst+1 E v(a′ , z ′ , t + 1)|z
                              (c,a )


subject to
                         c + a′ = (1 + r)a + e(z, t)w + T + bt

                     c ≥ 0,     a′ ≥ a and a′ ≥ 0 if             t=N

where r is the interest rate net of taxes and depreciation, w is the wage net of
taxes, T are accidental bequests left by all of the deceased in a period, which are
   4
     This is a commonly used assumption because the annuity market is very small in prac-
tice. Eichenbaum and Peled [43] show that in the presence of moral hazard people, will
choose to self-insure rather than use annuity markets, even if the rate of return on annuities
is high.

                                             10
assumed to be redistributed by the government to all people alive, and bt are
Social Security payments to the retirees. Modeling Social Security explicitly is
important because Social Security redistributes a signiﬁcant fraction of income
from the young to the old and thus reduces the saving rate and changes the
aggregate capital-output ratio.
    At every point in time, this model economy can be described by a proba-
bility distribution of people over age t, assets a, and earnings shocks z.
    A stationary equilibrium for this economy can be deﬁned analogously to the
one described for the inﬁnitely-lived model, with the additional requirements
that during each period total lump-sum transfers received by the households
alive equal accidental bequests left by the deceased and the government budget
constraint balances every period.
    Huggett [60] calibrates this model economy to key features of the U.S.
data and uses diﬀerent versions of it to quantify how much wealth inequality
can be generated using a pure life-cycle model with labor earnings shocks and
uncertain life span.

     Transfer       Percentage wealth in the top          Percentage with
      wealth Wealth                                         negative or
       ratio  Gini  1% 5% 20% 40% 60%                       zero wealth
     1989 U.S. data
       .60        .78    29 53      80    93   98             5.8–15.0
     A basic overlapping-generations Bewley model
       .67        .67     7   27    69    90   98                17

   Table 2: A basic overlapping-generations Bewley model, from De Nardi [36]



    The second line of Table 2 reports De Nardi’s [36] version of Huggett’s
model (this version of the results is reported for easier comparability with re-
sults coming later on, but Huggett’s numbers are very similar). The ﬁrst line
of the table refers to the 1989 U.S. data. The second one refers to a version of
Huggett’s model economy in which there are only accidental bequests, which
are redistributed equally to all people alive every year. That model economy
                                        11
succeeds in matching the U.S. Gini coeﬃcient for wealth, but the concentra-
tion is obtained by having too many people holding little wealth and by not
concentrating enough wealth in the upper tail of the wealth distribution. The
key reason of this failure is that in the data the rich (people with high per-
manent income) have a very high saving rate, while in the model households
that have accumulated a suﬃciently high buﬀer stock of assets and retirement
saving don’t keep saving until they reach huge levels of wealth. Thus, the
additional saving motives in this version of the model (saving for retirement
and for longevity risk) help bring the implications of the model a little closer
to the data, but do not go far enough in that direction as they do not raise
the saving rate of people by enough as they get richer.
    Huggett also ﬁnds that relaxing the household’s borrowing constraint in-
creases the fraction of people bunched at zero or negative wealth, but does
not increase much the asset holdings of the rich, and hence does not help in
generating a distribution of wealth closer to the observed one. In addition, he
documents the amount of wealth inequality generated by his model at diﬀer-
ent ages and shows that, starting from age 40, the model underpredicts the
amount of wealth inequality by age.

3.3    What we learn from basic quantitative Bewley models

The results in the two previous subsections show that basic Bewley models,
whether featuring inﬁnitely-lived agents or life-cycle agents with more realistic
patterns of earnings and savings over the life cycle, are far from doing a good
job of matching the observed distribution of wealth. In particular, while they
match aggregate wealth held in the economy, they do so by generating rich
people who are not nearly rich enough, middle-class people who are too rich,
and poor people who are too poor, compared with the actual data.5
   5
     Incomplete-market models can be applied to study many interesting and important
questions that go beyond wealth inequality and thus the scope of this survey. See Quadrini
and Victor Rı́os-Rull [90], Krusell and Smith [73], Guvenen [50], and Heathcote et al. [53]
for surveys on this.




                                            12
3.4   Analytically tractable Bewley models

There is work that makes simplifying assumptions to characterize analytically
various versions of saving models in presence of idiosyncratic risk. Among oth-
ers, Caballero [21] and Wang [99] study consumption and precautionary sav-
ings with Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA) preferences. Wang [100]
studies a continuous-time Bewley model with CARA utility and Uzawas dis-
counting function in which the joint wealth-income distribution can be char-
acterized in closed form. Benhabib and Bisin [9] characterize the dynamics
of the distribution of wealth in an economy with intergenerational transmis-
sion of wealth and redistributive ﬁscal policy. They show that the stationary
wealth distribution is a Pareto distribution and they study analytically the
its dependence on capital income taxes, estate taxes, and welfare subsidies.
Benhabib et al. [10] evaluate the dynamics of the distribution of wealth in
an overlapping generation economy with ﬁnitely lived agents and intergenera-
tional transmission of wealth. They show that in this framework the stationary
wealth distribution is still a Pareto distribution in the right tail and that it is
capital income risk, rather than labor income risk, that drives the properties
of the right tail of the wealth distribution. Fernholz [44] introduces new tech-
niques to obtain a closed-form characterization of the equilibrium distribution
of wealth and wealth mobility in a model in which inﬁnitely lived heteroge-
neous households face uninsurable idiosyncratic investment risk. These works
provide valuable insights. However, in this survey, the focus is on richer quan-
titative models that cannot be solved analytically.


4     Heterogenous preferences

There is enough micro-level empirical evidence of preference heterogeneity (see
for example, Lawrance [76] and Cagetti [23]) to suggest that preference hetero-
genity might be a plausible avenue to help explain the vastly diﬀerent amounts
of wealth held by people.
    Krusell and Smith [72] generalize the inﬁnitely-lived version of the Bewley
model by adding a stochastic process for each dynasty’s discount factor and
                                      13
risk aversion. The discount factor (or the risk aversion) changes on average
every generation and is meant to recover the fact that parents and children in
the same dynasty may have diﬀerent preferences. They show that it is possible
to ﬁnd a stochastic process for the dynasties’ discount factor to match the vari-
ance of the cross-sectional distribution of wealth. They also ﬁnd that hetero-
geneity in risk aversion does not aﬀect the results much (however, Cagetti [22]
shows that this result is sensitive to chosen utility parameter values). Instead,
a small discrepancy between the possible realizations of the discount factors
can generate a more dispersed wealth distribution. However, while captur-
ing the variance of the wealth distribution, their model and calibration fail
to match the extreme degree of concentration of wealth in the hands of the
richest.
    Hendricks [58] studies the eﬀects of preference heterogeneity in a life-cycle
framework with only accidental bequests. As Krusell and Smith, he also
ﬁnds that heterogeneity in risk aversion has very limited eﬀects on saving
and wealth inequality. Moreover, he shows that time preference heterogeneity
makes a modest contribution in accounting for high wealth concentration if
the heterogeneity in discount factors is chosen to generate realistic patterns of
consumption and wealth inequality as cohorts age.
    Also in the spirit of preference heterogeneity, Heer [56] adopts a model
in which richer and poorer people have diﬀerent tastes for leaving bequests,
while Laitner [74] assumes that all households save for life-cycle purposes but
that only some of them care about their children. Laitner allows for perfect
annuity markets, therefore all bequests are voluntary, and there is no earning
risk over the life cycle, hence no precautionary savings. In addition, he matches
the concentration in the upper tail of the wealth distribution by choosing the
fraction of households that behave as a dynasty and the distribution of wealth
within the dynasty (which is indeterminate in the model).
    More in the spirit of experimenting with preferences, rather than of pref-
erence heterogeneity, Dı́az, Pijoan-Mas, and Rı́os-Rull [34] study the eﬀect of
habit formation and ﬁnd that it actually decreases the concentration of wealth
generated by this type of model. In fact, habits act similarly to increased

                                       14
risk aversion, and more risk aversion tends to increase the saving of everyone
and to dampen wealth dispersion. Carroll [29], instead, suggests a “capitalist
spirit” model, in which ﬁnitely-lived consumers have wealth in the utility func-
tion, which can be calibrated to make wealth a luxury good, thus generating
nonhomothetic preferences.
    In sum, previous work indicates that preference heterogeneity, and espe-
cially patience heterogenity, can generate increased wealth dispersion. It would
be interesting to deepen the previous analysis by both studying richer pro-
cesses for patience and allowing for richer formulations of the utility function
in which, for instance, risk aversion and intertemporal substitution do not have
to coincide (see Wang et al [98] for some interesting ﬁndings on this).


5   Transmission of human capital and voluntary bequests

Kotlikoﬀ and Summers [70] argue that intergenerational transmission of wealth,
as opposed to life-cycle savings, accounts for the majority of aggregate capital
formation. Further studies have found that intergenerational transfers account
for at least 50-60% of total wealth accumulation (Gale and Scholz [46]). Given
that intergenerational transfers are so large in the aggregate, they might also
play an important role in shaping wealth inequality.
    Becker and Tomes [8] were the ﬁrst to model the parental decision prob-
lem and to characterize the transmission of both human capital and bequests
across generations. They showed that in the presence of borrowing constraints,
parental transfers ﬁrst come in the form of children’s human capital invest-
ment; and that only after the optimal amount of human capital investment in
children has been achieved, parents start giving monetary transfers, such as
bequests. Bequests are thus a luxury good in this framework.
    De Nardi [36] introduces two types of intergenerational links in the OLG
model used by Huggett: voluntary bequests and transmission of human cap-
ital. She models the utility from bequests as providing a “warm glow” (as
in Andreoni [5]). In this framework, parents and their children are linked by
voluntary and accidental bequests and by the transmission of earnings abil-

                                      15
ity. The households thus save to self-insure against labor earnings shocks and
life-span risk, for retirement, and possibly to leave bequests to their children.
     In De Nardi’s model, therefore, voluntary and accidental bequests coexist
and their relative size and importance are determined by the calibration. Em-
pirically measuring the size of voluntary bequests relative to that of purely ac-
cidental ones (due to uncertainty about the life-span) is challenging. Hurd [61]
estimates a very low marginal utility from leaving bequests. Altonji and Vil-
lanueva [4] also ﬁnd relatively small values for the elasticity of bequests to
permanent income, although they do show that this number increases with
life-time resources. Most of the bequests, however, are concentrated among
the top percentiles, a group that these papers ignore. Looking at a sample of
wealthier retirees, Laitner and Juster [75] ﬁnd that about half of the house-
holds in their sample plan to leave estates and that the amount of wealth
attributable to estate building is signiﬁcant, accounting for half or more of the
total for those who plan to leave bequests.
     Compared with Huggett, the voluntary bequest motive introduces an extra
term in the value function of a retired person who faces a positive probability
of death:
                           {                                                       }
                                                 ′                            ′
(1)       V (a, t) = max ′
                            u(c) + s t βE t V (a   , t + 1) + (1 − s t )ϕ(b(a   ))  ,
                     c,a

where
                                         (   b(a′ ) )1−σ
                                ′
(2)                        ϕ(b(a )) = ϕ1 1 +             ,
                                              ϕ2
where b(a′ ) are estates net of estate taxes, as a function of end of period net
worth. The utility from leaving bequests hence depends on two parameters: ϕ1 ,
which represents the strength of the bequest motive, and ϕ2 , which measures
the extent to which bequests are a luxury good because it aﬀects the marginal
utility of bequests in a nonlinear way (see De Nardi [36] for more discussion
on this). These two parameters are respectively calibrated to the data on the
fraction of capital due to intergenerational transfers and to match one moment
of the observed distribution of bequests, which is that over 30% of singles leave
estates of little or no value. This calibration implies that bequests are a luxury
                                         16
good.
    It should be noted many papers that do not ﬁnd evidence in favor of a
bequest motive, such as Hurd [61] and Hendricks [57], assume that utility is
homotetic in bequests (ϕ2 = 0), thus generating the counterfactual implica-
tion that even very poor people save to leave bequests of signiﬁcant size. In
contrast, De Nardi’s more ﬂexible functional form and parameterization imply
a realistic distribution of estates. Her calibration is also quantitatively consis-
tent with the elasticity of the savings of the elderly to permanent income that
has been estimated from microeconomic data by Altonji and Villanueva [4].

     Transfer       Percentage wealth in the top            Percentage with
      wealth Wealth                                           negative or
       ratio  Gini  1% 5% 20% 40% 60%                         zero wealth
     1989 U.S. data
       .60        .78     29 53      80    93      98       5.8–15.0
     No intergenerational links, equal bequests to all
       .67        .67      7   27    69    90      98          17
     No intergenerational links, unequal bequests to children
       .38        .68      7   27    69    91      99          17
     One link: parent’s bequest motive
       .55        .74     14 37      76    95     100          19
     Both links: parent’s bequest motive and productivity inheritance
       .60        .76     18 42      79    95     100          19

          Table 3: OLG models of wealth inequality, from De Nardi [36]



    Table 3 summarizes De Nardi’s results. The ﬁrst line of the table refers to
the 1989 SCF U.S. data. The second line refers to the version of Huggett’s
model economy in which there are only accidental bequests, which are redis-
tributed equally to all people alive every year, as described earlier.
    The third line refers to an economy in which there are only accidental be-
quests, but the accidental bequests are received by the children of the deceased
only once, upon their parent’s death; and are thus unequally distributed and
                                       17
imply a realistic age of bequest recipience (rather than every period). This
experiment shows that accidental bequests, even if unequally distributed, do
not generate a more unequal distribution. This is because receipt of a bequest
per se does not alter the saving behavior of the richest.
     The ﬁrst column in the table reports the Kotlikoﬀ and Summers’ [70] ratio
of wealth transmitted across generations to aggregate capital. A comparison
of this ratio in lines two and three highlights the fact that Kotlikoﬀ and Sum-
mers’ [70] measure on intergenerational transfers is sensitive to the timing of
transfers because of the way that transfers are capitalized and accumulated
interest is accrued to bequests. If children inherit only once, when their par-
ent dies (rather than every year), then the fraction of wealth attributed to
intergenerational transfers in the model is much lower than the one in the
data.
     The fourth line allows for a voluntary bequest motive and shows that vol-
untary bequests can explain the emergence of large estates, which are often
accumulated in more than one generation and characterize the upper tail of the
wealth distribution in the data. The bequest motive to save is much stronger
for the richest households, who, even when very old, keep some assets to leave
to their children. The rich leave more wealth to their oﬀspring, who, in turn,
tend to do the same. This behavior generates some large estates that are
transmitted across generations because of the voluntary bequests
     The ﬁfth line allows for both voluntary bequests and transmission of ability
and shows that a human-capital link through which children partially inherit
the productivity of their parents generates an even more concentrated wealth
distribution. More productive parents accumulate larger estates and leave
larger bequests to their children, who, in turn, are more productive than av-
erage in the workplace.
     As shown in Figure 1, the presence of a bequest motive also generates
lifetime saving proﬁles that imply slower wealth decumulation in old age for
richer people, consistent with the facts documented by De Nardi et al. [38],
using micro-level data from the Health and Retirement Survey. De Nardi et
al. [38] suggest that medical expenses are another important mechanism that

                                       18
can generate this kind of slow decumulation.
    In a model with intergenerational links that abstracts from medical ex-
penses risk, saving for precautionary purposes and saving for retirement are
the primary factors for wealth accumulation at the lower tail of the distribu-
tion, while saving to leave bequests signiﬁcantly aﬀects the shape of the upper
tail.
                         a                                                  b
     7                                                  7


     6                                                  6


     5                                                  5


     4                                                  4




                                                   Wealth
Wealth




     3                                                  3


     2                                                  2


     1                                                  1


     0                                                  0
     20   30   40   50         60   70   80   90        20   30   40   50         60   70   80   90
                         Age                                                Age



Figure 1: Wealth .1, .3, .5, .7, .9, .95 quantiles. No links, equal bequests to all,
panel a, and Bequest motive, panel b.


    This approach, however, takes the transmission of human capital, or pro-
ductivity, as exogenous. There is a vast literature studying this channel. For
instance, Ayagari et al. [3] study optimal parental investment of time and
money in children, both with perfect and imperfect altruism. Brown et al. [17]
develop a model in which parents and children make investments in the chil-
dren’s education. They show that for an identiﬁable set of parent-child pairs,
parents will rationally under-invest in their child’s education. For these parent-
child pairs, additional ﬁnancial aid will increase educational attainment. Their
evidence thus further points to the importance of modeling this channel to bet-
ter understand wealth inequality. Lee and Seshadri [78] study the importance
of parental investment on the intergenerational transmission of economic sta-
tus, while Lee et al. [79] attempts at identifying the causal eﬀect of parental
human capital on children’s human capital. For surveys about the importance
                                        19
of parental background, see Heckman and Mosso [55] and Bowles et al. [15].
    This approach also assumes that fertility is exogenous and that everyone
has the same number of children. Scholz and Seshadri [96] examine the eﬀects
of children in a life-cycle model with endogenous fertility. They argue that
children have a large eﬀect on household’s net worth and consequently are an
important factor in understanding the wealth distribution. They also ﬁnd that
fertility and credit constraints interact in ways that signiﬁcantly aﬀect wealth
accumulation.
    There is also large wealth inequality within various age and demographic
groups. Venti and Wise [97] and Bernheim at al. [11] show that wealth is
highly dispersed at retirement even for people with similar lifetime incomes
and argue that these diﬀerences cannot be explained only by events such as
family status, health, and inheritances, nor by portfolio choice. Hendricks [57]
focuses on the performance of a basic OLG model on cross-sectional wealth
inequality at retirement age. He shows that, at retirement age, a basic version
of the OLG model overstates wealth diﬀerences between earnings-rich and
earnings-poor, while it understates the amount of wealth inequality conditional
on similar lifetime earnings. De Nardi and Yang [39] show that the OLG
model augmented with voluntary bequests and intergenerational transmission
of earnings also matches the observed cross-sectional diﬀerences in wealth at
retirement and their correlation with lifetime incomes quite well.
    Gokhale et al. [49] aim to evaluate how much wealth inequality at re-
tirement age arises from inheritance inequality. To do so, they construct an
overlapping-generations model that allows for random death, random fertility,
assortative mating, heterogeneous human capital, progressive income taxation,
and Social Security. All of these elements are exogenous and calibrated to the
data. The families are assumed not to care about their oﬀspring, hence all be-
quests are involuntary. To solve the model, they impose that individuals are
inﬁnitely risk averse and that the rate of time preference equals the interest
rate. In their framework, inheritances in the presence of Social Security play
an important role in generating intra-generational wealth inequality at retire-
ment. The intuition is that Social Security annuitizes completely the savings

                                      20
of poor and middle-income people but is a very small fraction of the wealth of
richer people, who thus keep assets to insure against life-span risk.
    Nishiyama [83] adopts an OLG model with bequests and intervivos trans-
fers in which households in the same family line behave strategically. Like
De Nardi, he concludes that the model with intergenerational transfers better
explains the observed wealth distribution, although it does not fully match it.
    Thus, although modeling explicitly intergenerational links helps explain
the savings of the richest, the models by De Nardi and Nishiyama are not ca-
pable of matching the wealth concentration of the richest 1% without adding
complementary forces generating a high wealth concentration for the rich.
De Nardi and Yang [40] merge a version of the model with intergenerational
links with the high earnings risk for the top earners mechanism proposed by
Castañeda et al. [30] that we discuss in Section 7 and ﬁnd that these two forces
together match important features of the data well. More work is warranted
to evaluate the role of intergenerational links in conjunction with other com-
plementary explanations, including preference heterogeneity and out-of-pocket
medical expenses after retirement.


6   Entrepreneurship

Quadrini [88] provides a nice survey on the factors aﬀecting the decision to be-
come an entrepreneur and the aggregate and distributional implications of en-
trepreneurship for savings and investment. In addition, Quadrini [87], Gentry
and Hubbard [47], De Nardi et al. [37] and Buera [19] argue that entrepreneur-
ship is a key element in understanding wealth concentration among the richest
households.
    Cagetti and De Nardi [24] classify as entrepreneurs the households who
declare being self-employed, owning a privately held business (or a share of
one), and having an active management role in it. According to this deﬁnition,
which is consistent with the one in the model that they use, entrepreneurs
constitute a small fraction of the population (about 10%), but hold a large
share of total net worth (about 40%). They show that entrepreneurs constitute

                                       21
    Top %                                                  1   5    10   20
    Whole population
    percentage of total net worth held                   30    54   67   81
    Entrepreneurs
    percentage of households in a given percentile     63 49 39 28
    percentage of net worth held in a given percentile 68 58 53 47

Table 4: From Cagetti and De Nardi [24]. Entrepreneurs and the distribution of
wealth. SCF 1989.



a large fraction of rich people in the data. Table 4, from their paper, shows
that, not only total net worth held by the richest percentiles, but also the
percentage of entrepreneurs in a given wealth percentile (line two) and the
percentage of wealth within that percentile that is owned by entrepreneurs
(line three) are all very high. For example, among the richest 1% of people
in terms of net worth, 63% are entrepreneurs and they hold 68% of the total
wealth held by the wealthiest 1% of people. They also show that alternative
classiﬁcations of entrepreneurship give similar results.
    Cagetti and De Nardi [24] build a model of entrepreneurship with the
following key elements:

  1. Altruistic agents care about their children and face uncertainty about
     their time of death. Thus, they leave both accidental and voluntary
     bequests.

  2. Every period, agents decide whether to run a business or work for a
     wage.

  3. The entrepreneurial production function is given by


                              f (k) = θk ν + (1 − δ)k,

     where k is working capital, θ is entrepreneurial ability, ν is the degree
     of decreasing returns to scale, and δ is depreciation. Cagetti and De
                                     22
       Nardi [26] generalize the entrepreneurial production function to labor
       hiring.

   4. Borrowing constraints imply that

                                        k = a + b(a),

       where a is one’s assets and b(a) is borrowing as a function of one’s assets.

In the formulation adopted in Cagetti and De Nardi [24], b(a) is actually a
function of all of the state variables in the economy and this outcome arises
endogenously from the assumption that contracts are imperfectly enforceable
and lenders take the imperfect enforceability of contracts into account when de-
ciding how much to lend (as in Cooley et al. [31] and Kehoe and Levine [65]).
Besides being more micro-founded, these kind of borrowing constraints also
have the advantage of endogenously responding to economic conditions such
as changing wages and interest rates (see Bassetto et al. [7] for an illustration
and a discussion of this mechanism applied to the Great Recession). However,
simpler kinds of borrowing constraints, such as linear functions of one’s as-
sets, make for models that are easier and faster to solve, and generate similar
implications for cross-sectional wealth inequality at one point in time. For an
application of the classic case in which borrowing is a linear function of one’s
assets in a model with wealth inequality and entrepreneurship, see Kitao [68]
and Meh [81].
    In Cagetti and De Nardi [24]’s calibration, the optimal ﬁrm size is large
and the entrepreneur is borrowing constrained. Thus, entrepreneurs, even
when rich, want to keep saving to grow their ﬁrm to be able to borrow more
and reap higher returns from capital. This is the mechanism that, in this
framework, keeps the rich people’s saving rate high and generates a high wealth
concentration.
    In order to compare buﬀer-stock saving behavior with entrepreneurial sav-
ing behavior, Figure 2 compares the saving rates6 for people who have the
   6
    The saving rate in the graph is deﬁned as assets in a given period minus assets in the
previous period, divided by total income during the period.

                                           23
            Wealth  Fraction of  Percentage wealth in the top
             Gini  entrepreneurs  1% 5% 20%           40%
            Baseline model with entrepreneurs
             0.8        7.50%        31    60                                  83          94

             Table 5: Cagetti and De Nardi [24] model’s implications.


                                    0.4

                                    0.3

                                    0.2

                                    0.1
                     Saving rate



                                     0

                                   −0.1

                                   −0.2

                                   −0.3

                                   −0.4

                                   −0.5

                                   −0.6
                                       0   500   1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
                                                      Wealth, in thousands of dollars



Figure 2: Saving rate for highest-ability workers. Solid line: with high en-
trepreneurial ability; dash-dot line: with no entrepreneurial ability; vertical line:
asset level at which high-entrepreneurial-ability individuals enter entrepreneurship.


highest ability level as workers during the current period. The solid line refers
to the people who get the high entrepreneurial ability level during the current
period, while the dash-dot line refers to those who get the low entrepreneurial
ability draw. Given the same asset level (and potential earnings as work-
ers), the people with high entrepreneurial ability have a much higher saving
rate. As we discussed, the worker with no entrepreneurial ability displays pure
buﬀer-stock saving behavior.
    The people with high entrepreneurial ability become entrepreneurs only
if their wealth is above a certain level, denoted in the graph by a vertical
line. The saving rate of those with high entrepreneurial ability who do not
own enough assets to become entrepreneurs is higher than the one for the
workers because ability is persistent, and the workers with high entrepreneurial

                                                            24
ability save to have a chance to start a business in the future. In this region,
the distance between the solid line and the dash-dot line is solely due to the
higher implicit rate of return from saving that one could obtain becoming an
entrepreneur in the future: all households become workers in this range and
earn the same income, but the desire to become entrepreneurs generates a
higher saving rate for those who have such ability.
    The saving rate of those with high entrepreneurial ability and enough as-
sets to become entrepreneurs is positive and considerably higher than that
for workers. The return on the entrepreneurial activity is high, and the en-
trepreneur would like to increase the size of the ﬁrm by borrowing capital.
However, the borrowing constraint limits the size of the ﬁrm. In order to ex-
pand the business, the entrepreneur must in part self-ﬁnance the increase in
capital. The combination of higher returns from the business together with
the budget constraint thus generates a very high saving rate for entrepreneurs.
As the ﬁrm expands, the returns decrease. Therefore, the saving rate will also
eventually decrease. (We truncate the axis of the graph for easier readability.)
    Table 5 shows the high wealth concentration generated by this model. A
few things are worth mentioning. First, the distribution of wealth is not
matched by construction in the calibration procedure. Second, the model’s
implied returns to capital are in the range of those found by Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jørgensen [82] and Kartashova [64], and hence they are not implausi-
bly high. Third, the model generates entry probabilities as a function of one’s
wealth that are consistent with those estimated by Hurst and Lusardi [63] on
micro-level data and also implies that inheritances are a strong predictor of
business entry.
    It should be noted that in Cagetti and De Nardi’s parameterization, there
is only one level of entrepreneurial ability; and all heterogeneity in ﬁrm size and
asset holdings is due to the interaction between the borrowing constraints and
the stochastic evolution of entrepreneurial and working ability, which make
ﬁrms grow slowly over time. While this makes the calibration very parsimo-
nious and matches many features of the data well, it is clear that there is a
lot more heterogeneity in entrepreneurs and self-employed in the data. Ki-

                                        25
tao [68] allows for multiple entrepreneurial ability levels, but does not discuss
the impact of this generalization.
    Campbell and De Nardi [27] ﬁnd, for instance, that aspirations about the
size of the ﬁrm that one would like to run are diﬀerent for men and women,
and that many people who are trying to start a business also work for an
employer and thus work very long hours in total. It would be interesting to
generalize the model to allow, for instance, for heterogeneity in entrepreneurial
total factor productivity and optimal ﬁrm size (or decreasing-returns-to-scale
parameters), and to convincingly take the model to data to estimate those
additional parameters. Given the data on time allocation, it would also be
interesting to think more about the time allocation decision between working
for an employer, starting and running one’s ﬁrm, working on home production,
and enjoying leisure.
    Finally, Glover and Short [48] study the interplay between entrepreneurial
risks and the decisions to incorporate and to go bankrupt and ﬁnd that capital
shocks constitute important entrepreneurial risks, which generate high welfare
costs. These features are important and deserve more investigation.


7    Large earnings risk for the top earners

Castañeda et al. [30] consider a model economy with two stages of life, working
time and retirement time, in which workers have a constant probability of
retiring at each period, and retirees face a constant probability of dying. Each
household is perfectly altruistic toward its descendants. The paper employs
a number of parameters to match some features of the U.S. data, including
measures of both earnings and wealth inequality.
    The key feature of the model that generates a large amount of wealth
holdings in the hands of the richest is the productivity shock process, whose
key features are reported in Table 6. This process is thus calibrated so that
the highest productivity level is more than 100 times higher than the second
highest. Thus, there is a large discrepancy between the highest productivity
level and all of the others. Moreover, if one is at the highest productivity level,

                                        26
             Earnings level                 1.0        3.0      10.0     1060
    Fraction at invariant distribution    61.11%     22.25%    16.50%   0.04%

                 Table 6: Castañeda et al. [30] earnings’ process.



the chance of being 100 times less productive during the next period is more
than 20%.
    High-earning households thus face much higher earnings risk and save at
very high rates to self-insure against earnings risk and smooth consumption
and thus build huge buﬀer stocks of assets.
    This ﬁnding underscores the role of the earnings risk faced by the house-
holds in shaping saving behavior. It should be noted, however, that in this
framework, earnings risk is independent from the size of one’s wealth and
business capital.
    In the data, DeBacker et al. [33] use a conﬁdential panel of US income tax
returns for 1987-2009 to measure business income risks. They document that,
compared with labor income, business income is much riskier (even on condi-
tional staying in business), is less persistent over time, and is characterized by
higher probabilities of extreme upward or downward mobility. They also show
that high-income entrepreneurs are more likely to face tail risks at both ends of
the business income distribution. These features of the data are thus generally
consistent with the idea that high earners are subject to larger ﬂuctuations.
However, from the standpoint of the model and its implied savings decisions,
the question of how this risk is related to one’s investment in capital is very
important. In the data, it is not clear how the very risky business income
of business owners found by DeBacker et al. informs the calibration of this
earnings process that is assumed to be exogenous to any business investment
decision.
    More empirical support for this modeling assumption and calibration is
provided by Parker and Vissing-Jorgensen [85], who ﬁnd that incomes at the
top are cyclical because of the labor component and bonuses in particular.
Although for business owners the split between their wages and capital income
                                         27
might be somewhat ﬂexible, these authors write “High-income households (top
1 percent) earn more than half of their noncapital gains income from wage
income, and their wage income is far more exposed to aggregate ﬂuctuations
than that of lower-income households...we ﬁnd even higher income exposure
to aggregate ﬂuctuations for very high-income households (top 0.01 percent)
than for high-income households... ”.
    Interestingly, Barnett and Panousi [6] also uncover that the risks taken
by business people are heteroskedastic. High-wealth agents are more likely
than low-wealth agents to have big business income ﬂuctuations (both big
increases and big declines). In contrast, these “risks” do not vary along
other dimensions, such as gender, level of education, and race. These ﬁndings
provide support for the observation that wealth inﬂuences investment. This
outcome is consistent with the existence of borrowing constraints (Cagetti
and De Nardi [24]) and entrepreneurial risk aversion (a channel proposed by
Panousi [84]).
    From a theoretical standpoint, the “economics of superstars” by Rosen [92]
rationalizes the emergence of a small number of highly compensated individu-
als and a highly skewed distributions of earnings and very large rewards at the
top. Gabaix and Landier [45] propose a model to rationalize increased CEO
compensation. Lee [77] develops a model occupational choice for workers,
entrepreneurs, and managers, that endogenously generates high managerial
wages.


8   Conclusions: Lessons learned and directions for fu-
    ture research

Basic versions of the Bewley model in which households face earnings shocks
that are assumed to be an AR(1) estimated from micro-level data sets miss key
aspects of saving behavior and, in particular, the saving behavior of the rich.
Previous work has shown that there are realistic mechanisms that help bring
the savings implications of the model more in line with the data. These mech-
anisms include heterogeneity in preferences, transmission of human capital
                                      28
and voluntary bequests across generations, entrepreneurship or high returns
to capital coupled with borrowing constraints, and high earnings risk for the
top earners.
    Disturbingly, even if these mechanisms give rise to similar observed wealth
concentrations, they can have vastly diﬀerent policy implications. For instance,
modeling entrepreneurship usually implies that the adverse responses of sav-
ings and economic activity to increased taxation are signiﬁcant, and especially
so if taxation aﬀects the returns to running a business (Kitao [68], Lee [77],
and Cagetti and De Nardi [26]). In contrast, in a model with high earnings risk
for the top earners, Kindermann and Krueger [67] conclude that the optimal
marginal income tax rate is close to 90%. Thus, more work needs to be done
to more conclusively determine the eﬀects of taxation in quantitative models
of wealth inequality.
    The big diﬀerence in responses to taxation between these models is due to
the fact that entrepreneurs’ savings and investments are responsive to their
implicit rate of return, net of taxes. In contrast, the very high earner facing
a large probability of becoming a very low earner next period is desperate
to save to smooth consumption. Hence, even if their currently high earnings
become lower due to taxation, as long as potential net income tomorrow is
suﬃciently low compared with today’s net earnings, the household will save
at a high rate, even if earnings taxation is increased.
    This stark contrast in policy implications stemming from diﬀerent motiva-
tions to save points to the importance of understanding whether, for instance,
the risk that the rich face comes from their earnings or from the capital that
they invested in the ﬁrm. A combination of better data and empirical analysis
and richer models that allow both for high earnings risk for the top earners
and for risky entrepreneurial capital should help answering these questions.
    Similarly, one might think that if households’ voluntary bequest motives
are an important reason why rich households keep saving, the speciﬁc bequest
formulation might be quite important in determining the response to taxation.
Interestingly, De Nardi and Yang [40] ﬁnd that regardless of whether warm-
glow bequests of the type that we have discussed in this paper depend on

                                      29
estates net or gross of taxes, does not generate very diﬀerent responses to
estate taxation reform as long as the models are calibrated to match the same
facts.
    Generally, more work is needed to evaluate these explanations, both indi-
vidually and jointly, and to quantitatively assess their importance. Addition-
ally, more exploration of alternative or complementary mechanisms is needed.
For instance, there is evidence that a discretized AR(1) is likely a poor ap-
proximation of true income dynamics. In fact, Guvenen et al. [51] document
that, in a given year, most individuals experience very small earnings shocks,
and a small but non-negligible number experience very large shocks. They
also ﬁnd that statistical properties of earnings shocks vary signiﬁcantly both
over the life cycle and with the earnings level of individuals. Finally, they ﬁnd
important asymmetries: positive shocks to high-income individuals are quite
transitory, whereas negative shocks are very persistent; the opposite is true
for low-income individuals. DeBacker et al. [33] study business income and
their ﬁndings are broadly consistent with those in Guvenen et al. [51], but they
also ﬁnd that business income is much riskier than labor income. In addition,
DeBacker et al. [33] ﬁnd that the persistence of business income is very similar
over one-year and over ﬁve-year periods (ﬁve year results available from the
authors). All of these ﬁndings indicate that modeling earnings with a richer
process than an AR(1) is needed.
    Importantly, it should also be noted that the properties found by Guve-
nen et al. [51], while very interesting, come from individual-level earnings, as
opposed to household-level earnings or income. Given that many households
have dual earners, it would also be interesting to contrast and compare these
ﬁndings to those on household level data. For instance, Blundell at al. [14]
highlight the importance of of family labor supply as an insurance mechanism
to wage shocks and ﬁnd strong evidence of smoothing of males and females
permanent shocks to wages.
    Finally, the crucial importance of the nature of idiosyncratic risk assumed
in these models also raises the question of its measurement in the data. What
we as economists measure as a shock in the data might be anticipated by the

                                       30
households and thus have a very diﬀerent eﬀect than shocks in these models.
This might be especially the case in administrative data sets that contain little
information about the household (in contrast with survey data, which instead,
might contain information on households’ health, divorce, and expectations).
Sabelhaus and Ackerman [93] use SCF data to derive the gap between ac-
tual and normal income from survey questions and use it as a measure of
shocks. This approach stands in contrast to existing income shock measures
in the literature, which are generally derived from the residuals of estimated
earnings or income equations. Interestingly, the overall variance and asym-
metry of shocks over the business cycle derived from this analysis are similar
to those of existing residual-based estimates. Blundell et al. [13] use data on
both consumption and income to draw inference on the persistence of income
shocks. More work in needed to better disentangle the actual shocks that the
households face and their sources.




                                       31
References

 [1] John M. Abowd and David Card. On the covariance structure of earnings
     and hours changes. Econometrica, 57:441–455, March 1989.

 [2] S. Rao Aiyagari. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3):659–684, August 1994.

 [3] S Rao Aiyagari, Jeremy Greenwood, and Ananth Seshadri. Eﬃcient
     investment in children. Journal of Economic Theory, 102(2):290–321,
     2002.

 [4] Joseph G. Altonji and Ernesto Villanueva. The marginal propensity to
     spend on adult children. NBER Working Paper 9811, July 2003.

 [5] James Andreoni. Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity
     and Ricardian equivalence. Journal of Political Economy, 97:1447–1458,
     1989.

 [6] Michael Barnett and Vasia Panousi. Entrepreneurial risk and the great
     recession. Mimeo, 2015.

 [7] Marco Bassetto, Marco Cagetti, and Mariacristina De Nardi. Credit
     crunches and credit allocation in a model of entrepreneurship. Review
     of Economic Dynamics, 2014.

 [8] Gary Becker and Nigel Tomes. Human capital and the rise and fall of
     families. Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3):S1–S39, July 1979.

 [9] Jess Benhabib and Alberto Bisin. The distribution of wealth: Inter-
     generational transmission and redistributive policies. Work. Pap., New
     York Univ, 2007.

[10] Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. The distribution of
     wealth and ﬁscal policy in economies with ﬁnitely lived agents. Econo-
     metrica, 79(1):123–157, 2011.

                                   32
[11] B. Douglas Bernheim, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. What
     accounts for the variation in retirement wealth among U.S. households?
     American Economic Review, 91(4):832–857, September 2001.

[12] Truman F. Bewley. The permanent income hypothesis: A theoretical for-
     mulation. Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2):252–292, December 1977.

[13] Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. Consumption
     inequality and partial insurance. The American Economic Review,
     98(5):1887–1921, 2008.

[14] Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. Consump-
     tion inequality and family labor supply. NBER Working Paper 18445,
     October 2012.

[15] Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne Groves. Unequal
     chances: Family background and economic success. Princeton University
     Press, 2009.

[16] Jesse Bricker, John Sabelhaus, Jake Krimmel, and Alice Henriques. Mea-
     suring income and wealth at the top using administrative and survey
     data. Mimeo, 2015.

[17] Meta Brown, John Karl Scholz, and Ananth Seshadri. A new test of
     borrowing constraints for education. The Review of Economic Studies,
     page rdr032, 2011.

[18] Martin Browning and Annamaria Lusardi. Household saving: Micro
     theories and micro facts. Journal of Economic Literature, 24:1797–1855,
     December 1996.

[19] Francisco Buera. Persistency of poverty, ﬁnancial frictions, and en-
     trepreneurship. Working paper, Northwestern University, 2006.

[20] Francisco Buera. A dynamic model of entrepreneurship with borrowing
     constraints. Annals of Finance, 5(3-4):443–464, 2009.

                                    33
[21] Ricardo J Caballero. Consumption puzzles and precautionary savings.
     Journal of monetary economics, 25(1):113–136, 1990.

[22] Marco Cagetti. Interest elasticity in a life-cycle model with precautionary
     savings. American Economic Review, 91(2):418–421, May 2001.

[23] Marco Cagetti. Wealth accumulation over the life cycle and precaution-
     ary savings. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 21(3):339–353,
     July 2003.

[24] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Entrepreneurship, frictions,
     and wealth. Journal of Political Economy, 114(5):835–870, October
     2006.

[25] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Wealth inequality: data and
     models. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 12:285–313, 2008.

[26] Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Estate taxation, en-
     trepreneurship, and wealth. The American Economic Review, 99(1):85–
     111, 2009.

[27] Jeﬀrey R. Campbell and Mariacristina De Nardi. A conversation with
     590 entrepreneurs. Annuals of Finance, 5:313–327, 2009.

[28] Christopher D. Carroll. Buﬀer stock saving and the life-cycle/permanent
     income hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):1–55, Febru-
     ary 1997.

[29] Christopher D. Carroll. Why do the rich save so much? In Joel B. Slem-
     rod, editor, Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing
     the Rich, pages 466–484. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 2000.

[30] Ana Castañeda, Javier Dı́az-Giménez, and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Ac-
     counting for the U.S. earnings and wealth inequality. Journal of Political
     Economy, 111(4):818–857, August 2003.


                                      34
[31] Thomas Cooley, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini. Aggregate
     consequences of limited contract enforceability. Journal of Political
     Economy, 112(4):817–847, August 2004.

[32] Jason DeBacker, Bradley Heim, Vasia Panousi, Shanthi Ramnath, and
     Ivan Vidangos. Rising inequality: Transitory or persistent? new evidence
     from a panel of u.s. tax returns. Mimeo, 2013.

[33] Jason DeBacker, Vasia Panousi, and Shanthi Ramnath. The properties of
     income risk in privately held businesses. Federal Reserve Board Working
     Paper 2012-69, 2012.

[34] Antonia Dı́az, Josep Pijoan-Mas, and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Habit for-
     mation: Implications for the wealth distribution. Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 50(6):1257–1291, August 2002.

[35] Javier Dı́az-Giménez, Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Di-
     mensions of inequality: Facts on the U.S. distributions of earnings, in-
     come and wealth. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Re-
     view, 21(2):3–21, Spring 1997.

[36] Mariacristina De Nardi. Wealth inequality and intergenerational links.
     Review of Economic Studies, 71(3):743–768, July 2004.

[37] Mariacristina De Nardi, Phil Doctor, and Spencer D. Krane. Evidence
     on entrepreneurs in the United States: Data from the 1989-2004 Survey
     of Consumer Finances. Economic Perspectives, 4:18–36, 2007.

[38] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Why do the
     elderly save? The role of medical expenses. Journal of Political Economy,
     118(1):39–75, 2010.

[39] Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang. Bequests and heterogeneity in
     retirement wealth. European Economic Review, 72:182–196, 2014.



                                     35
[40] Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang. Wealth inequality, family back-
     ground, and estate taxation. Working Paper 21047, National Bureau of
     Economic Research, 2015.

[41] Karen Dynan, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen Zeldes. Do the rich save
     more? Journal of Political Economy, 112(2):397–444, April 2004.

[42] Karen E Dynan, Douglas W Elmendorf, Daniel E Sichel, et al. The evo-
     lution of household income volatility. Division of Research & Statistics
     and Monetary Aﬀairs, Federal Reserve Board, 2007.

[43] Martin Eichenbaum and Dan Peled. Capital accumulation and annu-
     ities in an adverse selection economy. Journal of Political Economy,
     95(2):334–354, April 1987.

[44] Ricardo T Fernholz. A model of economic mobility and the distribution
     of wealth. Technical report, mimeo, Claremont McKenna College, 2015.

[45] Xavier Gabaix and Augustin Landier. Why has CEO pay increased so
     much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1):49–100, 2008.

[46] William G. Gale and John Karl Scholz. Intergenerational transfers and
     the accumulation of wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4):145–
     160, Fall 1994.

[47] William M. Gentry and R. Glenn Hubbard. Entrepreneurship and house-
     hold savings. Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 4(1), 2004.
     Article 1.

[48] Andy Glover and Jacob Short. Bankruptcy, incorporation, and the na-
     ture of entrepreneurial risk. Mimeo, 2015.

[49] Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ, James Sefton, and Martin
     Weale. Simulating the transmission of wealth inequality via bequests.
     Journal of Public Economics, 79(1):93–128, 2000.


                                    36
[50] Fatih Guvenen. Quantitative Economics With Heterogeneity: An A-to-Z
     Guidebook. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2016.

[51] Fatih Guvenen, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozcan, and Jae Song. What do
     data on millions of U.S. workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?
     NBER Working Paper 20913, January 2015.

[52] Gary D Hansen and Ayşe İmrohoroğlu. The role of unemployment insur-
     ance in an economy with liquidity constraints and moral hazard. Journal
     of Political Economy, pages 118–142, 1992.

[53] Jonathan H. Heatcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante.
     Quantitative macroeconomics with heterogeneous households. Annual
     Review of Economics, 1:319–354, September 2009.

[54] John Heaton and Deborah Lucas. Evaluating the eﬀects of incomplete
     markets on risk sharing and asset prices. Journal of Political Economy,
     104:443–487, 1996.

[55] James J. Heckman and Stefano Mosso. The economics of human de-
     velopment and social mobility. NBER Working Paper 19925, February
     2014.

[56] Burkhard Heer. Wealth distribution and optimal inheritance taxation in
     life-cycle economies with intergenerational transfers. Mimeo. University
     of Cologne, Germany, 1999.

[57] Lutz Hendricks. Accounting for patterns of wealth inequality. Mimeo.
     Iowa State University, 2004.

[58] Lutz Hendricks. How important is preference heterogeneity for wealth
     inequality? Mimeo. Iowa State University, 2004.

[59] Lutz Hendricks. Retirement wealth and lifetime earnings. International
     Economic Review, 48(2):421–456, 2007.


                                    37
[60] Mark Huggett. Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies. Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 38(3):469–494, December 1996.

[61] Michael D. Hurd. Mortality risk and bequests. Econometrica, 57(4):779–
     813, July 1989.

[62] Erik Hurst, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank P. Staﬀord. Wealth dynamics
     of American families, 1984-94. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     1998(1):267–337, 1998.

[63] Erik Hurst and Annamaria Lusardi. Liquidity constraints, wealth
     accumulation and entrepreneurship. Journal of Political Economy,
     112(2):319–347, April 2004.

[64] Katya Kartashova. The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A private
     equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review, 104(10):3297–
     3394, 2014.

[65] Timothy J. Kehoe and David K. Levine. Debt-constrained asset markets.
     Review of Economic Studies, 60(4):865–888, October 1993.

[66] Arthur B. Kennickell. A rolling tide: Changes in the distribution of
     wealth in the U.S., 1989-2001. Mimeo, September 2003.

[67] Fabian Kindermann and Dirk Krueger. High marginal tax rates on the
     top 1%? Lessons from a life cycle model with idiosyncratic income risk.
     Mimeo, January 2015.

[68] Sagiri Kitao. Entrepreneurship, taxation, and capital investment. Review
     of Economic Dynamics, 11(1):44–69, March 2008.

[69] Wojciech Kopczuk. What do we know about evolution of top wealth
     shares in the United States? NBER Working Paper 20734, December
     2014.

[70] Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ and Lawrence H. Summers. The role of intergener-
     ational transfers in aggregate capital accumulation. Journal of Political
     Economy, 89(4):706–732, August 1981.
                                      38
[71] Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri. Does income inequality lead to con-
     sumption inequality? Evidence and theory. The Review of Economic
     Studies, 73(1):163–193, 2006.

[72] Per Krusell and Anthony Smith, Jr. Income and wealth heterogeneity
     in the macroeconomy. Journal of Political Economy, 106(5):867–896,
     October 1998.

[73] Per Krusell and Anthony Smith, Jr. Quantitative macroeconomic models
     with heterogeneous agents. In Advances in Economics and Economet-
     rics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress, pages 110–115.
     Elsevier, 2006.

[74] John Laitner. Secular changes in wealth inequality and inheritance. The
     Economic Journal, 111(474):691–721, 2001.

[75] John Laitner and Thomas F. Juster. New evidence on altruism, a study
     of TIAA-CREF retirees. American Economic Review, 86(4):893–908,
     1996.

[76] Emily Lawrance. Poverty and the rate of time preference: Evidence from
     panel data. Journal of Political Economy, 99:54–77, 1991.

[77] Sang Yoon Lee. Entrepreneurs, managers and inequality. Mimeo, 2015.

[78] Sang Yoon Lee, Nicolas Roys, and Ananth Seshadri. The causal eﬀect
     of parental human capital on childrens human capital. Technical report,
     mimeo, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2014.

[79] Sang Yoon Tim Lee and Ananth Seshadri. On the intergenerational
     transmission of economic status. Unpublished manuscript, University of
     Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Economics, 2014.

[80] Lars Ljungqvist and Thomas J. Sargent. Recursive Macroeconomic The-
     ory. MIT Press, Boston, MA, 2000.


                                    39
[81] Cesaire Meh. Entrepreneurship, wealth inequality, and taxation. Review
     of Economic Dynamics, 8(3):688–719, July 2005.

[82] Tobias J. Moskowitz and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. The returns to en-
     trepreneurial investment: A private equity premium puzzle? American
     Economic Review, 92(4):745–778, 2002.

[83] Shinichi Nishiyama. Bequests, inter vivos transfers, and wealth distri-
     bution. Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(4):892–931, October 2002.

[84] Vasia Panousi. Capital taxation with entrepreneurial risk. Forthcoming,
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012.

[85] Jonathan A. Parker and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. Who bears aggre-
     gate ﬂuctuations and how? American Economic Review, 99(2):399–405,
     2009.

[86] Thomas Piketty. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard Univer-
     sity Press, Cambridge, 2014.

[87] Vincenzo Quadrini. The importance of entrepreneurship for wealth con-
     centration and mobility. Review of Income and Wealth, 45(1):1–19,
     March 1999.

[88] Vincenzo Quadrini. Entrepreneurship in macroeconomics. Annals of
     Finance, 5(3):295–311, 2009.

[89] Vincenzo Quadrini and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Models of the distribu-
     tion of wealth. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review,
     21(2):1–21, Spring 1997.

[90] Vincenzo Quadrini and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Inequality in macroeco-
     nomics. In A.B. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, editors, Handbook of
     Income Distribution, vol. 2B. Elsevier, 2014.

[91] Santiago Budria Rodriguez, Javier Dı́az-Giménez, Vincenzo Quadrini,
     and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull. Updated facts on the U.S. distributions of
                                    40
     earnings, income, and wealth. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
     Quarterly Review, 26(3):2–35, Summer 2002.

 [92] Sherwin Rosen. The economics of superstars. American Economic Re-
      view, 71(5):845–858, 1981.

 [93] John Sabelhaus and Samuel Ackerman. The eﬀect of self-reported tran-
      sitory income shocks on household spending. FEDS Working Paper,
      2012.

 [94] John Sabelhaus and Jae Song. Earnings volatility across groups and
      time. Available at SSRN 1374970, 2009.

 [95] Emanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. Wealth inequality in the United
      States since 1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data. NBER
      Working Paper 20625, October 2014.

 [96] John Karl Scholz and Ananth Seshadri. Children and household wealth.
      Michigan Retirement Research Center Research Paper No. WP, 158,
      2007.

 [97] Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. The cause of wealth dispersion at
      retirement: Choice or chance? American Economic Review, 88(2):185–
      191, May 1988.

 [98] Chong Wang, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. Optimal consumption
      and savings with stochastic income and recursive utility. Mimeo, January
      2015.

 [99] Neng Wang. Caballero meets Bewley: The permanent-income hypothe-
      sis in general equilibrium. American Economic Review, pages 927–936,
      2003.

[100] Neng Wang. An equilibrium model of wealth distribution. Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 54(7):1882–1904, 2007.


                                     41
[101] Edward N. Wolﬀ. Changing inequality of wealth. American Economic
      Review, 82(2):552–558, may 1992.

[102] Edward N. Wolﬀ. Recent trends in the size distribution of household
      wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3):131–150, Summer 1998.




                                    42
