NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE AND DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF SHALE GAS
Catherine Hausman
Ryan Kellogg
Working Paper 21115
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21115

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We thank Steve Cicala, David Lagakos, David Romer, and Justin Wolfers for valuable comments;
Karen Fisher-Vanden, Timothy Fitzgerald, Laura Grant, Joshua Hausman, Kelsey Jack, Lutz Kilian,
Cathy Kling, Tom Lyon, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Yueming Qiu, Barry Rabe, and Daniel Raimi for helpful
feedback; and Sarah Johnston for excellent research assistance. This paper was originally prepared
for the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity and presented at the Spring 2015 Brookings Panel.
Both authors hereby declare that they have no material financial interests that relate to the research
described in this paper. This research was supported by an honorarium from the Brookings Institution.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Catherine Hausman and Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Welfare and Distributional Implications of Shale Gas
Catherine Hausman and Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 21115
April 2015
JEL No. D12,L60,L71,Q41,Q53
ABSTRACT
Technological innovations in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing have enabled tremendous
amounts of natural gas to be extracted profitably from underground shale formations that were long
thought to be uneconomical. In this paper, we provide the first estimates of broad-scale welfare and
distributional implications of this supply boom. We provide new estimates of supply and demand elasticities,
which we use to estimate the drop in natural gas prices that is attributable to the supply expansion.
We calculate large, positive welfare impacts for four broad sectors of gas consumption (residential,
commercial, industrial, and electric power), and a negative impact for producers, with variation across
regions. We then examine the evidence for a gas-led ``manufacturing renaissance'' and for pass-through
to prices of products such as retail natural gas, retail electricity, and commodity chemicals. We conclude
with a discussion of environmental externalities from unconventional natural gas, including limitations
of the current regulatory environment. Overall, we find that between 2007 and 2013 the shale gas revolution
led to an increase in welfare for natural gas consumers and producers of $48 billion per year, but more
data are needed on the extent and valuation of the environmental impacts of shale gas production.

Catherine Hausman
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 S. State St. #4215
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
chausman@umich.edu
Ryan Kellogg
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kelloggr@umich.edu

Figure 1: U.S. Natural Gas Production and Price

Note: Gross withdrawals include not only marketed production, but also natural gas used
to repressure wells, vented and flared gas, and nonhydrocarbon gases removed. Source:
EIA.

Following a decade of essentially no growth, natural gas production in the United States
grew by more than 25 percent from 2007 to 2013. This supply boom, amounting to an increase of 5.5 trillion cubic feet per year, was driven by technological innovations in extraction.
In particular, advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing1 have enabled natural
gas to be extracted profitably from underground shale formations that were long thought to
be non-economic. Figure 1 shows this increase in total natural gas production, as well as
the change in production from “unconventional” shale gas reservoirs. The increase in shale
extraction began in the late 2000s, accelerated in 2010, and amounted to more than one
trillion cubic feet per month by late 2013. As a result of this sustained growth in extraction,
natural gas prices have fallen substantially in the U.S. Figure 1 plots the real2 U.S. price
of natural gas since 1997.3 While prices averaged $6.81 per mcf (2013 dollars per thousand
cubic feet) from 2000 to 2010, prices since 2011 have averaged $3.65 per mcf.
In this paper, we estimate the broad implications of this boom in unconventional natural
gas for U.S. welfare. We examine effects on natural gas purchasers and producers, pay1

The latter is often referred to as “fracking” or “fracing.”
Prices throughout the paper are deflated to 2013 dollars using the CPI: all urban less energy.
3
We focus on the Henry Hub price in Louisiana, the most liquid natural gas trading hub in the country.
Prices are quoted in $/mmBtu (dollars per million British thermal units), and we convert this to $/mcf
(dollars per thousand cubic feet). The heat content of natural gas varies, but the average conversion typically
used is 1.025 mmBtu per mcf.
2

2

ing particular attention to how benefits and costs are allocated across sectors and across
space. We also discuss the potential environmental impacts associated with fracking and
how regulations might mitigate these externalities.
We begin in section 1 by providing background on natural gas markets, including the
related literature on fracking. We then provide new estimates of supply and demand elasticities. In section 2, we use our estimated supply and demand functions to calculate the portion
of the drop in natural gas prices that is attributable to the supply expansion, as opposed to
contemporaneous changes in the U.S. economy such as the recession and recovery. For 2007
to 2013, we estimate that the boom in U.S. natural gas production reduced gas prices by
$3.45 per mcf. We evaluate the impact of the supply shift and corresponding price change
for consumers and producers in section 3. We show that consumer surplus increased by
about $74 billion per year from 2007 to 2013 because of the price fall. In contrast, producer
surplus fell: wells, once drilled and producing, have very low marginal operating costs and
are rarely idled—thus from 2007 to 2013, revenue accruing to producers of existing wells
decreased by $30 billion per year owing to the price decrease. This loss was only partially
offset by the gains associated with new wells, which totalled $4 billion per year over this time
period. Accordingly, we estimate that annual total welfare increased by $48 billion from 2007
to 2013, ignoring external costs from environmental damages (to which we return later in
the paper). Under plausible alternative assumptions, this estimate varies by up to about 20
percent. This change in surplus is large relative to the size of the natural gas sector; retail
spending on natural gas was around $160 billion in 2013. On the scale of the economy as a
whole, it is noticeable but not large—the change amounts to about 1/3 of 1 percent of GDP,
or around $150 per capita.
We also consider the distributional effects of the supply boom across sectors of the economy and across regions. Purchasers of natural gas can be broadly separated into the residential, commercial, industrial, and electric power sectors. We calculate the breakdown in
consumer surplus changes across these four sectors, finding the largest gains for the electric
power and industrial sectors. We then estimate the distribution of consumer gains across
states, finding that the largest gains are concentrated in the South Central and Midwestern United States, where industrial and electric power demand for gas is large. Regional
variation in the producer surplus impact is substantial; shale-heavy states like Pennsylvania
experienced net gains, whereas states with mostly conventional gas supplies lost. Finally,
we examine the pass-through of natural gas wholesale price changes to end-users. We find
that pass-through to retail natural gas prices is essentially 100%, implying that the consumer surplus gains we estimate have accrued to end-users of gas rather than distributors
or retailers.
3

In section 4, we study how exports of liquified natural gas (LNG) would affect gas purchasers and producers. Natural gas is costly to ship overseas: it must be liquified (by chilling
it to an extremely low temperature and placing it under high pressure), then shipped on
specialized LNG tankers, and then re-gasified at the final destination. Moreover, both the
construction of LNG facilities and the export of LNG require federal approval (from FERC
and DOE, respectively). A considerable wedge has developed since 2010 between relatively
low U.S. natural gas prices and those in Europe and Asia, as shown in the left panel of
figure 2.4 This price differential has led firms to apply for LNG export permits. We use
our modeling framework to simulate how the U.S. gas market would be affected by: (1)
LNG exports equal to the capacity of all FERC-approved projects (9.2 bcf per day), and (2)
LNG exports equal to the capacity of all projects approved by and proposed to FERC (24.6
bcf per day). In both cases the U.S. natural gas price rises, leading to an increase in U.S.
producer surplus, a decrease in U.S. consumer surplus, and a net gain overall. However, the
net gain is limited (and nearly zero in the first case) because a share of the increase in overall
producer surplus accrues to Canadian exporters of natural gas to the U.S.
Section 5 considers the impacts of shale gas on manufacturing at a more disaggregated
level, motivated by the considerable interest in whether shale gas will lead to a U.S. “manufacturing renaissance.” We identify industries that are especially natural gas intensive in
production and therefore have the potential to benefit the most from the shale boom. A
handful of manufacturing sectors stand out as important, especially fertilizer production.
We find that these sectors have grown more rapidly than other sectors over the course of
the shale boom, though drawing a conclusive causal link is difficult. We document that the
fertilizer industry has substantially expanded, likely owing to the fact that U.S. fertilizer
prices are integrated with global markets and have therefore not greatly decreased. We find
a similar pricing pattern for high-density polyethylene, a common plastic that uses natural
gas as an input. Thus, at least for these gas-intensive chemical products, reductions in gas
prices have not passed through to product prices.
Finally, there are important unpriced environmental impacts associated with shale gas
production. Scientists have identified a long list of potential impacts, such as groundwater
contamination and methane leaks. In section 6, we present the state of the literature on these
effects. We note several challenges for monetization: there is a lack of comprehensive data
on physical damages, and the spatial heterogeneity of impacts prohibits a comprehensive
bottoms-up aggregation. Additionally, both local and global impacts depend on the extent
to which coal has been displaced, about which there is still uncertainty. Because of these
4

The price differential between the U.S. and Asia has shrunk somewhat in early 2015, since Asian LNG
prices are tied at least in part to crude oil prices, which have fallen substantially.

4

Figure 2: U.S. and International Natural Gas and Crude Oil Prices

Note: The Henry Hub price is a monthly average of the daily NYMEX spot price. The UK price is a monthly average of the
daily National Balancing Point price, and it has been converted from GB pence per therm to dollars per mcf. Source: EIA for
Henry Hub, WTI, and Brent spot prices; Bloomberg for the UK NBP spot price; World Bank for the Japanese LNG price.

uncertainties, we estimate that valuation of greenhouse gas impacts in 2013, for instance,
ranges from net costs of $3.0 billion to $28 billion. We discuss the challenges associated with
collecting comprehensive data on environmental impacts, as well as the implications of these
data limitations for regulation of the industry.
While this paper focuses on natural gas, it is important to note that a shale oil fracking
boom has been taking place alongside the boom in natural gas (see Kilian (2014a)). Oil
production in the U.S. increased by almost 50 percent from 2007 to 2013, enabled by the
same technological improvements driving the natural gas boom. Moreover, oil prices fell
dramatically in 2014: from around $100 per barrel in Q1 and Q2 to around $50 per barrel by
the start of 2015. We focus here on natural gas in part because it has historically received
less attention in the literature.5 Future work on recent changes to oil markets, driven by
5

Excellent recent examples of work studying the link between oil and the macroeconomy include Hamilton
(2009); Kilian (2009); Hamilton (2011); Kilian (2014b), and Kilian and Murphy (2014).

5

unconventional sources, would certainly be valuable. Natural gas and oil markets have some
similarities (since they are both exhaustible resources, are substitute inputs for one another
in some industries, and are extracted using similar technologies), but they also have some
key differences. In particular, crude oil is easily shipped internationally, so the world oil
market is largely integrated.6 In contrast, natural gas is easy to transport by pipeline but
is otherwise costly to ship. The shale oil boom has resulted in some transportation-related
and grade-related bottlenecks, and therefore wedges between the U.S. and world oil prices
(Borenstein and Kellogg, 2014; Brown et al., 2014; Kilian, 2014a). The right panel of figure
2 shows how the Brent (North Sea) price has increased relative to the U.S. West Texas
Intermediate price since 2010. However, this oil price differential is small compared to the
recent wedge in natural gas prices between North America and markets in Europe and Asia.
Overall, our study finds that a broad set of sectors has benefited from new sources of
unconventional natural gas. Households, for instance, have seen much lower utility bills for
both natural gas and electricity. Industrial users have also benefited, including rents for
some natural gas intensive industries that have not had to pass on the lower gas prices to
their customers. Natural gas producers, on the other hand, have seen substantial revenue
declines that have been only partially offset by the shale-driven expansion of drilling and
production. The full scope of external environmental costs is still unknown, and better data
are needed in this area.

1

Fundamentals of the U.S. Natural Gas Market

Natural gas marketed production in the United States was approximately 50 bcf per day for
1990 through 2007, primarily extracted from Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma.7 From 2007 to
2013, production increased by 25 percent. This sharp acceleration of production was spurred
by technological advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing. While horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing have been in use for half a century, they only recently
became cost-effective for large scale gas extraction. Reservoirs that have seen substantial
activity include the Barnett Shale in Texas and the Marcellus Shale in Pennsylvania.
Our paper relates to a nascent economics literature on the shale boom, including work
that, like ours, devotes its attention to broad economic impacts. Fitzgerald (2013) offers
a useful summary of stylized facts about the fracking boom, including summaries of the
6

Though the U.S. remains a net importer of crude oil, the U.S. crude oil export ban binds due to crude
quality differences. See Kilian (2014a) for a discussion.
7
While figure 1 plots gross withdrawals, we focus for the remainder of the paper on marketed production.
Marketed production averages 80 to 85 percent of gross withdrawals and does not include, for instance,
reinjections. Figure 1 plots gross withdrawals, as marketed production specific to shale is not available.

6

technological changes and their impact on the cost of extraction. Mason, Muehlenbachs
and Olmstead (2014) provides a summary of the literature on shale gas in economics, as
well as a broad first pass at calculating the scope of economic costs and benefits. Krupnick
et al. (2014) summarizes policy questions that remain unanswered relating to economic
impacts, environmental impacts, and preferred regulatory approaches. Other related work
has used calibrated models of the energy sector to forecast future impacts of shale gas
production (Brown and Krupnick, 2010; Krupnick, Wang and Wang, 2013), and a growing
literature examines how falling natural gas prices affect electricity markets (Brehm, 2015;
Cullen and Mansur, 2014; Holladay and LaRiviere, 2014; Knittel, Metaxoglou and Trindade,
2014; Linn, Muehlenbachs and Wang, 2014). The Congressional Budget Office recently issued
a report aimed at projecting future economic and budgetary impacts of shale oil and gas
(CBO, 2014). Local employment effects near extraction sites have been analyzed by Agerton
et al. (2015), Allcott and Keniston (2014), DeLeire, Eliason and Timmins (2014), Maniloff
and Mastromonaco (2014), and Paredes, Komarek and Loveridge (2015). In section 6, we
summarize the large literature, spanning many disciplines, on the environmental impacts of
fracking.

1.1

Demand and Supply Estimation: Empirical Strategy

Our paper is the first to provide a comprehensive analysis of the welfare impacts of the
shale gas boom for purchasers and producers, including the distribution of these impacts
across consumption sectors and across space. An important first step in our analysis is the
estimation of supply and demand functions for natural gas, and in particular the elasticities
of supply and demand. These elasticities are essential inputs into the calculation of the U.S.
natural gas price that would have held in 2013 had the shale gas revolution not expanded
supply. Specifically, we will calculate the counterfactual equilibrium price of gas at the
intersection of the 2007 supply curve with the 2013 demand curve; we need the elasticities
of both supply and demand to identify this intersection relative to the realized 2007 and
2013 equilibria. With the counterfactual 2013 natural gas price in hand, we can then use the
estimated supply and demand curves to estimate changes in consumer and producer surplus
associated with fracking.
While some elasticity estimates exist in the literature (Davis and Muehlegger, 2010;
Arora, 2014), they are not available for all sectors. We begin by estimating the short-run
and long-run elasticities of natural gas demand. Consider a dynamic equation for natural
gas consumption in state i in month t, Cit , in which adjustment costs lead to an AR(1)

7

process:
log Cit = αC log Pit + γC log Ci,t−1 + βC WCit + µCit + δC t + εCit .

(1)

In equation (1), gas consumption is affected by the current-period retail gas price Pit , observed weather WCit , state-specific seasonality µCit , a secular trend, and a disturbance term
εCit , which includes unobservable shocks to energy-consuming economic activity. We model
demand as a dynamic process because we anticipate that purchasers’ adjustments to price
shocks will be gradual. For instance, agents might react to high natural gas prices by making
investments in energy efficiency; these investments usually require more than a single month
to complete. We focus for simplicity on an AR(1) specification, but results are robust (as
shown in the appendix) to inclusion of Ci,t−2 as an explanatory variable. Nonetheless, due
to the limited duration of our sample, our estimate of equation (1) may understate the true
long-run demand elasticity, which could include out-of-sample capital replacement and innovation (such as widespread deployment of natural gas powered vehicles). Below, we consider
bounding exercises on our welfare estimates that allow for a substantially larger elasticity
than what we estimate from (1).
Because natural gas consumption and prices are simultaneously determined by the interaction of demand and supply, OLS estimation of equation (1) will be biased: the estimated
magnitude of the demand elasticity αC will be too low. To address this problem, we leverage the intuition from two previous papers that confront a similar issue. First, Davis and
Muehlegger (2010) estimates a natural gas demand elasticity from state-level data using
weather shocks in other states as an instrumental variable (IV). The intuition is that much
of natural gas is used for space heating, so cold weather drives up demand and therefore
price. To show the importance of space heating, figure 3 plots demand by month for each
sector. The space heating impact leads to large seasonality for residential and commercial
users; industrial demand also increases in the winter but is much less seasonal. Natural gas
use in the electric power sector, in contrast, follows demand for electricity, and accordingly
spikes in the summer.
The intuition for the validity of the Davis and Muehlegger (2010) instrument is that
weather shocks in states other than i will be correlated with the natural gas price in state
i because U.S. gas markets are well-integrated. At the same time, weather shocks in other
states should not directly affect natural gas consumption in state i, after controlling for
weather shocks in state i. To ensure that the instrument captures weather shocks and not
seasonality, Davis and Muehlegger (2010) controls for state by month effects.
We do not rely solely on this approach, however, because we estimate a weak first stage.

8

Figure 3: U.S. Natural Gas Consumption

Note: This figure shows natural gas consumption for five major end uses. Natural gas
used in vehicles, in drilling operations, and as fuel in natural gas processing plants are
not shown, but all are small. Source: EIA.

That is, after controlling for own weather, this is little variation left in other states’ weather.8
We therefore also take advantage of the theory of competitive storage, an approach that has
been used in prior work to understand agricultural markets (Roberts and Schlenker, 2013).
The intuition is that the price at which suppliers are willing to deliver gas is a function
of the volume of gas in storage. Storage volumes at time t will be a function of shocks in
previous periods; thus, lagged values of WCit are valid instruments for Pit in equation (1).9
For instance, cold weather in month t − k will drain gas storage reserves, increasing the gas
price in periods t − k through t (and beyond).10
We incorporate the intuition from both Davis and Muehlegger (2010) and Roberts and
Schlenker (2013) by using lags of weather in states other than i as our instrumental variable.
In practice, we operationalize WCit using heating degree days (HDDs), a measure of cold
weather that is commonly used to approximate space heating requirements.11 For each state8

Davis and Muehlegger (2010) also includes the Brent crude oil price as an additional IV. This instrument
requires that demand shocks be uncorrelated across oil and natural gas markets.
9
Lagged prices and consumption may potentially also be valid instruments; however, the validity of these
IVs requires no serial correlation in εCit .
10
We verified this intuition empirically by regressing inventories (in levels or changes) on cold weather,
controlling for month effects. We estimate negative and statistically significant effects of cold weather, lasting
for around six to eight months.
11
On any given day, the number of heating degrees is given by min(0, 65 − T ), where T is the day’s
temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. We then average across days in the month. Cooling degree days (CDDs)

9

month observation it, we then construct the IV as follows: we calculate population-weighted
average HDDs for each month for all states in other regions (defined as census divisions)
and then sum these averages over lags two through twelve. We sum across lags two through
twelve for two reasons. First, the effect of weather on storage is cumulative; prices will likely
increase more when unexpected draw-downs have occurred in multiple prior months. Second,
we want the second-stage to be identified off of price variation in all months, not only months
with cold weather. Otherwise, our estimated elasticity would only be appropriate for winter
months.
We control for current weather (as measured by heating and cooling degree days), onemonth lagged weather, state by month effects, and a linear time trend. Since we identify off
of variation in weather shocks, the linear time trend is not necessary for unbiased estimates,
but it does aid with precision. Conditional on these controls, we thus make fairly weak
assumptions to obtain identification: the exclusion restriction is satisfied as long as twomonth through twelve-month lagged weather shocks in regions other than i are conditionally
uncorrelated with demand shocks in region i. For this to be satisfied, we simply need any
impact of past weather on current consumption to be picked up in the AR(1) term. Standard
errors are two-way clustered by sample month and state.
Our strategy for estimating the natural gas supply elasticity is conceptually very similar
to that for demand. We again use the behavior of storage to motivate our instrument – in
fact, the same instrument can be used for the supply equation. Conceptually, anything that
drives down storage volumes in previous months will increase price in the current month,
impacting both current supply and demand. Since storage volumes can fluctuate, supply
need not equal demand in any given month; thus, the same instrument can be used for both
equations. In practice, there are a few operational differences in how we implement this
idea. First, we use national rather than state-level quantities and prices because of data
limitations. Second, we use the wholesale Henry Hub natural gas price rather than retail
natural gas prices; results are similar if we use the average wellhead price instead of Henry
Hub. Third, we found that power in the first stage was aided by using one-month lagged
HDDs and CDDs, rather than cumulative HDDs.
Rather than use natural gas production in month t as the dependent variable, we use
the number of wells drilled in month t.12 We do so because oil and gas producers respond
to price shocks not by changing the production rate of existing wells but by changing the
rate at which they drill new wells (Anderson, Kellogg and Salant, 2014).13 Thus, the supply
are analogous to heating degree days and are given by min(0, T − 65).
12
Appendix figure A1 shows a time series of natural gas drilling.
13
Moreover, in the drilling and production model of Anderson, Kellogg and Salant (2014), the long-run
drilling elasticity equals the long-run production elasticity, assuming that resource scarcity rents are small,

10

equation we estimate is given by:
log St = αS log Pt + γS log St−1 + βS WSt + µSt + δS t + εSt .

(2)

where St is the numbers of wells drilled.14 We again control for month-of-year effects to
isolate weather shocks from seasonality, and we include a linear time trend for precision.
We also control for current weather because it may be correlated with our instrument (past
weather), and it may impact current drilling operations. As in the demand specifications,
we show (in the appendix) that results are robust to inclusion of St−2 on the right-hand side.
Finally, standard errors are Newey-West with 17 lags.
Our data source for consumption and retail prices is the Energy Information Administration (EIA). The data are at the state-by-month level for 2001 to present, and they are broken
down into residential, commercial, electricity sector, and other industrial usage.15 Because
the electric sector price has many missing values, our preferred electric power specification
uses the citygate price, also available from the EIA.16 Our data source for monthly natural
gas production and the number of wells drilled is also the EIA. The drilling data, which we
use for the elasticity estimation, are monthly but unfortunately are not available at the state
level, and recent years (2011-2014) have not yet been released. For production, we focus on
marketed production rather than gross withdrawals, as the latter includes gas reinjected into
wells. Marketed production is available for a few states with substantial production (such as
Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma), while other states are aggregated together. In the supply
estimation, we use average monthly spot prices from Bloomberg. We focus on the price at
Henry Hub, Louisiana, which is the delivery point for liquidly traded natural gas futures
contracts. Henry Hub is also typically well-integrated with other U.S. natural gas markets.
Finally, we use monthly state-level weather data (heating and cooling degree days) from the
National Climatic Data Center at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
because steady-state production is proportional to steady-state drilling. A few caveats are necessary here.
First, we are assuming that productivity from wells drilled when prices are high is the same as productivity
from wells drilled when prices are low. Second, the time horizon at which the elasticities are approximately
equal may be longer than the period we consider. Finally, some natural gas is extracted from oil wells, which
likely have a lower elasticity with respect to natural gas prices. Below, we consider bounding cases on the
price and welfare impacts using both a higher and lower elasticity.
14
More specifically, the data track wells drilled and “completed” – i.e., ready for production.
15
Total consumption is available farther back, but electricity and industrial consumption data only begin
in 2001. For consistency across sectors, we use 2001 through 2013. The demand regressions do not include
Alaska, DC, or Hawaii. Additionally, some of the electricity sector usage data are “withheld to avoid
disclosure of individual company data.” These are from states with low levels of usage. Also, some states
report zero electricity sector usage for some months; we replace with ln(0.1), but results are similar if we
drop these observations.
16
The two prices are highly correlated, and results are similar if we use the electric power price instead.

11

1.2

Elasticity Estimation Results

Our primary natural gas demand and supply estimates are presented in table 1 below. The
demand elasticity varies by sector, although the differences are not statistically significant.
The industrial and electric power sectors are most elastic, with short-run price elasticities of
-0.16 and -0.15, respectively. The long-run elasticities, equal to αC /(1 − γC ), are -0.57 and
-0.47, with standard errors of 0.17 and 0.43. The residential and commercial sectors have
short-run elasticities of -0.11 and -0.09, respectively, with long-run elasticities of -0.20 and
-0.23 (the standard errors on the long-run estimates are 0.19 and 0.18).17 The estimated
short-run supply elasticity, αS , is 0.09. The long-run elasticity is 0.81, with a standard error
of 0.16.
Unfortunately, the estimates are imprecise. However, as we show and discuss in section
2, the overall welfare gain we calculate is qualitatively quite robust to reasonable alternate
elasticities. Conceptually, the large standard errors are not surprising. Our identifying
variation comes largely from movements in prices in response to national weather shocks, so
the specifications are akin to time-series regressions using eleven years of monthly data for
demand and nine years of monthly data for supply.18
In the appendix (tables A4, A5, A6, and A7) we consider a number of additional robustness checks, including alternative instruments (such as shorter and longer weather lags, and
regional weather) and alternative controls. It is reassuring that the results, in particular the
long-run elasticities, are generally very similar using these alternative specifications. Our
short-run elasticities are smaller than those from Davis and Muehlegger (2010), which reports an average short-run elasticity of -0.28 for residential, -0.21 for commercial, and -0.71
for industrial users. Arora (2014) estimates a long-run residential demand elasticity of -0.24,
and a long-run supply elasticity ranging from 0.10 to 0.42.
Appendix tables A2 and A3 provide first stage estimates for the demand and supply
specifications in table 1. For all four demand sectors, the instrument—cumulative lagged
HDDs in other states—has a positive and statistically significant effect on the natural gas
price, as expected. For supply, the instruments—lagged national HDDs and CDDs—also
have a positive effect on the natural gas price.
17

Summing across the four sectors, the demand equation no longer has constant elasticity. For the range
of quantities observed in our data, the long-run elasticity of total demand is about -0.4.
18
Conventional rather than clustered standard errors, as a result, would have been only about half as large
for the demand equations. For the supply equation, conventional standard errors are slightly larger than the
Newey-West results we report.

12

Table 1: Demand and Suppy Elasticity Estimates

Residential

Demand
Commercial
Industrial

Electric power

Supply
Drilling

log(Price)

-0.11
(0.11)

-0.09
(0.08)

-0.16
(0.07)

-0.15
(0.14)

0.09
(0.05)

yt−1

0.43
(0.05)

0.59
(0.04)

0.72
(0.09)

0.68
(0.03)

0.89
(0.04)

Heating degree days, hundreds

2.94
(0.23)

2.29
(0.18)

0.58
(0.12)

1.35
(0.48)

-1.02
(0.33)

Cooling degree days, hundreds

-1.07
(0.19)

-0.48
(0.17)

-0.21
(0.22)

10.92
(1.36)

-0.72
(0.68)

Implied long-run price elasticity

-0.20
(0.19)

-0.23
(0.18)

-0.57
(0.17)

-0.47
(0.43)

0.81
(0.16)

First-stage F

10.01

10.55

10.33

11.85

4.46

Observations

6912

6912

6912

6849

108

Note: This table reports 2SLS price elasticity estimates for U.S. natural gas supply and demand. The
dependent variable is quantity in logs. Tables A2 and A3 in the appendix show the first stage estimates.
The instrument in the demand equations is cumulative lagged weather (heating degree days) in other
census divisions. As described in the text, the instrument is constructed with lags 2 through 12. The
instruments in the supply equation are one-month lagged national HDDs and CDDs. The time period
covered is 2002-2010 for supply and 2002-2013 for demand. The supply equations use national timeseries data; the demand equations use a national panel. All specifications include month-of-year effects
and a linear time trend; the demand equations also include state by month-of-year fixed effects and
one-month lagged cooling and heating degree days. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are
Newey-West (with 17 lags) for supply and two-way clustered by sample month and state for demand.

2

How Much Has the Natural Gas Boom Lowered U.S.
Prices?

The goal of this section is to assess the extent to which the shale gas boom has reduced
the price of natural gas in the United States. We study changes in prices and production
beginning in 2007, when shale gas began to compose a substantial share of total U.S. gas
production. From 2007 to 2013, the Henry Hub price fell in real terms from $8.00 per mcf to
$3.82 per mcf, as shale gas withdrawals rose from 5 bcf per day to 33 bcf per day. However,
the raw price difference of $4.18 per mcf may not be the causal impact of the shale boom on
gas prices, because natural gas demand was likely not constant over this time period. We
therefore seek to estimate the counterfactual gas price that would have held in 2013—given
2013 demand—had natural gas supply not expanded.
Calculating the counterfactual 2013 gas price requires estimates of the demand and supply
curves for natural gas. We assume that supply and the four sectors of demand are constant
13

elasticity over the range of the data, with elasticities given by the estimates from section
1.2 above. We assume that the elasticities have not changed from 2007 to 2013; we do
not have enough statistical power to investigate this assumption in our data. We back
out the scale parameters for the demand and supply curves for each year using observed
Henry Hub prices, average mark-ups, and observed quantities. Specifically, to sum demand
across sectors, we must make assumptions on how Henry Hub prices pass through to each
sector’s retail price. We expect one-to-one pass-through in the long run due to rate-of-return
regulations; below we verify this empirically. We additionally assume a constant mark-up
in each sector, equal to the average mark-up observed over the period 2007 to 2013. The
resulting demand function for each year y in 2007 and 2013 is:
QC,y =

X

ACiy · (PHenryHub + mark-upi )ηi

i∈(r,c,i,e)

where the four sectors are residential, commercial, industrial and electric power, η is the
sector-specific long-run price elasticity, and the scale parameters ACiy have been calculated
using observed prices and quantities in each year. Similarly, the supply function is:
QS,y = ASy · (PHenryHub )ηS
Figure 4 shows the resulting supply and demand functions for 2007 and 2013. The thick
lines show 2007, and thin lines 2013. The supply boom can be clearly seen in this figure,
as expected. While this outward shift is almost certainly driven primarily by the expansion
of shale gas production over 2007–2013, some of the supply shift is also associated with a
concurrent boom in shale oil, from which natural gas is often co-produced. For instance, oil
wells in North Dakota, which are experiencing a boom in the Bakken Shale, produced 1.6 bcf
of gas in December 2013 (for reference, production from shale gas reservoirs – primarily the
Marcellus – in Pennsylvania was 281 bcf in December 2013).19 Thus, our estimates of the
price change and welfare effects associated with the natural gas boom should be interpreted
as capturing the impact of production from both shale gas and shale oil reservoirs.20
Interestingly, the demand elasticities we estimate lead to scale parameters that imply an
inward shift in demand from 2007 to 2013. In appendix figure A2, we show the demand shift
for each of the four sectors, finding that the inward shift is driven largely by the industrial and
electricity sectors. These shifts are plausible, as manufacturing has decreased, and there has
19

These values are gross withdrawals rather than marketed production.
Co-production of natural gas from shale oil reservoirs should not bias our estimated supply elasticities
because this production is infra-marginal (since it is driven primarily by oil prices) and will therefore not be
sensitive to in-sample natural gas price variation.
20

14

Figure 4: Supply and Demand in the U.S. Natural Gas Market

Note: The thick lines show 2007, and thin lines 2013. The equilibrium prices are not at the intersection
of domestic supply and demand, since there are non-zero net imports. For 2007 and 2013 net imports,
we use the quantities observed in our data. For the counterfactual scenario, we assume a linear net
import function, as described in the text.

been a secular reduction in electricity generated by fossil fuels. Table A1 in the appendix
summarizes potential demand shifters. While GDP and population both increased from
2007 to 2013, median income decreased, potentially affecting residential heating demand,
and electricity generation from fossil fuels decreased substantially (driven by both a drop in
total electricity quantity as well as an expansion of renewables). Moreover, employment and
establishment counts for non-gas-intensive manufacturing industries have substantially fallen
(we present the trends for non-gas-intensive industries to separate secular changes from the
impacts of the gas price fall).
To calculate equilibrium prices and quantities in the counterfactual scenario, two other
assumptions are additionally necessary. First, we assume that the portion of supply used for
pipeline operations and drilling operations is constant across time, as is the ratio of wet to
dry gas. Second, the equilibrium prices are not at the intersection of domestic supply and
demand, since there are non-zero net imports. The vast majority of natural gas trade is with
Canada and Mexico by pipeline; as described below, liquified natural gas trade with other
countries remains extremely small. For 2007 and 2013 net imports, we use the quantities
observed in our data. For the counterfactual scenario, we must make assumptions about

15

the behavior of imports and exports. We assume that the net import function (driven
largely by the Canadian and Mexican supply and demand functions) did not change from
2007 to 2013,21 and we fit a linear function through the observed prices and net import
quantities in 2007 and 2013. This net import function allows us to calculate net imports at
the counterfactual price.22
For the resulting supply, demand, and net imports functions, we calculate equilibrium
prices and quantities for 2007 and 2013. The resulting prices are $8.03 per mcf for 2007
and $3.88 per mcf for 2013.23 The equilibrium 2013 price that would have resulted from the
demand shift, had supply not expanded, is $7.33 per mcf. Thus we estimate that the natural
gas supply expansion from 2007 to 2013 lowered wholesale prices by $3.45 per mcf.
Given the imprecision of the supply and demand elasticities, it is important to consider
bounds on this price decrease. In table 2, we show the estimated price decrease for alternative
assumptions on the elasticities. The cases we consider assume a halving or a doubling of all
the elasticities. For demand, then, the alternative long-run price elasticity is either -0.10 or
-0.40 for residential use; -0.12 or -0.46 for commercial; -0.29 or -1.14 for industrial; and -0.24
or -0.94 for electric power. For supply, the long-run price elasticity can take on a value of
0.41 or 1.62. The counterfactual price change for these alternative assumptions ranges from
a decrease of $2.19 to a decrease of $4.16 per mcf.

3
3.1

Welfare Impacts of the Gas Supply Boom
Consumers of Natural Gas

In this section, we use our supply and demand functions to estimate the changes in consumer
and producer surplus caused by the natural gas supply boom. For consumer surplus, we
calculate in figure 4 the area bounded by the counterfactual pre-period price ($7.33 per
mcf), the post-period observed price ($3.88 per mcf), the y-axis, and the 2013 demand
curve. This area, the change in benefits accruing to purchasers as a result of the price
decline and quantity expansion from 2007 to 2013, totals $74 billion per year. The leftmost column in table 2 shows the portion of this surplus accruing to each of the residential,
21

While shale gas is being extracted in Canada, it has not yet proved as significant as in the U.S.
Alternatively, we can assume that the elasticity of net exports is determined by the difference between
supply and demand curves in other countries. We assumed the same elasticities we observe for the U.S.
(a plausible assumption for Canada and Mexico) and fit linear net export equations for 2007 and 2013
accordingly. Equilibrium prices and quantities in the counterfactual scenario are similar using this method
to what we report in the text.
23
For comparison, the observed prices in our data are $8.00 and $3.82, respectively. The difference arises
from our assumption that mark-ups are constant over time within each sector.
22

16

Table 2: Natural Gas Price Decrease and Changes in Consumer and Producer Surplus Associated with Shale Gas, 2007–2013
Alternative
elasticities
Low 2
High 1

Base case

Low 1

3.45

2.19

3.06

4.12

4.16

Change in consumer surplus, $billion per year
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Electric power

74
17
11
22
25

45
10
7
13
15

60
14
9
17
20

92
20
13
28
31

93
20
13
28
31

Change in producer surplus, $billion per year

-26

-8

-20

-40

-37

Change in total surplus, $billion per year

48

37

41

52

56

Counterfactual price decrease, $ per mcf

High 2

Note: The left-most column represents the base case, with elasticities as estimated in the text. In
“Low 1,” the demand elasticities are doubled, and the supply elasticity is halved. In “Low 2” all
elasticities are doubled. In “High 1” all elasticities are halved. In “High 2” the demand elasticities
are halved and the supply elasticity doubled.

commercial, industrial, and electric power sectors. The electric power sector, which in 2013
consumed the largest amount of natural gas, experienced the greatest benefit from the price
decline, with an increase in consumer surplus of around $25 billion. Consumer surplus in the
industrial sector increased by around $22 billion, residential by $17 billion, and commercial
by $11 billion per year. The welfare results are a function of the elasticities we use in our
calculations, through both the impact on the counterfactual price and through the impact
on the demand and supply functions themselves. Table 2 shows welfare measures for four
alternative cases, corresponding to the alternative assumptions on price elasticities described
in section 2. The total increase in consumer surplus ranges from a low of $45 billion per year
to a high of $93 billion.24
Table 3 breaks out the change in consumer surplus by region. We calculate each region’s
change in consumer surplus using our counterfactual price change and each Census division’s
sectoral counterfactual quantity change.25 For ease of comparison across divisions, we divide
by the population in 2013. It is important to note that these calculations do not account
24

This range is qualitatively similar to the calculation done by Mason, Muehlenbachs and Olmstead (2014).
Under an assumed elasticity of -0.5 for overall demand, they calculate a change in consumer surplus of $65
billion per year.
25
We also explored allowing price elasticities to vary by region. The residential elasticity, for instance,
might vary according to how much demand is used for space heating as opposed to cooking. Similarly, the
electric power elasticity might vary by how much of electric capacity is coal-fired plants versus natural gas.
The resulting elasticity estimates were noisy, as expected. Reassuringly, the consumer surplus estimates were
qualitatively similar to those presented in table 3.

17

Table 3: Regional Impact on Natural Gas Purchasers
Change in consumer surplus, 2007 to 2013, before spillovers,
Dollars per year per person

Census division

New England
Middle Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific

Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Electric
power

Total,
All sectors

50
71
99
73
25
33
31
57
42

39
50
53
51
21
24
26
35
23

26
24
77
94
29
81
212
34
54

75
76
30
20
92
101
163
83
62

190
220
259
237
167
239
432
209
181

Note: For all four sectors, the counterfactual price change is a fall of $3.45 per mcf, as
described in the previous section. New England includes CT, MA, ME, NH, RI, and
VT. Middle Atlantic includes NJ, NY, and PA. East North Central includes IL, IN, MI,
OH, and WI. West North Central includes IA, KS, MN, MO, ND, NE, and SD. South
Atlantic includes DC, DE, FL, GA, MD, NC, SC, VA, and WV. East South Central
includes AL, KY, MS, and TN. West South Central includes AR, LA, OK, and TX.
Mountain includes AZ, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, UT, and WY. Pacific includes CA, OR,
and WA.

for spillovers across regions. For instance, some of the electric power produced in one state
is consumed in other states. Similarly, benefits in the industrial sector could be accruing to
out-of-state consumers and shareholders as opposed to in-state employees. Nevertheless, we
believe this is a useful first pass at disaggregating benefits by region, and some results in
particular are worth highlighting.
Ex-ante, one might have predicted that the bulk of the benefits would accrue to cold
weather states that use a lot of natural gas for space heating. In fact, however, the region
with the greatest impact by far is West South Central, comprised of Arkansas, Louisiana,
Oklahoma, and Texas. This result is driven by the impact on the industrial and electric power
sectors, both of which used substantial amounts of natural gas over this time period. The
region with the second largest change is East North Central, comprised of Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin; there the result is driven by both residential and industrial
impacts.
More generally, the “purchasers” definition of these sectors aggregates across many economic agents. The benefits for the residential sector, for instance, could in principle accrue
to either utilities providing natural gas or households who heat with natural gas. Similarly,
the commercial and industrial sectors include both companies (employees and shareholders)
and the purchasers of their products. Finally, the benefits for the electric power could be
accruing to electric power companies, households consuming electric power, commercial and
18

industrial users of power, or the consumers of goods those companies produce. We next
separate out some of these agents, considering pass-through to retail natural gas and electric
power prices, and we will later also consider pass-through to some finished manufacturing
products.

3.2

Pass-Through to Product Prices

Here we explore how the benefits to consumers accrue to households versus industries. We
first note that providers of natural gas are generally regulated with average cost, or rateof-return, regulations. As such, we expect the long-run pass-through of wholesale natural
gas prices to retail natural gas prices to be one-to-one (in levels), although the adjustment
may be slow depending on the structure of the price regulations. We verify this one-toone pass-through empirically for all four demand sectors, using the same data we used for
the elasticity estimation. Panel A of table 4 shows results from estimation of the following
regression for pass-through of the wholesale Henry Hub price to sector-level retail prices:
log Pitretail =

11
X

HenryHub
retail
αl log Pt−l
+ γ log Pi,t−1
+ βWP t + µP it + δP t + εP st

(3)

l=0

Because pass-through is unlikely to be immediate, we include a lagged dependent variable
and several lags of the Henry Hub price in the regression. We also include controls for weather
WP t , state-by-month-of-year effects µP t , and year effects δP t . As shown in panel A of table
4, we cannot reject long-run one-to-one pass-through for any of the four sectors (estimates of
individual coefficients on the price regressors are given in the appendix). This result matches
our intuition regarding price regulation.
Panel B of table 4 presents a 2SLS specification that instruments for the Henry Hub
price with lagged weather (HDDs and CDDs). Power issues in the first stage preclude us
from using multiple lags of the Henry Hub price as explanatory variables; instead we use
only the contemporaneous Henry Hub price. The intuition for why OLS may be biased is
as follows: a positive shock to retail prices will drive down quantity consumed, which in
turn will drive down the Henry Hub price. This issue should only be qualitatively important
if shocks to retail prices are correlated across states, and in practice the OLS and 2SLS
results are similar. Overall, with one-to-one pass-through, we expect that local natural gas
distribution companies have not benefited from the supply boom.
The residential sector is composed of households that use natural gas primarily for heating
and cooking. Our estimates imply that these households have substantially benefited from
the price drop. Average residential natural gas bills have decreased by 19 billion dollars per
19

Table 4: Pass-Through of Henry Hub to Retail Natural Gas Prices
Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Electric power

Panel A: OLS
Henry Hub price (long-run)

1.18
(0.19)

1.08
(0.11)

1.00
(0.08)

0.94
(0.12)

Panel B: 2SLS
Henry Hub price (long-run)

0.99
(0.14)

1.03
(0.07)

0.99
(0.08)

1.02
(0.06)

Note: This table reports results of the impact of Henry Hub prices (in levels) on retail
prices (in levels) for each of the four retail sectors. As described in the text, the electric
power price we use is the citygate price. Panel A reports OLS results of estimation of
retail residential prices on lagged retail price, current Henry Hub price, and 1 throuh 11
lags of Henry Hub price. These regressions control for year effects and state by month
effects. Standard errors are clustered by sample month. Panel B reports 2SLS results
using only one lag of the Henry Hub price, instrumenting with lagged national weather.
These regressions control for current and one-month lagged own-state weather, state by
month-of-year effects, and a linear time trend. Standard errors are two-way clustered
by sample month and state. Full results for both sets of regressions are shown in the
appendix.

year from 2007 to 2013; of this, we attribute 13 billion dollars per year to the supply boom
(and the remaining portion to the impact of secular changes to overall demand). This bill
change, however, does not represent the full benefit to households, who chose to consume
more in response to the price fall. Overall, as indicated by table 2, the residential sector
has benefited from the supply boom by $17 billion per year in increased consumer surplus
in 2013.
In the commercial sector, natural gas is again used primarily for heating. With one-toone pass-through of wholesale to retail gas prices, consumer surplus will again not accrue to
local gas providers. It is beyond the scope of this paper to divide the $111 billion increase
in consumer surplus per year between employees, shareholders, and customers.
The fall in natural gas prices has transformed the electric power industry, as documented
by a growing body of literature. Brehm (2015), Cullen and Mansur (2014), Holladay and
LaRiviere (2014), Knittel, Metaxoglou and Trindade (2014), and Linn, Muehlenbachs and
Wang (2014) document substantial coal-to-gas switching when natural gas prices fall, with
implications for carbon emissions as well as local air pollutants such as SO2 , NOx , particulate
matter, and mercury. In analyzing the implications of low natural gas prices on fuel use
in the electricity sector, much of the existing literature has focused on short-run impacts
on the intensive margin, especially fuel use at existing plants. With respect to long-run
effects, Brehm (2015) finds some evidence that natural gas power plant investment has been
20

impacted, and Krupnick, Wang and Wang (2013) simulates changes in power plant capacity
under various shale expansion scenarios. Davis and Hausman (2014) points to the effect of
low natural gas prices on nuclear power plant financial viability; whether any plants will
close because of fracking remains an open question.
In its analysis of the electricity sector, Linn, Muehlenbachs and Wang (2014) also examines the impact of shale gas on wholesale electricity prices. The fuel switching described
above suggests that electric generators’ natural gas demand is not constant elasticity as we
have assumed, since the elasticity will be greatest over the gas price range in which coal-fired
and gas-fired plants’ marginal costs overlap. The impact of a fall in the price of natural gas
on electricity prices depends on whether natural gas plans are on the margin, which in turn
varies by hour, month, and region. In California, for instance, natural gas plants are on the
margin in all hours, so wholesale electricity prices should be very sensitive to natural gas
prices. In the Midwest, on the other hand, the very large capacity of coal-fired plants means
that electricity prices are not always determined by natural gas prices. Generally, gas prices
should have a larger impact in regions with lower coal-fired generation capacity; they should
also have a larger impact at hours of day and times of year when demand is high enough for
natural gas plants to be marginal. Matching this intuition, Linn, Muehlenbachs and Wang
(2014) finds larger impacts for “on-peak” wholesale electricity prices; that is, prices at hours
of day when demand is expected to be high.
The impact of lower wholesale electricity prices on end-use consumers of course depends
on how retail electricity prices adjust. We expect one-to-one pass-through of wholesale
electricity rates to retail rates in the long run, because of rate-of-return regulations. Overall,
then, we should expect that lower electricity prices driven by the shale boom have benefited
consumers, including both households and electricity-intensive industries. Infra-marginal
power plants, such as those powered by coal or nuclear technologies, will have lost, and in
the long-run, some of them may close.
In section 5, we consider the U.S. manufacturing sector in more detail. In particular,
we show which industrial sectors have benefited the most from the decrease in the price of
natural gas, and we discuss pass-through for a few important chemical products for which
data are available.

3.3

Producers of Natural Gas

We now turn to estimating the change in producer surplus brought about by the shale boom.
This exercise differs from that for consumer surplus in that we must consider not only the
difference between counterfactual and equilibrium prices in 2013, but also the substantial

21

shift in supply shown in figure 4. Thus, following figure 4, in order to calculate the change
in producer surplus we must calculate the area bounded by the counterfactual pre-period
price ($7.33 per mcf) and the 2007 supply curve (which we take to be the counterfactual
2013 supply curve), calculate the area bounded by the 2013 price ($3.88 per mcf) and the
2013 supply curve, and then take the difference.
One difficulty in performing this calculation arises from the fact that the shift in supply
along the entire supply curve will affect the result. That is, we need to model the supply
shift not just in the neighborhood of the 2007 and 2013 equilibrium quantities (i.e., the
range of quantities shown in figure 4) but also all the way back to a quantity of zero. One
potential approach to doing so would be to assume that the elasticity of supply is globally
constant. This assumption is problematic, however, due to the large volume of inframarginal
gas production from wells drilled during or prior to 2007. For these wells, the marginal cost
of production is essentially zero and is unaffected by the technological change that enabled
the drilling, fracking, and production of shale gas resources.26
To calculate the quantity of 2013 production that comes from wells drilled prior to 2007
(inclusive), we follow Anderson, Kellogg and Salant (2014) by assuming that the 2007 production quantity would have declined exponentially had no new wells been drilled. We use a
decline rate for conventional gas wells of 11.1% per year, obtained from Credit Suisse (2012).
This value is similar to that estimated for Texas crude oil wells in Anderson, Kellogg and
Salant (2014) (below, we examine the sensitivity of our results to this assumption). Given
2007 equilibrium natural gas production of 1,450 bcf/month, we therefore estimate that 717
bcf/month of 2013 natural gas production is inframarginal. Note that a small but non-trivial
share of 2007 gas production was from shale reservoirs (8.1%).27 Because shale gas wells are
widely believed to experience steeper production declines than conventional wells, we are
likely overestimating the volume of 2013 inframarginal production.
To extend the 2013 counterfactual and realized supply curves to a quantity of zero, we
assume that marginal cost is zero for all quantities less than 717 bcf/month.28 The resulting
supply curves are presented along with 2013 demand in figure 5. In this figure, the supply
curves to the right of 717 bcf/month are identical to those presented in figure 4 above. These
portions of the supply curves represent gas production from new wells as a function of the
26

See Anderson, Kellogg and Salant (2014) for a discussion of why the marginal cost of production from
previously drilled wells is essentially zero, though that paper focuses on oil rather than gas wells.
27
Per EIA gas withdrawal data, gross 2007 withdrawals were 24.66 tcf, and shale withdrawals were 1.99
tcf. The ratio is 8.1%.
28
Our producer surplus change calculations would be unaffected by assuming a non-zero marginal cost,
so long as this MC were smaller than the 2013 equilibrium price of $3.88 per mcf. The key to the producer
surplus change calculation is not the level of the MC, but rather the fact that the MC for production from
previously drilled wells is not affected by shale gas drilling and fracking technology.

22

Figure 5: Supply and Demand in the U.S. Natural Gas Market, Including
Inframarginal Supply

Note: The vertical part of the supply curve denotes the quantity of 2013 natural gas production that
we estimate to be coming from wells drilled during or prior to 2007. See text for details. As described
in the text, the equilibrium prices are not at the intersection of domestic supply and demand, since
they also account for imports and exports.

natural gas price, per the elasticity estimated in section 1.2.29 These constant elasticity
segments still involve extrapolation, as the kink point at 717 bcf/month lies below the range
of quantities used to estimate the supply elasticities (figure 4). For 2013, the supply curve
near the kink point may lie below its position in figure 5, owing to natural gas production
from new shale oil wells that would have been drilled even at very low gas prices. Our
producer surplus calculations will under-estimate the surplus associated with this low-cost
gas.
Following figure 5, we estimate total producer surplus of $52 billion per year in 2013, of
which $33 billion comes from inframarginal production and $19 billion comes from the elastic
part of the supply curve. Inframarginal producer surplus under the counterfactual supply
and gas price is much greater—$63 billion per year—owing to the substantially higher gas
price in the counterfactual. However, surplus from the elastic portion of the supply curve
is lower in the counterfactual—only $15 billion—since the equilibrium quantity produced is
29

This portion of the supply curves in figure 5 can be thought of as representing the amortized per mcf
drilling cost for the marginal well at each production level.

23

smaller. Overall, we find that 2013 producer surplus is lower than that of the counterfactual
by $26 billion per year. This surplus reduction is driven entirely by losses to inframarginal
producers that are adversely affected by the decrease in the natural gas price.30
Table 2 gives alternative producer surplus estimates using the alternative elasticity assumptions described earlier. The change in 2013 producer surplus ranges from a drop of
$8 billion per year to a drop of $40 billion. Additionally, we considered robustness of the
results to alternative decline rates. For a halving of the assumed decline rate, the change
in producer surplus is a drop of $36 billion; for a doubling of the rate, producer surplus
decreases by $19 billion.
While we do not have comprehensive drilling data for all states, we are able to observe
production volumes for many individual states. Table 5 shows the change in producer surplus
for the ten states with the greatest natural gas production over the period 2007 to 2013.31
The difference in the impact on inframarginal producers versus marginal producers drives
substantial heterogeneity across gas producing states. In particular, states with large volumes
of conventional natural gas experienced decreases in producer surplus, while states with
predominantly shale resources have seen increases. Arkansas, home to the Fayetteville Shale
play, and Pennsylvania, where the Marcellus Shale is located, both saw substantial increases
in supply from 2007 to 2013. These supply increases were large enough to cause an increase
in producer surplus. Pennsylvania in particular saw an increase in producer surplus of $5
billion per year from 2007 to 2013. In contrast, most other states saw falls in producer
surplus, as the increase from marginal producers was not large enough to offset the decrease
in revenues from existing wells.
These surplus calculations are simplified as they are derived from a static framework.
For instance, losses to inframarginal producers will extend forward into time because shale
gas will continue to depress the natural gas price, though the losses will diminish over time
as the inframarginal production rate decays (conversely, monthly inframarginal losses were
higher in years before 2013 when inframarginal production was greater). Gains to owners of
newly-drilled wells will be spread over the lifetimes of these wells. The estimated producer
surplus changes are therefore best interpreted as estimates of surplus flows for 2013 that will
30

If we had instead simply extrapolated the constant elasticity supply curves to the origin, the estimate
for the change in producer surplus would have been -$18 billion per year. Our constant elasticity of supply
would have implied that marginal cost shifted down everywhere along the supply curve, rather than just for
new wells, and therefore producers would have lost less.
31
Disaggregation across states introduces some error into the producer surplus estimates. In particular,
the 2013 supply curve for the United States as a whole is not a linear sum of the state-level curves, because
of the kink. The national estimate probably more closely reflects the true marginal cost curve: the constant
elasticity assumption at the state level leads to underestimates of marginal cost for some new wells in states
like Pennsylvania with relatively little pre-2007 production.

24

Table 5: State-level Impacts of Shale Gas on Producers

Arkansas
Colorado
Louisiana
New Mexico
Oklahoma
Pennsylvania
Texas
Utah
West Virginia
Wyoming

2007
supply, bcf

2013
supply, bcf

Change in
annual PS,
billion $

Percent
change in PS

232
1069
1174
1305
1534
157
5266
324
199
1761

980
1380
2070
1028
1844
2803
6489
405
617
1598

1.1
-1.6
-0.6
-3
-2.5
5.4
-8.3
-0.5
0.5
-3.8

104%
-32%
-12%
-52%
-36%
758%
-35%
-34%
51%
-48%

Note: In all states, the counterfactual price change is a fall of $3.45 per
mcf, as described in the text. These ten states were the largest natural
gas producing states over 2007 to 2013. Supply numbers are net of drilling
and pipeline operations use and net of liquids extraction, as described in
the text.

evolve over the years to come.
Producer surplus likely accrues to several types of economic agents. For production
from legacy wells, surplus is split between mineral rights owners and leaseholders (oil and
gas production companies) per production royalties. Mineral rights owners’ royalty shares
vary both within and across shale plays (Brown, Fitzgerald and Weber (2015) finds average
royalties ranging from 13.2% in the Marcellus Shale to 21.2% in the Permian Basin), and
Brown, Fitzgerald and Weber (2015) suggests that these owners are likely not capturing the
full economic rents from shale development. State governments may also be affected through
severance taxation (see Raimi and Newell (2014) for a summary). For new wells, surplus
will also accrue to owners of scarce capital inputs—in particular, owners of drilling rigs
and fracking equipment. Skilled labor shortages may also cause rents to accrue to workers.
Indeed, it is this capital and labor scarcity that gives rise to the upward slope in the supply
curves in figures 4 and 5 (see Anderson, Kellogg and Salant (2014) for a discussion).
The overall welfare change from shale gas accruing to consumers and producers is shown
in figure 6. Area A is the transfer from natural gas producers to purchasers; area B is new
consumer surplus, and area C is new producer surplus. Thus the change in total surplus
from 2007 to 2013 is the combination of B and C, equal to $48 billion per year. That is,
the welfare gains accruing to natural gas consumers more than offset the losses accruing to
natural gas producers. Table 2 gives alternative estimates for the total change in surplus,
ranging from a low of $37 billion per year to a high of $56 billion; the alternative assumptions
on elasticities or decline rates impact the estimated transfer from producers to consumers
25

Figure 6: Change in Surplus

Note: The thick lines show 2007, and thin lines 2013. As described in the text, the equilibrium prices
are not at the intersection of domestic supply and demand, since they also account for imports and
exports.

more than they impact the total change in surplus. Figure 6 provides some intuition for
this: the magnitude of area B+C is in large part determined by observed quantities in 2007
and 2013, combined with the fact that marginal cost for existing wells is not impacted by
the supply expansion. While alternative elasticity assumptions have a fairly large impact on
the counterfactual price change and accordingly on the size of A (the transfer), there is only
a moderate impact on B+C (new surplus) for 2013. It is worth noting that larger supply
and demand elasticities in the future, through additional capital replacement or innovation
effects, would lead to greater quantity effects, and therefore larger total welfare gains.

4

Impacts From LNG Exports

Beyond shedding light on the impacts of the shale gas revolution to date, our framework is
also useful for assessing the potential impacts of policies that will affect the U.S. natural gas
market. In particular, a debate has emerged regarding whether to permit large-scale overseas
export of liquified natural gas (LNG). Exporting LNG is expensive; a NERA (2014) study
used a LNG transport cost of $6.33/mcf for the US to Europe, $6.65 to Korea and Japan,

26

and $7.79 to China and India.32 Nonetheless, the large differential between the U.S. gas
price and prices in Europe and Asia (figure 2) has spurred strong interest in construction of
LNG export terminals. As of February 5, 2015, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) has approved construction of five export terminals with a total planned capacity of
9.2 bcf per day (FERC 2015a), and 14 additional terminals have been proposed, having a
total planned capacity of 15.4 bcf per day (FERC 2015b). All of the approved projects are
currently under construction.
Our natural gas demand and supply model illustrated in figure 6 provides guidance on how
expanding natural gas exports will impact consumer and producer welfare. Holding domestic
demand and supply fixed at 2013 levels, LNG exports will drive up the U.S. equilibrium
natural gas price, reducing consumer surplus but increasing producer surplus. In this section,
we use our model to quantify these effects for two scenarios: (1) LNG exports equal to the
capacity of all approved LNG projects, and (2) LNG exports equal to the capacity of all
approved and proposed LNG projects. These calculations complement EIA (2014), which
simulates U.S. natural gas price, production, and consumption impacts from LNG exports
using a variety of modeling scenarios from the 2014 EIA Annual Energy Outlook. Another
related paper is Arora and Cai (2014), which studies potential global impacts from LNG
exports. Our analysis holds the U.S. domestic supply and demand curves for natural gas
constant at their 2013 locations, as estimated in section 2. We also assume, as in section
2, that the function for non-LNG net imports from Canada and Mexico is constant. Thus,
when we simulate LNG exports, the resulting gas price increase will cause a decrease in U.S.
consumption, an increase in U.S. production, and an increase in non-LNG net imports.
Under the LNG export scenarios, we calculate the equilibrium U.S. natural gas price by
finding the price at which the U.S. quantity produced minus the U.S. quantity consumed,
plus non-LNG net imports, equals LNG exports. The resulting price in the “approved LNG”
scenario is $4.37 per mcf (relative to the 2013 equilibrium price of $3.88 per mcf), and the
price in the “approved plus proposed LNG” scenario is $5.24 per mcf. These equlibrium
prices under LNG export are shown in figure 7.
We also calculate the changes in consumer and producer surplus, relative to the 2013
equilibrium, for both LNG scenarios. Under approved LNG exports, U.S. consumer surplus
contracts by $11.5 billion per year, and this effect is almost exactly offset by an expansion
of U.S. producer surplus by $11.6 billion per year (the net effect is an increase in surplus of
$0.1 billion per year). This near-perfect offset seems at first surprising, as an expansion of
export capacity is typically thought to increase producer surplus by more than it decreases
32

Of this, approximately $2.08/mcf was from amortized capital costs, $2.04/mcf was from pipeline costs,
and the rest was in the form of marginal costs for liquefaction, shipping, and regasification.

27

Figure 7: Impacts from LNG Exports

Note: FERC-approved LNG exports are 9.2 bcf/d (280 bcf/month), and FERC-approved plus proposed LNG exports are 24.6 bcf/d (748 bcf/month). The 2013 equilibrium price is not at the intersection of domestic supply and demand because net imports (from Canada and Mexico) are positive. For
the LNG scenarios, we assume a linear function for non-LNG net imports, as described in the text.

consumer surplus. In this case, however, net imports from Canada and Mexico also play an
important role. Because the U.S. is still a net importer of gas in 2013 (with the imports
coming from Canada), the increase in producer surplus brought about by LNG exports is
shared between U.S. and Canadian producers. Thus, while LNG exports must increase the
sum of consumer and producer surplus for all of North America, this sum need not increase
for the U.S. alone. In fact, for sufficiently small LNG exports, the sum of U.S. consumer and
producer surplus will decrease. The intuition for this effect can be seen in figure 7: starting
from the 2013 equilibrium, a small increase in the U.S. gas price reduces U.S. consumer
surplus more than it increases U.S. producer surplus.
For the “approved plus proposed LNG” scenario, the decrease in U.S. consumer surplus of
$31 billion per year is more than offset by an increase in U.S. producer surplus of $35 billion
per year. For this large expansion of LNG, the substantial increase in U.S. gas production
generates gains to producers that outweigh the losses to consumers.
Finally, it is important to note that these welfare calculations do not include any rents
accruing to the firms that invest in and operate the LNG export facilities. These rents will
be generated if the exported quantity is insufficient to bring the price difference between

28

international and U.S. natural gas down to the level of the long-run LNG transportation
cost (including liquifaction and re-gasification). Thus, it may be that for a small quantity of
LNG exports, the sum of the change in U.S. consumer, producer, and exporter surplus will
be positive. Addressing this issue quantitatively is beyond the scope of this paper.

5

A Manufacturing Renaissance?

Considerable interest has been directed toward the question of whether the shale gas revolution will result in a “renaissance” in U.S. manufacturing. Natural gas is an important direct
input to industries such as chemical, plastics, and cement manufacturing, and through its
use in electricity generation it is an indirect input to essentially all manufacturing. Analysts
have forecasted large employment gains in manufacturing because of low natural gas prices
(PWC, 2011, 2014). In this section, we explore the extent to which the new availability
of low-cost natural gas has spurred the expansion of U.S. industries with gas-intensive production processes. Note that our analysis in this section does not consider how the shale
revolution may have caused some sectors (such as steel pipe manufacturing) to expand employment and output through their production of inputs to the oil and gas industry. Changes
in surplus earned via the manufacturing of such products are in principle included in our
producer surplus calculations.
Our investigation complements a recent empirical working paper, Melick (2014), which
finds, using energy intensity and business activity data aggregated to 80 sectors, that gasintensive manufacturing sectors respond more strongly to natural gas price shocks than other
manufacturing sectors. The paper’s regression results imply that the most energy-intensive
sectors have expanded by 30% in response to the change in natural gas prices from 2006–
2013. Our approach differs in that we study highly disaggregated U.S. Economic Census
data, ultimately broken out into 230 manufacturing sectors, which allows for greater focus
on particularly gas-intensive industries.
We obtain data on sector-level manufacturing activity from the 2002, 2007, and 2012
Economic Censuses (ECs). An advantage of these data is their level of disaggregation:
there are 473 manufacturing sectors in 2002, 471 in 2007, and 364 in 2012. For each EC
year, we gather for each industry the number of establishments, total employment, total
compensation, and total capital expenditure.33
We obtain measures of sector-level natural gas intensity from the Bureau of Economic
33

The ECs also provide information on the dollar value of each sector’s output and its value added. We do
not use this information because it introduces considerable noise from fluctuations in industrial commodity
prices.

29

Analysis (BEA) 2007 input-output (IO) tables. These tables provide industry input requirements and product outputs for 389 sectors, of which 238 are in manufacturing (North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes beginning with 3). In the BEA system, direct natural gas inputs into manufacturing flow almost entirely through sector 221200,
natural gas distribution. In addition, all sectors consume natural gas indirectly, especially
through their use of electricity. Our natural gas intensity measure for each manufacturing
sector is therefore its total (direct + indirect) input requirement from sector 221200,34 which
can be calculated directly from the IO tables.35 These industry requirements are measured
in dollars of natural gas input per dollar of industry output, all at 2007 prices. Finally, we
merge our BEA gas intensity data with the EC data by NAICS code. This merge requires
aggregation of the EC sectors to match the smaller number of BEA sectors, though there
are a small number of BEA sectors that also require aggregation to match the 2012 EC.36
Our final matched dataset has 230 manufacturing sectors.
Across all sectors, the weighted average natural gas intensity is $0.018 of gas input per
dollar of output (weighting is by 2007 BEA industry output). However, there is considerable
variation and right-skewness in the intensity data. Table 6 presents the natural gas intensity for each sector at or above the 90th intensity percentile. The 90th percentile sector,
“aluminum product manufacturing from purchased aluminum,” has a gas intensity of 0.034,
84% greater than the average. The most gas-intensive manufacturing sector in the economy,
fertilizer manufacturing, has a gas intensity of 0.143 (680% greater than the average). The
gas intensity of the fertilizer industry is actually 53% greater than that of the second-most
gas intense industry, lime and gypsum product manufacturing. This particularly high natural gas intensity derives from the fact that natural gas is the chemical feedstock for virtually
all nitrogen-based fertilizer production (i.e., gas is not used merely for process heat).37
Our first analysis of manufacturing sector growth is presented in table 7. This table shows
changes in manufacturing establishment counts, employment, employee compensation, and
capital expenditure between the 2002 and 2007 ECs, and between the 2007 and 2012 ECs.
We focus our attention on changes from 2007 to 2012, as this was the period during which
the shale boom substantially decreased the U.S. natural gas price. Table 7 groups sectors by
their manufacturing intensity, separately presenting activity changes for sectors below the
90th intensity percentile, for sectors above the 90th percentile, for sectors above the 95th
34

The results of our analysis are qualitatively unchanged if we instead only use direct natural gas requirements.
35
Details on these calculations are provided in the appendix.
36
Details on the merge are provided in the appendix.
37
Nitrogen-based fertilizers are derived from ammonia (NH3 ), which is made by combining atmospheric
nitrogen with hydrogen via the Haber process. Hydrogen is in turn produced via steam reforming of natural
gas: reacting natural gas (CH4 ) with water (H2 O) to produce hydrogen (H2 ) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ).

30

Table 6: Natural Gas Intensity for Manufacturing Sectors at or above the 90th Percentile

NAICS
Code

33131B
313300
311210
331314
325180
3252A0
325211
327992
33131A
327993
327100
327200
325190
322120
322110
322130
327310
325110
311221
327400
325310

Sector

Aluminum product manufacturing from purchased aluminum
Textile and fabric finishing and fabric coating mills
Flour milling and malt manufacturing
Secondary smelting and alloying of aluminum
Other basic inorganic chemical manufacturing
Synthetic rubber and artificial and synthetic fibers
and filaments manufacturing
Plastics material and resin manufacturing
Ground or treated mineral and earth manufacturing
Alumina refining and primary aluminum production
Mineral wool manufacturing
Clay product and refractory manufacturing
Glass and glass product manufacturing
Other basic organic chemical manufacturing
Paper mills
Pulp mills
Paperboard mills
Cement manufacturing
Petrochemical manufacturing
Wet corn milling
Lime and gypsum product manufacturing
Fertilizer manufacturing

Gas intensity
(dollars of gas
per dollar of output)

Weighted
intensity
percentile

2007 Industry
output
($million)

0.034
0.034
0.034
0.036
0.038
0.040

90
91
91
91
91
92

25770
8995
13264
7698
29165
15498

0.041
0.042
0.043
0.044
0.046
0.051
0.052
0.054
0.060
0.067
0.069
0.073
0.082
0.094
0.143

92
94
94
94
94
94
95
97
98
98
98
98
100
100
100

83876
3102
7798
5836
8373
22955
97786
49742
5049
25216
10182
75752
11728
7392
17348

Note: Natural gas intensity is the total (direct + indirect) gas requirement for each sector divided by the sector’s output.
These values are derived from the 2007 BEA IO tables as described in the text. 2007 industry output is from the 2007 BEA
Make table. Intensity percentiles are weighted by 2007 BEA industry output.

percentile, and for fertilizer manufacturing.
The first set of rows in table 7 shows that sectors outside the 90th intensity percentile
have experienced declining establishment counts, employment, and employee compensation,
especially over the 2007–2012 period that includes the Great Recession. The remaining rows
show that these declines were not as steep for sectors above the 90th and 95th intensity
percentiles, and that employee compensation actually increased for these sectors. For fertilizer manufacturing, by far the most gas-intensive manufacturing sector, the establishment
count, employment, and compensation all increased considerably between 2007 and 2012.
The change in capital expenditure from 2007 to 2012, while positive for non-gas-intensive
sectors, is larger for sectors above the 90th percentile, and was a massive 233% for fertilizer
manufacturing. It is therefore clear that manufacturing sectors that are particularly gas
intensive have expanded relative to other manufacturing sectors since the onset of the shale
gas boom.38
38

The establishment count, employment, and compensation changes for 2007–2012 for sectors above the
90th percentile are greater than those for sectors below the 90th percentile even if fertilizer manufacturing is
excluded. Establishments, employment, and compensation change by -7.1%, -13.7%, and 3.8%, respectively.

31

Table 7: Changes in Manufacturing Sector Activity: 2002–
2007 and 2007–2012
Employee
compensation

Capital
expenditure

Sectors with natural gas intensity < 90th percentile
2002 to 2007
-5.8%
-9.0%
2007 to 2012
-10.6%
-16.5%

9.9%
-3.7%

21.3%
4.9%

Sectors with natural gas intensity ≥ 90th percentile
2002 to 2007
-3.5%
-14.7%
2007 to 2012
-6.2%
-13.1%

-1.9%
4.3%

36.8%
8.5%

Sectors with natural gas intensity ≥ 95th percentile
2002 to 2007
-0.6%
-14.3%
2007 to 2012
1.7%
-8.6%

-1.0%
9.1%

46.5%
2.5%

Fertilizer manufacturing (NAICS 325310)
2002 to 2007
-9.5%
-15.8%
2007 to 2012
8.3%
8.6%

8.5%
24.8%

20.4%
232.7%

Years

Number of
establishments

Employment

Note: Manufacturing sector activity data come from the 2002, 2007, and 2012 economic censuses (ECs) and are merged with sector-level natural gas intensity data
per the discussion in the text. Values shown are percent changes in activity from
the 2002 to 2007 EC and from the 2007 to 2012 EC. Percentile classifications of
sectors are weighted on 2007 sector output from the BEA. Sector-level percentiles
for sectors above the 90th percentile are shown in table 6.

Interpretation of the changes in gas-intensive manufacturing activity as being caused by
the shale boom requires a counterfactual for what would have happened during 2007–2012
absent shale gas. One possible counterfactual is that gas-intensive sectors would have experienced the same contraction as did non-gas-intensive sectors. In this case, the effect of
shale gas on gas-intensive manufacturing is given by the difference between 2007 to 2012
activity changes for intense versus non-intense sectors. Specifically, under this counterfactual shale gas caused sectors above the 90th intensity percentile to experience increases in
establishments, employment, compensation, and capital expenditure of 4.4%, 3.4%, 8.0%,
and 3.6%, respectively. An alternative counterfactual is that gas-intensive sectors’ activity
changes from 2007–2012 would differ from changes in non-gas-intensive sectors according to
the 2002–2007 pre-trends. For instance, employment in sectors above the 90th percentile decreased by 5.7 percentage points more than employment in non-gas-intensive sectors between
2002 and 2007, and we might have expected this difference to persist over 2007–2012 absent
shale gas. Under this counterfactual, the shale boom caused sectors above the 90th intensity
percentile to experience increases in establishments, employment, and compensation of 2.2%,
9.1%, and 19.8%, respectively, and a decrease in capital expenditure of 11.9% (the “triple
Changes relative to the 2002–2007 pre-trend are still substantially larger than for non-intense sectors. The
change in capital expenditure, however, is relatively small: 2.7%.

32

differenced” capital expenditure effect is positive, however, for fertilizer manufacturing).
Overall, this analysis suggests that employment in gas-intensive industries was 3.4% to
9.1% higher in 2012 because of low natural gas prices, a noticeable impact. However, total
employment for the industries at or above the 90th percentile of natural gas intensity was
only 710,000 in 2013, implying that the number of additional jobs from fracking in those
industries was in the range of 24,000 to 65,000.
What about employment impacts for manufacturing sectors outside the 90th percentile?
Given that average gas intensity in manufacturing is only 2%, we do not expect large percentage changes in employment from the gas price change. It is plausible, however, that even
a small percentage change could imply many additional jobs, when aggregated across all of
manufacturing. To analyze this possibility, we estimate the correlation between gas intensity
and changes in manufacturing employment from 2007 to 2012. Specifically, we regress log
employment by industry in 2012 on gas intensity, controlling for log employment in both
2002 and 2007 and weighting by industry output.39 Conceptually, this regression is similar
to the “triple differenced” numbers we report above, but it allows us to study changes within
the non-gas-intensive sectors. Including log employment in 2002 and 2007 as explanatory
variables is important, since pre-existing secular trends in manufacturing activity may be
correlated with gas intensity. Additionally, we control for 3-digit NAICS code fixed effects
to isolate the variation within broad categories of manufacturing.
We estimate a coefficient on gas intensity of 1.3 (with a standard error of 0.8; full regression results in the appendix), suggesting that for every additional percentage point of gas
intensity, employment in 2012 was 1.3% higher. Assuming that a zero-gas-intensity sector
would experience no change in employment from the natural gas price fall, we can calculate
total employment impacts as follows. First, we multiply, for each sector, the coefficient on
gas intensity by the sector’s gas intensity level and by its employment in 2007, yielding the
change in the number of jobs in that sector associated with the change in the sector’s natural
gas input cost. Summing across sectors, we find an increase in manufacturing employment of
around 280,000 in 2012; the 95% confidence interval is -60,000 to 610,000. For comparison,
total manufacturing employment in 2012 was around 11 million. Overall, while it is difficult
to pinpoint a precise causal effect, the balance of the evidence suggests that manufacturing
has experienced an expansion of activity as a result of the shale boom. The total employment effect would, of course, depend on whether new jobs in manufacturing were moved from
other sectors (a multiplier less than one) or whether this growth contributed to employment
in other sectors (a multiplier greater than one). In addition, the 2007 to 2012 time period we
39

This regression relies on the employment elasticity with respect to gas prices being proportional to gas
share. This proportionality is true for a CES production function and constant elasticity demand.

33

study may be too brief to observe the full long-run effect of decreased natural gas prices on
manufacturing employment: slow-moving investments in capital may need to be completed
before the full employment effects are realized.40
We conclude this section by studying prices for two gas-intensive chemical products for
which data are readily available: ammonia, a major fertilizer and the precursor to nearly
all other nitrogen-based fertilizers, and high density polyethylene (HDPE), a common type
of plastic. Ammonia is manufactured using methane, the primary chemical component
of natural gas, as a direct input. HDPE can be produced using ethane as a feedstock
(with ethylene as a crucial intermediate product), and ethane is the second most common
component of natural gas.41 These two products are interesting because, relative to their
natural gas inputs, their international transportation costs are low. Whereas methane has
a boiling point of −161 ◦ C, and ethane has a boiling point of −89 ◦ C, ammonia boils at
−33 ◦ C, and HDPE is a solid at room temperature, facilitating their shipment.
The ease of trade for ammonia and HDPE leads to international parity in their prices.
The left panel of figure 8 presents time series of ammonia prices for the U.S. Gulf Coast,
the Black Sea, and the Middle East. The figure makes clear that ammonia prices in these
three regions are tightly linked despite large overall price fluctuations. In particular, the
U.S. ammonia price does not substantially diverge from Black Sea and Middle East prices
after 2007, despite the large decrease in the U.S. natural gas price. The right panel of figure
8 shows a similar result for HDPE and its input, ethane.42 The U.S. and Western European
HDPE prices follow each other closely, even though the U.S. ethane price has fallen far
below ethane prices in Western Europe. The lack of pass-through of U.S. natural gas prices
to ammonia and HDPE prices implies that the welfare gains for these sectors caused by
cheap natural gas are accruing almost entirely to manufacturers rather than consumers.
The divergence between U.S. ammonia and natural gas prices also helps to explain the
tremendous expansion of U.S. fertilizer manufacturing shown in table 7 above. Because
ammonia prices are set on a large global market, U.S. fertilizer manufacturers are able to
expand their production without substantially affecting their output price. While we lack
sector-specific employment and production data for HDPE, the EIA reports that several
firms have now planned substantial investments in chemical plants that will use ethane to
produce ethylene, a key ingredient for HDPE and other plastics (EIA, 2015). This new
40
We have estimated the regression described above with investment as the dependent variable rather than
employment. The estimation results are very sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of the fertilizer sector.
41
HDPE can also be produced through the processing of crude oil, where the long-chain hydrocarbons in
crude can be “cracked” to produce ethylene.
42
The U.S. ethane prices are FOB contract prices, and the Western Europe ethane prices are derived by
Nexant. We obtain both series from Bloomberg.

34

Figure 8: U.S. and International Ammonia, Ethane, and HDPE Prices

Source: Bloomberg.

capacity—driven by low U.S. feedstock prices relative to prices elsewhere—is expected to
increase ethylene production by 40% once it comes online in 2017 or 2018 (EIA, 2015).

6

Environmental Externalities and Regulation

Scientists have identified a number of potential environmental impacts from fracking, although much research is still needed. Below we briefly summarize the concerns brought
forward to date. We then discuss how the existing environmental economics literature might
shed light on the options available to regulators.

6.1

Global Environmental Impacts

Unconventional natural gas extraction could impact climate change via several mechanisms,
and overall the impact could be to either decrease or increase total greenhouse gas emissions
(McJeon et al., 2014; Newell and Raimi, 2014). First, methane leaks can occur throughout
the natural gas production chain, and methane is a powerful greenhouse gas. The rate at
which methane is leaking from the supply chain is much debated (Moore et al., 2014); this is
in part because the leak rate is very heterogeneous across producers and sites (Brandt et al.,
2014). Below we discuss how this uncertainty impacts the optimal regulatory approach.
The second way fracking could impact climate change is through its combustion as fuel.
Two effects operate here: the lower price of natural gas encourages total energy use to rise (a
scale effect), and it encourages substitution away from other fuels, both less carbon-intensive
(renewables and nuclear) and more carbon-intensive (coal and oil). According to simulations

35

by Newell and Raimi (2014), the coal displacement effect has dominated both the scale effect
and the effect on renewables and nuclear use, so that domestic emissions from combustion
have decreased. After incorporating the effect of methane leaks, however, their results for
overall domestic greenhouse gas emissions are inconclusive. Moreover, the total global impact
depends on how much coal exports have increased. Newell and Raimi (2014) suggest the coal
export effect is small, but more research on the global coal market is needed to definitively
answer this question.
To illustrate the wide variation in potential climate impacts, consider two bounding scenarios.43 First, suppose that all displaced coal is exported, and international coal production
is not reduced at all (this is an extreme bound, both because some displaced coal is likely not
extracted, and because some international coal production is reduced). In this case, there
are no substitution benefits, and CO2 emissions increase from the scale effect. In this case,
CO2 emissions would have increased by 340 million tons in 2013 because of fracking; at the
IWG’s44 social cost of carbon (SCC) of $40/ton, this would be worth $13 billion per year.
Additionally, taking the highest methane leak rate number in the recent literature (7.9%),
methane emissions would have increased from 2007 to 2013 by 11 million tons; with a global
warming potential of 34, this would be worth an additional $15 billion per year.
At the other extreme, consider the case where the increase in gas-fired electricity generation displaced coal with no offsetting increase in exports (or equivalently, assume any increase
in coal exports was completely offset by reductions in coal production abroad). In this lower
bound case, CO2 emissions from electricity production would have decreased by 70 million
tons in 2013 because of fracking, implying a savings of $2.8 billion per year. Residential,
commercial, and industrial sector emissions, however, still would have increased by almost
130 million tons due to the scale effect, for a cost of $5.3 billion per year. Overall, in this
lower bound case, fracking would have led to a cost of $2.5 billion per year from increased
CO2 emissions. Newell and Raimi (2014) finds that the coal displacement effect dominates
the scale effect, a function of different demand elasticities.45 For a lower bounding case for
methane leaks, a leak rate of 0.42% would imply an increase in methane emissions of 0.5
million tons, worth $0.5 billion per year.
Overall, then, our bounding exercise suggests that the climate change impacts of fracking
in 2013 could have been anywhere from an increase in environmental costs of $3.0 billion
43

Parameter assumptions and calculations are given in the appendix.
IWG: Interagency Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government. See the
appendix for details.
45
The demand elasticities in Newell and Raimi (2014), all taken from the EIA’s NEMS model, are in the
range of -0.1 to -0.5 for the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors, but the elasticity for the electric
power sector is substantially larger.
44

36

per year to $28 billion per year, at a social cost of carbon of $40/ton. Some of this range is
from uncertainty regarding coal displacement, and some is from uncertainty over methane
leaks. An additional caveat is important and points to the need for additional research.
The long-run impact of low natural gas prices on the transition to a less carbon intensive
energy sector depends crucially on how the prices affect investment decisions (for new power
plants, the vehicle fleet, etc.) as well as future expenditures on research and development
(R&D). Existing models, such as the EPA’s NEMS model, incorporate investment decisions,
but impacts on R&D are largely unknown. It is worth highlighting that, while technology
has advanced for renewable energy sources such as solar and wind, the pace of technological
advances for oil and gas extraction in recent years has been astounding. In the absence of
climate policy, renewables must advance technologically faster than fossil fuels in order to
displace them.

6.2

Local Environmental Impacts

The environmental impact that has perhaps attracted the most attention to date is the potential for water contamination. Contamination can occur at several stages of the extraction
process, impacting either surface or groundwater. Damages can result from the natural gas
itself, the toxic fluids used in the fracking process, or other naturally occurring chemicals
released by the fracking process (Burton, Nadelhoffer and Presley, 2013). Concern has also
been raised about the volume of water used for fracking, and the potential for surface or
groundwater depletion. For a review of studies analyzing the risks to water, see Jackson
et al. (2014), Mason, Muehlenbachs and Olmstead (2014) and Small et al. (2014); the EPA
is also currently undertaking a large-scale review of water impacts (EPA, 2011).
A second area of concern relates to local air quality. Emissions of criteria and toxic pollutants could again result from several components of the extraction process, including the
well itself, compressor stations, or transport equipment (Mason, Muehlenbachs and Olmstead, 2014; Moore et al., 2014). On the other hand, increased natural gas production may
lead to air quality improvements to the extent that it causes displacement of coal in electric
power generation and therefore reductions in pollutants such SO2 , NOx , particulate matter,
and mercury.
Unconventional gas extraction also involves a great deal of transport equipment. In
addition to creating road dust, the increased trucking can lead to increased traffic accidents
and fatalities (Graham et al., 2015). The heavy truck traffic may also cause significant
damage to local roads; Abramzon et al. (2014) provides estimates of roadway damages for
the Marcellus Shale in Pennsylvania.

37

Additionally, scientists have pointed to earthquakes associated with the injection of
wastewater in fracking operations (EPA, 2014; Small et al., 2014). Comprehensive analysis
of this seismic activity is still lacking. As with conventional oil and gas extraction activity,
habitat fragmentation can also occur, and studies specific to the areas being newly developed for unconventional gas are still limited (Small et al., 2014; Mason, Muehlenbachs and
Olmstead, 2014). The final local externality that has raised concern is the suite of disamenities associated with a rapidly growing “boomtown,” including noise and crime. Overall,
the empirical evidence on these disamenities is mixed (Jacquet, 2014; Mason, Muehlenbachs
and Olmstead, 2014; Raimi and Newell, 2014), but they may well be large in some regions.
Finally, one recent study has found an impact of drilling on infant health in Pennsylvania,
but the precise mechanism is unknown (Hill, 2013).
Overall, a number of local environmental impacts have been identified, and site-specific
studies are accumulating. A valuable complement to our consumer and producer surplus
calculations would be a full monetization of these impacts. Unfortunately, that is not yet
possible given the state of the data on water and air quality. Even two recent federal rules on
fracking failed to monetize environmental impacts.46 Mason, Muehlenbachs and Olmstead
(2014) summarizes the limited damages estimated in the literature to date. For all of the
impacts, more analysis is still needed on their magnitude and geographic scope (Mason,
Muehlenbachs and Olmstead, 2014; Small et al., 2014). Only with improved physical data
on impacts will it be possible to obtain a comprehensive bottoms-up economic valuation of
the local environmental effects of fracking, using marginal damage estimates such as those
developed in Muller and Mendelsohn (2009) for local air pollutants.
An alternative, top-down approach to local environmental impact evaluation would be
focus on housing prices, as in Muehlenbachs, Spiller and Timmins (2012) and Muehlenbachs,
Spiller and Timmins (2014). In theory, home values can fully capitalize the value of all local
environmental disamenities to the marginal resident. However, interpretation of results on
housing prices is difficult for several reasons. First, the change in housing prices reflects not
only environmental disamenities but also the local boom in economic activity and resource
rents associated with extraction. Second, responses of housing prices to changes in disamenities do not in general reveal marginal valuations or welfare changes when households have
heterogeneous preferences (Kuminoff and Pope, forthcoming; Haninger, Ma and Timmins,
2014). Finally, if information on environmental impacts is incomplete, the values of the
46

These are the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) regulation published in Federal Register Volume
80 Number 58, “Oil and Gas; Hydraulic Fracturing on Federal and Indian Lands; Final Rule” March 26
2015, and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation published in Federal Register Volume
77 Number 159, “Oil and Natural Gas Sector: New Source Performance Standards and National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants Reviews; Final Rule” August 16 2012.

38

homes reflect only the perceived level of environmental disamenities. This last issue is particularly important in the context of fracking, where the extent of and spatial heterogeneity
in damages remains unknown.

6.3

Regulatory Approaches

Environmental regulation for fracking varies considerably across locations (Richardson et al.,
2013), but in general, comprehensive and cost-effective environmental regulation has lagged
behind the rapid rise of unconventional natural gas. At the federal level, the 2012 EPA
rule mentioned above regulates some forms of air emissions but not others, and the 2015
BLM rule only applies to federal lands. Additionally, while some states and localities have
outright banned fracking, other areas have allowed the industry to rapidly move forward.
From an efficiency perspective, this variation in policy approaches is unlikely to be optimal.
Several factors have impeded the development of unified and cost-effective regulation. As the
previous discussion made clear, a great deal of uncertainty still surrounds the location and
extent of the damages outlined. The damages are likely to be heterogeneous across space;
groundwater contamination and methane leaks, for instance, both depend on the integrity
of equipment (Allen et al., 2013; Ingraffea et al., 2014), and will thus vary across producers
and sites. This heterogeneity affects the ability of the scientific community to estimate the
magnitude of the overall problem; it also limits the ability of policy-makers to rapidly target
the environmental impacts of greatest concern.
It is worth considering fracking in the light of other environmental problems where uncertainty and lack of data are present. In particular, we highlight both poor monitoring
and difficult attribution of liability. We begin by discussing examples of uncertainty around
environmental damages from fracking; then we discuss implications for regulators.
To hold individual producers accountable for the damages they cause, regulators must (1)
observe a baseline level of environmental quality; (2) document a change in environmental
quality from fracking; and (3) attribute the change directly to an individual producer. The
first problem to date, then, has been lack of complete data on baseline environmental quality
levels for surface water, groundwater, and air quality (Adgate, Goldstein and McKenzie,
2014; Burton, Nadelhoffer and Presley, 2013; Moore et al., 2014; Small et al., 2014). Even
in locations where baseline and post-fracking water quality have been measured, it remains
difficult to hold individual producers liable (Davis, 2015). As Fitzgerald (2013) points out,
“fracking occurs far underground, where verification is costly if not impossible” (p 1356).
Contamination occurs if wells are poorly encased (Darrah et al., 2014; Fitzgerald, 2013;
Ingraffea et al., 2014; Vidic et al., 2013), but monitoring every individual well is costly

39

(Davis, 2015). Researchers have found that incomplete data on well casing integrity poses a
real challenge (Jackson et al., 2014).
Comprehensive monitoring and attribution of methane emissions is also difficult. Methane
can be emitted from a number of sources throughout the extraction process; for a description,
see Allen et al. (2013) and Moore et al. (2014). Direct measurement of most of the individual
sources is possible, but such measurements to date have been limited to snapshots taken at
a small sample of sites (Allen et al., 2013; Brandt et al., 2014). An alternative is to measure
the entire plume at a downwind location, so that only one measurement is needed. However,
a suitable downwind location is not available at all sites (Allen et al., 2013); moreover, a
regulator must then prove that all of the observed emissions are from a given producer,
rather than other nearby sources. The EPA has struggled with similar difficulties in other
industries, such as refining.47
Cost-effective regulation is extremely challenging in settings with incomplete data and
imperfect attribution. The standard market-based incentives that economists prefer, such as
emissions taxes or cap-and-trade programs, can only be used with high quality monitoring.
The efficiency of these incentives is predicated on rewarding the firms that engage in clean
production while punishing firms that emit—clearly this requires attribution to individual
firms.
In the absence of market-based incentives, two broad types of regulatory approaches are
currently in place (in addition to outright bans and moratoria). The first is holding producers
liable for accidents ex-post through the judicial system. This again requires proof of damages,
so the data quality and attribution issues discussed above still apply. Moreover, incentives
for emissions abatement can be greatly distorted when penalties are applied through the tort
system (Davis, 2015). As an example, bankruptcy protection will exempt very small firms
from ex-post liability of large accidents (Boomhower, 2014).
The second regulatory approach currently in place is command-and-control regulation,
mainly technology standards. For instance, individual state environmental agencies have
imposed a suite of standards on well casing, well depth, wastewater storage, and similar
elements (Richardson et al., 2013). One well-known problem with relying on technology
standards is that implementation may vary considerably across firms. For this industry,
many firms are engaged in extraction of unconventional natural gas, and they are of varying
sizes and degrees of technical capability (Small et al., 2014). Moreover, with technology
standards, the regulator will not necessarily observe whether the technology is correctly
47

See, for instance, Federal Register Volume 79 Number 125, “Petroleum Refinery Sector Risk and Technology Review and New Source Performance Standards; Proposed Rule,” June 30 2014; accessed from
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-06-30/pdf/2014-12167.pdf.

40

installed. This issue is important for both methane leaks and well casings, which are a
function of equipment integrity.
The academic literature in environmental economics has proposed a set of regulations
that are incentive compatible even under imperfect attribution. First proposed by Segerson
(1988), the approach combines ambient environmental quality standards with joint liability.
For instance, if regulators can observe groundwater quality throughout a geographic area,
they hold all firms in that area liable for any damages to the water. Not surprisingly, despite
a large theoretical literature, legal and political barriers have prevented this approach from
being implemented.
One could imagine, however, a version of the Segerson (1988) approach being applied to
unconventional natural gas extraction. This variant allows firms to opt out of the penalties if they can prove, with their own (regulator-verified) monitoring devices, that they did
not contribute to the damages (Millock, Sunding and Zilberman, 2002).48 This approach
leverages self-selection of clean firms into self-monitoring. One could imagine clean, technologically advanced firms agreeing to this sort of solution for groundwater emissions, surface
water emissions, and methane leaks in order to prevent a total ban on fracking activities.
In conclusion, scientists remain concerned about a number of environmental damages
caused by fracking. Unfortunately, data collection has not kept pace with the boom in
extraction, and a great deal of uncertainty remains regarding pollution from fracking. This
uncertainty has limited the ability of regulators to target those areas of greatest concern; it
has also limited their ability to regulate in a cost-effective way. Higher quality, comprehensive
data on baseline levels of environmental quality as well as on emissions from individual
producers would go a long way. In the absence of such data, regulatory options remain
limited and are unlikely to be cost effective.

7

Conclusion

This paper provides what we believe to be the most comprehensive analysis to date of how
shale gas development has affected the welfare of U.S. natural gas consumers—including
both households and industries—as well as producers of natural gas. We estimate both the
demand and supply curves for natural gas and then use these estimates to find that the
expansion of natural gas supply has reduced U.S. natural gas prices by $3.45 per mcf from
2007 to 2013, equivalent to 47% of the counterfactual 2013 price. This price reduction has
led to large increases in surplus for natural gas purchasers, particularly in the South Central
48

Recently enacted legislation in North Carolina does involve presumptive liability for water contamination,
placing the burden of proof on the gas developer or operator.

41

and Midwestern United States where the industrial and electric power sectors consume large
quantities of gas. We confirm that the wholesale natural gas price reduction has fully passed
through to retail rates for all sectors. However, pass-through of industrial gas prices to
prices for gas-intensive manufactured products need not be 100%. For ammonia and HDPE,
two commodity chemicals with gas-intensive production processes, we show that U.S. and
international output prices are tightly linked even though natural gas input prices have
diverged, suggesting that pass-through is very small.
In contrast to natural gas purchasers, we find that natural gas producers have experienced
a reduction in surplus because their gain from the expansion of supply has been outweighed
by the fall in the gas price. These surplus reductions are particularly acute in regions
that have historically produced large quantities of conventional natural gas but have not
developed shale resources. Combining our consumer and producer surplus estimates, we
estimate that the shale boom increased total U.S. consumer plus producer surplus by $48
billion in 2013. Under plausible alternative assumptions, this number varies by up to 20
percent. Future gains could be larger through long-run capital replacement and innovation
effects, particularly on the demand side. Currently planned levels of LNG exports will further
increase U.S. total surplus, but the gains will be modest because the increase in producer
surplus will be shared with Canadian exporters to the United States.
Importantly, our consumer and producer surplus estimates omit changes in welfare associated with environmental externalities from shale gas development. We provide a summary
of the potential local and global environmental impacts from the fracking revolution, noting that for the vast majority of these impacts the data necessary to obtain an economic
valuation do not exist. We identify plausible bounds on the climate impacts for 2013 that
range from a $3.0 billion to $28 billion increase in external costs, though other studies have
found that climate impacts may actually be beneficial (McJeon et al., 2014; Newell and
Raimi, 2014). Bounding the economic value of all local impacts is not currently possible,
and the aggregate impact may be positive or negative. It is therefore impossible to know,
at present, the extent to which environmental externalities affect the net welfare gains to
natural gas consumers and producers. Improvements in data collection would be immensely
valuable both for quantifying potential environmental impacts from fracking and for enabling
cost-effective regulation.

42

References
Abramzon, Shmuel, Constantine Samaras, Aimee Curtright, Aviva Litovitz,
and Nicholas Burger. 2014. “Estimating the Consumptive Use Costs of Shale Natural Gas Extraction on Pennsylvania Roadways.” Journal of Infrastructure Systems,
20(3): 06014001.
Adgate, John L., Bernard D. Goldstein, and Lisa M. McKenzie. 2014. “Potential
Public Health Hazards, Exposures and Health Effects from Unconventional Natural Gas
Development.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48: 8307–8320.
Agerton, Mark, Peter Hartley, Kenneth B. Medlock III, and Ted Temzelides.
2015. “Employment Impacts of Upstream Oil and Gas Investment in the United States.”
IMF Working Paper.
Allcott, Hunt, and Daniel Keniston. 2014. “Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The
Local Economic Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern America.” NBER Working
Paper 20508.
Allen, David T., Vincent M. Torres, James Thomas, David W. Sullivan, Matthew
Harrison, Al Hendler, Scott C. Hemdon, Charles E. Kolb, Matthew P. Fraser,
A. Daniel Hill, Brian K. Lamb, Jennifer Miskimins, Robert F. Sawyer, and
John H. Seinfeld. 2013. “Measurements of Methane Emissions at Natural Gas Production Sites in the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(44): 17768–17773.
Anderson, Sorent T, Ryan Kellogg, and Stephen W. Salant. 2014. “Hotelling Under
Pressure.” NBER Working Paper 20280.
Arora, Vipin. 2014. “Estimates of the Price Elasticities of Natural Gas Supply and Demand
in the United States.” MPRA Paper No. 54232.
Arora, Vipin, and Yiyong Cai. 2014. “U.S. Natural Gas Exports and their Global Impacts.” CAMA Working Paper No. 22/2014.
Boomhower, Judson. 2014. “Drilling Like There’s No Tomorrow: Bankruptcy, Insurance,
and Environmental Risk.” EI@Haas Working Paper 254.
Borenstein, Severin, and Ryan Kellogg. 2014. “The Incidence of an Oil Glut: Who
Benefits from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest?” Energy Journal, 35: 15–33.
Brandt, A. R., G. A. Heath, E. A. Kort, F. O’Sullivan, G. Petron, S. M. Jordaan,
P. Tans, J. Wilcox, A. M. Gopstein, D. Arent, S. Wofsy, N. J. Brown, R.
Bradley, G. D. Stucky, D. Eardley, and R. Harriss. 2014. “Methane Leaks from
North American Natural Gas Systems.” Science, 343: 733–735.
Brehm, Paul. 2015. “Natural Gas Prices, Electric Generation Investment, and Greenhouse
Gas Emissions.” Working Paper.
43

Brown, Jason P., Timothy Fitzgerald, and Jeremy G. Weber. 2015. “Capturing
Rents from Natural Resource Abundance: Private Royalties from U.S. Onshore Oil and
Gas Production.” Working Paper.
Brown, Stephen P.A., and Alan J. Krupnick. 2010. “Abundant Shale Gas Resources:
Long-Term Implications for U.S. Natural Gas Markets.” RFF Discussion Paper 10-41.
Brown, Stephen P.A., Charles Mason, Alan Krupnick, and Jan Mares. 2014.
“Crude Behavior: How Lifting the Export Ban Reduces Gasoline Prices in the United
States.” RFF Issue Brief 14-03-REV.
Burton, G. Allen, Knute J. Nadelhoffer, and Kathleen Presley. 2013. “Environment/Ecology Technical Report.” Graham Sustainability Institute Integrated Assessment
Report Series, 2(4).
(CBO), Congressional Budget Office. 2014. “The Economic and Budgetary Effects of Producing Oil and Natural Gas From Shale.” Accessed
from
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/49815Effects of Shale Production.pdf on 31 March, 2015.
Credit
Suisse.
2012.
“US
Natural
Gas
Reservoir:
Conventional
Wisdom.”
Accessed
from
https://research-andanalytics.csfb.com/docView?language=ENG&format=PDF&document id=976837261
&source id=em&serialid=Z3IKek5vW2GldY6jWOI%2Fmo5Wvrs8soj3gZp6tZWs8M4%3D.
Cullen, Joseph A., and Erin T. Mansur. 2014. “Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs
in Electricity Markets: A Revealed Preference Approach using the Shale Revolution.”
Working Paper.
Darrah, Thomas H., Avner Vengosh, Robert B. Jackson, Nathaniel R. Warner,
and Robert J. Poreda. 2014. “Noble Gases Identify the Mechanisms of Fugitive Gas
Contamination in Drinking-Water Wells Overlying the Marcellus and Barnett Shales.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(39): 14076–14081.
Davis, Lucas. 2015. “Bonding Requirements for Natural Gas Producers.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 9(1): 128–144.
Davis, Lucas, and Catherine Hausman. 2014. “The Value of Transmission in Electricity
Markets: Evidence from a Nuclear Power Plant Closure.” NBER Working Paper 20186.
Davis, Lucas W., and Erich Muehlegger. 2010. “Do Americans Consume Too Little
Natural Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing.” RAND Journal of Economics,
41(4): 791–810.
DeLeire, Thomas, Paul Eliason, and Christopher Timmins. 2014. “Measuring the
Employment Impacts of Shale Gas Development.” Working Paper.

44

Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2014. “Effect of Increased Levels of Liquefied Natural Gas Exports on U.S. Energy Markets.” Accessed from
http://www.eia.gov/analysis/requests/fe/pdf/lng.pdf.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2015. “Growing U.S.
Production
Spurs
Petrochemical
Industry
Investment.”
Accessed
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=19771.

HGL
from

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2011. “Plan to Study the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources.” Accessed from
http://water.epa.gov/type/groundwater/uic/class2/hydraulicfracturing/upload/FINALSTUDY-PLAN-HF Web 2.pdf.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2014. “Minimizing and Managing Potential Impacts of Injection-Induced Seismicity from Class II Disposal Wells: Practical
Approaches.” Accessed from http://www.epa.gov/Region5/water/uic/ntwg/pdfs/inducedseismicity-201502.pdf.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). 2015a. “North American LNG
Export Terminals Proposed.” Accessed from http://www.ferc.gov/industries/gas/indusact/lng/lng-export-proposed.pdf on 28 February, 2015.
Federal
Energy
Regulatory
Commission
(FERC).
2015b.
“North
American
LNG
Import/Export
Terminals
Approved.”
Accessed
from
http://www.ferc.gov/industries/gas/indus-act/lng/lng-approved.pdf on 28 February,
2015.
Fitzgerald, Timothy. 2013. “Frackonomics: Some Economics of Hydraulic Fracturing.”
Case Western Reserve Law Review, 63(4): 1337–1362.
Graham, Jove, Jennifer Irving, Xiaoqin Tang, Stephen Sellers, Joshua Crisp,
Daniel Horwitz, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Alan Krupnick, and David Carey. 2015.
“Increased traffic accident rates associated with shale gas drilling in Pennsylvania.” Accident Analysis and Prevention, 74: 203–209.
Hamilton, James D. 2009. “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007–08.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring: 215–261.
Hamilton, James D. 2011. “Nonlinearities and the Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Prices.”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 15 (Supplement 3): 364–378.
Haninger, Kevin, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins. 2014. “The Value of Brownfield Remediation.” NBER Working Paper number 20296.
Hill, Elaine L. 2013. “Shale Gas Development and Infant Health: Evidence from Pennsylvania.” Working Paper.

45

Holladay, J. Scott, and Jacob LaRiviere. 2014. “The Impact of Cheap Natural Gas
on Marginal Emissions from Electricity Generation and Implications for Energy Policy.”
Working Paper.
Howarth, Robert W. 2014. “A Bridge to Nowhere: Methane Emissions and the Greenhouse Gas Footprint of Natural Gas.” Energy Science and Engineering.
Ingraffea, Anthony R., Martin T. Wells, Renee L. Santoro, and Seth B. C. Shonkoff. 2014. “Assessment and Risk Analysis of Casing and Cement Impairment in Oil and
Gas Wells in Pennsylvania, 2000–2012.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
111(30): 10955–10960.
Jackson, Robert B., Avner Vengosh, J. William Carey, Richard J. Davies,
Thomas H. Darrah, Francis O’Sullivan, and Gabrielle Petron. 2014. “The Environmental Costs and Benefits of Fracking.” Annual Review of Environment and Resources,
39: 327–362.
Jacquet, Jeffrey B. 2014. “Review of Risks to Communities from Shale Energy Development.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48: 8321–8333.
Kilian, Lutz. 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market.” American Economic Review, 99(3): 1053–1069.
Kilian, Lutz. 2014a. “The Impact of the Shale Oil Revolution on U.S. Oil and Gasoline
Prices.” Working Paper.
Kilian, Lutz. 2014b. “Oil Price Shocks: Causes and Consequences.” Annual Review of
Resource Economics, 6: 133–154.
Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel P. Murphy. 2014. “The Role of Inventories and Speculative
Trading in the Global Market for Crude Oil.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29: 454–
478.
Knittel, Christopher R., Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and Andre Trindade. 2014.
“Dash for Gas: The Sequel.” Working Paper.
Krupnick, Alan J., Raymond J. Kopp, Kristin Hayes, and Skyler Roeshot. 2014.
“The Natural Gas Revolution: Critical Questions for a Sustainable Energy Future.” Accessed from http://www.rff.org/RFF/Documents/RFF-Rpt-NaturalGasRevolution.pdf.
Krupnick, Alan J., Zhongmin Wang, and Yushuang Wang. 2013. “Sector Effects of
the Shale Gas Revolution in the United States.” RFF Discussion Paper 13-20.
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., and Jaren C. Pope. forthcoming. “Do “Capitalization Effects” for
Public Goods Reveal the Public’s Willingness to Pay?” International Economic Review.
Linn, Joshua, Lucija Muehlenbachs, and Yushuang Wang. 2014. “How Do Natural
Gas Prices Affect Electricity Consumers and the Environment?” RFF Working Paper
14-19.
46

Maniloff, Peter, and Ralph Mastromonaco. 2014. “The Local Economic Impacts of
Hydraulic Fracturing and Determinants of Dutch Disease.” Working Paper.
Mason, C., Lucija Muehlenbachs, and Sheila Olmstead. 2014. “The Economics of
Shale Gas Development.” In prep for Annual Review of Resource Economics.
McJeon, Haewon, Jae Edmonds, Nico Bauer, Leon Clarke, Brian Fisher, Brian P.
Flannery, Jerome Hilaire, Volker Krey, Giacomo Marangoni, Raymond Mi,
Keywan Riahi, Holger Rogner, and Massimo Tavoni. 2014. “Limited Impact on
Decadal-Scale Climate Change from Increased Use of Natural Gas.” Nature, 514: 482–485.
Melick, William R. 2014. “The Energy Boom and Manufacturing in the United States.”
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System IFDP No. 1108.
Millock, Katrin, David Sunding, and David Zilberman. 2002. “Regulating Pollution
with Endogenous Monitoring.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
Moore, Christopher W., Barbara Zielinska, Gabrielle Petron, and Robert B.
Jackson. 2014. “Air Impacts of Increased Natural Gas Acquisition, Processing, and Use:
A Critical Review.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48: 8349–8359.
Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. 2012. “Shale
Gas Development and Property Values: Differences across Drinking Water Sources.”
NBER Working Paper 18390.
Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. 2014. “The
Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development.” NBER Working Paper 19796.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn. 2009. “Efficient Pollution Regulation:
Getting the Prices Right.” American Economic Review, 99(5): 1714–1739.
NERA. 2014. “Updated Macroeconomic Impacts of LNG Exports from the United States.”
Accessed from http://www.nera.com/content/dam/nera/publications/archive2/PUB LNG
Update 0214 FINAL.pdf on 31 March, 2015.
Newell, Richard G., and Daniel Raimi. 2014. “Implications of Shale Gas Development
for Climate Change.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48(15).
Paredes, Dusan, Timothy Komarek, and Scott Loveridge. 2015. “Income and Employment Effects of Shale Gas Extraction Windfalls: Evidence from the Marcellus Region.”
Energy Economics, 47: 112–120.
PWC. 2011. “Shale Gas:
A Renaissance in US Manufacturing?”
Accessed
from
http://www.pwc.com/en US/us/industrial-products/assets/pwc-shale-gas-usmanufacturing-renaissance.pdf.
PWC. 2014. “Shale Gas: Still a Boon to US Manufacturing?”
Accessed from
http://www.pwc.com/en US/us/industrial-products/publications/assets/shale-gas-boostsus-manufacturing.pdf.
47

Raimi, Daniel, and Richard G. Newell. 2014. “Shale Public Finance: Local Government Revenues and Costs Associated with Oil and Gas Development.” Accessed from
http://energy.duke.edu/sites/energy.duke.edu/files/files/Shale%20Public%20Finance%20
Local%20Revenues%20and%20Costs%20Report%20Final.pdf.
Richardson, Nathan, Madeline Gottlieb, Alan Krupnick, and Hannah
Wiseman. 2013. “The State of State Shale Gas Regulation.” Accessed from
http://www.rff.org/rff/documents/RFF-Rpt-StateofStateRegs Report.pdf.
Roberts, Michael J., and Wolfram Schlenker. 2013. “Identifying Supply and Demand
Elasticities of Agricultural Commodities: Implications for the US Ethanol Mandate.”
American Economic Review, 103(6): 2265–2295.
Segerson, Kathleen. 1988. “Uncertainty and Incentives for Nonpoint Pollution Control.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
Small, Mitchell J., Paul C. Stern, Elizabeth Bomberg, Susan M. Christopherson,
Bernard D. Goldstein, Andrei L. Israel, Robert B. Jackson, Alan Krupnick,
Meagan S. Mauter, Jennifer Nash, D. Warner North, Sheila M. Olmstead,
Aseem Prakash, Barry Rabe, Nathan Richardson, Susan Tierney, Thomas Webler, Gabrielle Wong-Parodi, and Barbara Zielinska. 2014. “Risks and Risk Governance in Unconventional Shale Gas.” Environmental Science and Technology, 48: 8289–
8297.
Vidic, R. D., S. L. Brantley, J. M. Vandenbossche, D. Yoxtheimer, and J. D.
Abad. 2013. “Impact of Shale Gas Development on Regional Water Quality.” Science,
340.

48

Appendix
A1.1

Manufacturing Data

Here we give details on the manufacturing data used in section 5. The first data source is
the Economic Census, for years 2002, 2007, and 2012. It includes sector-level establishment
counts, total employment, total compensation, and total capital expenditure. While the
ECs also provide information on the dollar value of each sector’s output and its value added,
we do not use this information because it introduces considerable noise from fluctuations in
industrial commodity prices.
The second data source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis 2007 input-output tables,
which we use for direct and indirect natural gas requirements at the sectoral level. (An
alternative data source would be the EIA’s 2010 Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey
(MECS); however, the MECS data are much more aggregated, with many sectors reported at
the 3-digit NAICS level.) In the BEA system, direct natural gas inputs into manufacturing
flow almost entirely through sector 221200, natural gas distribution. Manufacturing sectors
also receive small input flows from sector 211000, oil and gas extraction. It is not clear
whether these flows reflect natural gas input (which we would like to capture in our intensity
measures) or oil / petroleum input (which we do not want to capture). To be conservative,
we do not reclassify these small flows into NAICS 221200.
The total requirements table is calculated as (I − M D)−1 , where M is the Make table
(production by each row industry of each column commodity), D is the direct requirements
table (dollars of each commodity row input per dollar of column industry output), and I
is the identity matrix. The manufacturing sector natural gas requirements come from the
row of the total requirements table corresponding to NAICS 221200. The raw D matrix
from the BEA has electricity generation obtaining its gas requirement almost entirely from
NAICS 211000 (oil and gas extraction) rather than NAICS 221200. We therefore transfer this
requirement to NAICS 221200 before calculating the total requirements table (this transfer
is valid because only a trivial fraction of electricity generation uses petroleum products as
fuel).
After merging the data from the Economic Censuses and from the BEA tables, we have
230 manufacturing sectors. The only sector that does not cleanly merge across the EC and
BEA data is NAICS 339100 (medical equipment). Subsector 339111 appears in the 2002
EC but not in the other datasets, and the other datasets also lack an “other medical equipment” category in which 339111 might be included. We therefore drop NAICS 339100 from
our analysis. We also drop sectors 316000 (leather and allied products), 331410 (smelting of non-ferrous and non-aluminum metals), and 335224 (household laundry equipment
A-1

manufacturing) because their data were omitted from some EC years due to confidentiality
issues.

A1.2

Supplementary Figures and Tables
Figure A1: U.S. Natural Gas Drilling

Note: Wells include both development and exploratory wells. Wells producing both oil
and natural gas are excluded. Source: EIA.

A-2

Figure A2: Estimated Demand Shift, 2007 to 2013, by Sector

Note: The thin lines show 2007, and thick lines 2013. We assume that supply and demand are constant
elasticity (at the sectoral level) over the range of the data, with elasticities given by the estimates in
table 1. We back out the scale parameters for the demand and supply curves for each year using
observed prices and quantities and assuming a constant retail price markup.

A-3

Table A1: Potential Demand Shifters
2007

2013

% change

16.8
316
52,000

5.6%
5.1%
-8.0%

12.1
124
56,000

5.1%
3.0%
-4.2%

4.9
128

-16%
-12%

3.6
190
49,000
4.1
2.7

-4.9%
6.4%
-9.2%
-2.4%
-8.4%

Panel A: Impacts to All End-Uses
Real GDP, trillions
Population, millions (all regions)
Real median income (all regions)

15.9
301
56,000

Panel B: Impacts to Residential (Heating) Only
Heating degree days, daily (population weighted)
Population, millions (cold states)
Real median income (cold states)

11.5
120
59,000

Panel C: Impacts to Industrial Only
Employment, non-gas intensive industries, millions
Establishments, non-gas intensive industries, thousands

5.8
146

Panel D: Impacts to Electricity Only
Cooling degree days, daily (population weighted)
Population, millions (hot states)
Real median income (hot states)
Electricity generation, billion MWhs: total
Fossil fuels

3.8
178
53,000
4.2
3.0

Note: This table reports changes to potential demand shifters for natural gas. GDP is in
trillions of 2013 dollars. Median income (household) is in 2013 dollars. Hot states are the
24 warmest, as measured by average HDDs for 1981-2013; cold states are the 24 coldest
(as described in the text, Alaska and Hawaii are dropped). Non-gas-intensive industries
are those with gas intensity below the (weighted) median, according to the 2007 BEA
input-output tables. We present only the trends for non-gas-intensive industries, so as
not to confound with the impact of the natural gas price fall.

A-4

Table A2: First Stage: Demand
Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Electric power

Cumulative other HDDs, hundreds

0.47
(0.14)

0.56
(0.17)

0.75
(0.23)

0.89
(0.26)

Own HDDs, hundreds

-0.78
(0.44)

-0.47
(0.48)

-0.22
(0.59)

-0.51
(0.66)

Own CDDs, hundreds

-0.52
(0.56)

-1.16
(0.74)

-1.76
(1.13)

-1.44
(1.18)

Lagged demand

-0.23
(0.05)

-0.25
(0.07)

-0.07
(0.04)

0.01
(0.02)

Observations

6912

6912

6912

6849

Note: This table reports first stage estimates for the 2SLS estimates presented in table 1. The
dependent variable is retail price in each sector in logs. The excluded instrument in the second
stage is cumulative other heating degree days (HDDs). As described in the text, the instrument
is constructed with lags 2 through 12. The time period covered is 2002-2013. All specifications
include month-of-year by state fixed effects, a linear time trend, and lagged cooling and heating
degree days. Standard errors are two-way clustered by sample month and state.

Table A3: First Stage: Supply
Henry Hub price

Lagged HDDs, hundreds

4.46
(2.33)

Lagged CDDs, hundreds

6.79
(3.82)

Current HDDs, hundreds

3.52
(1.96)

Current CDDs, hundreds

2.69
(2.78)

Lagged supply

0.94
(0.14)

Observations

108

Note: This table reports first stage estimates
for the 2SLS estimates presented in table 1.
The dependent variable is the Henry Hub
price in logs. The excluded instruments in
the second stage are one-month lagged heating and cooling degree days. The time period
covered is 2002-2010. Month-of-year effects
and a linear time trend are included. Standard errors are Newey-West with 17 lags.

A-5

Table A4: Alternative Instruments: Demand
(1)

(2)

(3)

(6)

(7)

log(Price)

-0.14
(0.12)

-0.10
(0.12)

-0.15
(0.12)

-0.37
(0.17)

-0.13
(0.11)

yt−1

0.42
(0.05)

0.43
(0.05)

0.42
(0.05)

0.42
(0.05)

0.43
(0.04)

0.38
(0.05)

0.43
(0.04)

Long-run price

-0.25
(0.20)

-0.18
(0.21)

-0.25
(0.19)

-0.25
(0.23)

-0.22
(0.18)

-0.59
(0.24)

-0.22
(0.18)

8.86

8.84

0.97

7.32

6.93

7.00

11.20

log(Price)

-0.13
(0.08)

-0.08
(0.08)

-0.11
(0.08)

-0.27
(0.12)

-0.13
(0.07)

yt−1

0.58
(0.04)

0.59
(0.04)

0.58
(0.04)

0.58
(0.05)

0.59
(0.04)

0.54
(0.04)

0.58
(0.04)

Long-run price

-0.30
(0.18)

-0.20
(0.19)

-0.26
(0.17)

-0.26
(0.25)

-0.23
(0.17)

-0.60
(0.22)

-0.31
(0.16)

9.81

9.08

0.96

4.45

6.17

7.13

11.19

log(Price)

-0.15
(0.07)

-0.15
(0.07)

-0.17
(0.07)

Panel C: Industrial
-0.16
(0.13)

-0.16
(0.07)

-0.20
(0.19)

-0.19
(0.09)

yt−1

0.72
(0.09)

0.72
(0.09)

0.72
(0.09)

0.72
(0.09)

0.72
(0.09)

0.72
(0.10)

0.72
(0.09)

Long-run price

-0.55
(0.16)

-0.54
(0.18)

-0.61
(0.19)

-0.58
(0.39)

-0.57
(0.17)

-0.71
(0.47)

-0.66
(0.21)

First-stage F

10.12

8.37

0.97

2.89

5.65

4.24

10.62

log(Price)

-0.15
(0.14)

-0.26
(0.18)

Panel D: Electric Power
-0.23
-0.02
-0.14
(0.16)
(0.32)
(0.14)

-0.40
(0.33)

-0.26
(0.18)

yt−1

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

0.68
(0.03)

Long-run price

-0.46
(0.41)

-0.80
(0.55)

-0.71
(0.47)

-0.07
(0.99)

-0.45
(0.43)

-1.24
(0.98)

-0.79
(0.54)

11.6

8.79

1.16

3.06

6.44

5.10

13.34

Y

Y
Y

First-stage F

First-stage F

First-stage F
Instruments:
Shorter cumulative HDDs
Longer cumulative HDDs
All lags of HDDs
Cumulative CDDs
Cumulative HDDs
Local HDDs
East/West HDDs

(4)

(5)

Panel A: Residential
-0.14
-0.12
(0.14)
(0.11)

Panel B: Commercial
-0.11
-0.10
(0.11)
(0.07)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Note: This table reports 2SLS price elasticity estimates for U.S. natural gas demand. The dependent variable is quantity consumed,
in logs. The cumulative heating and cooling degree days (HDDs and CDDs) IVs use data from other regions and lags 2 through
12. The “shorter” IV uses lags 2 through 11, and the “longer” IV uses lags 2 through 13. The “all lags” IV uses multiple IVs (lags
2 through 12) rather than a single cumulative IV. The “local” IV uses only weather in the own state. The “East/West” IV uses
weather only in the own half of the country (with census region “West” versus all other census regions) and excludes own-division
weather. The time period covered is 2002-2013, so there are
6912 observations in each specification; missing values for the electricity
A-6
specifications lead to 6849 observations. Standard errors are two-way clustered by sample month and state.

Table A5: Alternative Controls: Demand
(1)

(2)

log(Price)

-0.11
(0.11)

-0.07
(0.11)

Long-run price

-0.19
(0.19)

(6)

(7)

Panel A: Residential
-0.20
-0.08
-0.11
(0.29)
(0.29)
(0.12)

0.05
(0.13)

-0.10
(0.12)

-0.13
(0.20)

-0.41
(0.56)

-0.14
(0.50)

-0.17
(0.18)

0.09
(0.25)

-0.20
(0.23)

9.99

12.62

6.91

6.20

10.12

7.66

9.64

log(Price)

-0.12
(0.08)

-0.11
(0.07)

Panel B: Commercial
-0.07
<0.01
-0.10
(0.22)
(0.19)
(0.08)

0.02
(0.08)

-0.07
(0.08)

Long-run price

-0.25
(0.15)

-0.28
(0.16)

-0.20
(0.58)

<0.01
(0.47)

-0.22
(0.16)

0.04
(0.21)

-0.20
(0.24)

First-stage F

10.99

15.87

14.87

14.56

10.7

8.36

9.78

log(Price)

-0.17
(0.07)

-0.16
(0.07)

Panel C: Industrial
-0.05
-0.01
-0.18
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.08)

-0.14
(0.04)

-0.10
(0.04)

Long-run price

-0.59
(0.17)

-0.56
(0.16)

-0.19
(0.18)

-0.05
(0.14)

-0.55
(0.17)

-0.50
(0.21)

-0.62
(0.19)

First-stage F

10.81

14.29

27.10

27.21

10.05

11.56

9.38

log(Price)

-0.15
(0.17)

-0.24
(0.15)

Panel D: Electric Power
0.20
0.35
-0.17
(0.57)
(0.57)
(0.15)

-0.04
(0.14)

-0.05
(0.13)

Long-run price

-0.44
(0.49)

-0.84
(0.48)

0.60
(1.75)

1.07
(1.81)

-0.50
(0.42)

-0.12
(0.44)

-0.19
(0.48)

First-stage F

12.19

15.66

5.52

6.31

12.04

12.66

11.18

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y

First-stage F

Controls:
Lagged HDDs and CDDs
State by month effects
Census division by month effects
Linear time trend
Year effects
Time trend by census division
Cumulative local HDDs
yt−2

(3)

(4)

(5)

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
Y

Note: This table reports 2SLS price elasticity estimates for U.S. natural gas demand. The dependent variable
is quantity consumed, in logs. The specifications are identical to those in table 1 except for the controls. There
are 6,912 observations in the residential, commercial, and industrial equations, and 6,849 observations in the
electric power equations. Standard errors are two-way clustered by sample month and state.

A-7

Table A6: Alternative Instruments: Supply
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log(Price)

0.07
(0.04)

0.10
(0.04)

0.06
(0.04)

0.13
(0.05)

0.11
(0.04)

yt−1

0.91
(0.04)

0.88
(0.04)

0.91
(0.04)

0.85
(0.04)

0.87
(0.03)

Long-run price

0.75
(0.16)

0.84
(0.14)

0.72
(0.22)

0.88
(0.14)

0.85
(0.14)

2.33

4.50

3.22

13.32

9.53

Y
Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y
Y

First-stage F
Instruments:
One-month lagged HDDs
One-month lagged CDDs
Cumulative HDDs
Cumulative CDDs
Lagged Henry Hub price
Lagged demand
Lagged oil wells

Y
Y

Note: This table reports 2SLS price elasticity estimates for U.S. natural
gas supply. The dependent variable is quantity supplied, in logs. The lag
length for Henry Hub price, quantity demanded, and oil wells drilled is six
months. Total quantity demanded is the sum of residential, commercial,
industrial, and electric power natural gas demand in all states. The
time period covered is 2002-2010, so there are 108 observations in each
specification. Month-of-year effects and a linear time trend and current
population-weighted HDDs and CDDs are included. Standard errors are
Newey-West with 17 lags.

A-8

Table A7: Alternative Controls: Supply
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log(Price)

0.10
(0.05)

0.09
(0.05)

0.05
(0.07)

0.05
(0.06)

0.09
(0.05)

yt−1

0.89
(0.04)

0.89
(0.04)

0.77
(0.06)

0.93
(0.05)

0.78
(0.16)

yt−2

Long-run price

First-stage F
Controls:
HDDs and CDDs
Month-of-year effects
Linear trend
Year effects
Monthly linear trends

0.11
(0.14)
0.88
(0.18)

0.81
(0.16)

0.23
(0.30)

0.66
(0.42)

0.83
(0.17)

4.09

4.37

6.50

3.76

4.54

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Note: This table reports 2SLS price elasticity estimates for U.S. natural gas supply. The dependent variable is quantity supplied, in logs.
The specifications are identical to those in table 1 except for the controls. There are 108 observations. Standard errors are Newey-West
with 17 lags.

A-9

Table A8: Pass-Through of Henry Hub to Retail Natural Gas
Prices, Full Results
Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Electric power

Henry Hub pricet

0.10
(0.03)

0.11
(0.02)

0.16
(0.02)

0.31
(0.04)

Henry Hub pricet−1

0.27
(0.03)

0.26
(0.02)

0.26
(0.03)

0.25
(0.05)

Henry Hub pricet−2

-0.13
(0.03)

-0.14
(0.02)

-0.16
(0.03)

-0.36
(0.06)

Henry Hub pricet−3

-0.04
(0.03)

-0.04
(0.02)

-0.07
(0.02)

-0.01
(0.04)

Henry Hub pricet−4

0.00
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

0.04
(0.04)

Henry Hub pricet−5

-0.01
(0.03)

-0.01
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.04
(0.03)

Henry Hub pricet−6

0.02
(0.04)

0.02
(0.02)

0.04
(0.02)

0.10
(0.04)

Henry Hub pricet−7

0.00
(0.04)

0.00
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.04
(0.03)

Henry Hub pricet−8

0.04
(0.04)

0.03
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.03
(0.03)

Henry Hub pricet−9

-0.02
(0.05)

-0.03
(0.02)

0.00
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.03)

Henry Hub pricet−10

-0.01
(0.04)

0.00
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.02)

-0.02
(0.04)

Henry Hub pricet−11

0.03
(0.04)

0.03
(0.02)

0.04
(0.02)

0.04
(0.04)

yt−1

0.77
(0.02)

0.81
(0.02)

0.73
(0.02)

0.71
(0.02)

Observations

6912

6912

6912

6912

Implied long-run price

1.18
(0.19)

1.08
(0.11)

1.00
(0.08)

0.94
(0.12)

Note: Data are monthly from 2002 to 2013, and are at the state level. The dependent
variable is the sector-level retail price, in levels. As described in the text, the electric
power price we use is the citygate price. The long-run price elasticity is calculated
as the sum of the coefficients on prices with lags zero through eleven, divided by
(one minus the coefficient on yt−1 ). All specifications control for year effects and
state by month-of-year effects. Standard errors are clustered by sample month.

A-10

Table A9: Pass-Through of Henry Hub to Retail Natural Gas
Prices, 2SLS Specification
Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Electric power

Henry Hub pricet

0.23
(0.08)

0.29
(0.06)

0.33
(0.07)

0.64
(0.14)

yt−1

0.77
(0.05)

0.72
(0.05)

0.67
(0.05)

0.38
(0.11)

Observations

6912

6912

6912

6912

Implied long-run price

0.99
(0.14)

1.03
(0.07)

0.99
(0.08)

1.02
(0.06)

5.56

8.31

8.10

5.17

First-stage F

Note: Data are monthly from 2002 to 2013, and are at the state level. The dependent
variable is the sector-level retail price, in levels. As described in the text, the electric
power price we use is the citygate price. The long-run price elasticity is calculated
as the coefficient on the Henry Hub price, divided by (one minus the coefficient
on yt−1 ). The instruments for the price variable are population-weighted lagged
national heating degree days and cooling degree days. All specifications control for
current and one-month lagged own-state HDDs and CDDs, state by month-of-year
effects, and a linear time trend. Standard errors are two-way clustered by sample
month and state.

A-11

Table A10: Employment Regressions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Gas intensity

1.25
(0.77)

0.93
(0.70)

1.00
(0.67)

1.45
(1.12)

Log employment, 2002

-0.32
(0.06)

-0.42
(0.06)

-0.42
(0.06)

-0.32
(0.07)

Log employment, 2007

1.31
(0.06)

1.39
(0.06)

1.39
(0.06)

1.31
(0.07)

Constant

-0.03
(0.14)

0.15
(0.14)

0.17
(0.14)

0.03
(0.15)

NAICS-2 effects
NAICS-3 effects
Weighting by output
Weighting by 2007 employment
Observations

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

229

229

229

229

Note: Data are at the 6-digit NAICS level and represent the manufacturing industry (NAICS 31-33). The dependent variable is log employment
in 2012.

A-12

A1.3

Climate Change Impacts Calculations

Here we give the parameters assumed for the calculations in section 6.1. In our estimated
counterfactual, quantity produced increases by 6173 bcf/year, and quantity consumed increases by 4132 bcf/year; the difference comes from a reduction in net imports. For our
“high” case, we use 6173, and for our “low” case, we use 4132. Of the 4132 bcf/year, 2441 is
in the residential, commercial and industrial sectors, and 1691 is in the electric power sector.
Parameters
• Heat content of natural gas: 1.025 mmBtu per mcf.49
• Carbon content of fuels: 117.08 pounds CO2 per mmBtu for natural gas and 212.7
pounds CO2 per mmBtu for coal.50
• Social cost of carbon: 39 $(2011)/metric ton, or 40 $(2013)/metric ton. Source: Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government.51
• Gross methane leak rate: 0.42% (low case) to 7.9% (high case).52
• Mass of methane in one bcf of dry gas at standard temperature and pressure: 20,602
metric tons per bcf.53
• Methane global warming potential, 100-year (GWP): 34.54
• Average heat rate of power plants: 10416 Btu per kWh for natural gas and 10107 Btu
per kWh for coal.55
High Case Calculations
• High case: increase in CO2 emissions from increased combustion of natural gas:
=

ton
40$
6173bcf 1025 · 109 Btu 117.08 · 103 lbs CO2
·
·
·
·
year
bcf
109 Btu
2205 lbs ton CO2

= +13 billion dollars per year
49

http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=45&t=8
http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=74&t=11
51
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html
52
Low case: Allen et al. (2013). High case: Howarth (2014).
53
http://agnatural.pt/documentos/ver/natural-gas-conversion-pocketbook fec0aeed1d2e6a84b27445ef
096963a7eebab0a2.pdf. Calculations: 1 metric ton of LNG = 1300 cubic meters of gas at normal temperature and pressure (0 ◦ C, 1 atmosphere pressure). Convert to standard temperature and pressure (60 ◦ F,
1 atmosphere pressure) by multiplying by 1,163 Btu/cf and dividing by 1,100 Btu/cf. Thus, 1 metric ton
equals 1300 * 35.315 cf/cm * 1163 / 1100 = 48,538 cf of dry gas at STP. Inverting yields 20,602 metric tons
of gas per bcf.
54
http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/report/WG1AR5 Chapter08 FINAL.pdf
55
http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=74&t=11
50

A-13

• High case: increase in methane emissions from increased extraction of natural gas:
=

0.079
20602 tons
40$
6173 bcf
·
·
· 34 GWP ·
year
1 − 0.079
bcf
ton

= +15 billion dollars per year
• Total, high case: +28 billion dollars per year
Low Case Calculations
• Low case: increase in CO2 emissions from increased natural gas combustion in residential, commercial, industrial, and electric power sectors:
=

4132 bcf 1025 · 109 Btu 117.08 · 103 lbs CO2
ton
40$
·
·
·
·
9
year
bcf
10 Btu
2205 lbs ton

= +9.0 billion dollars per year (of which the electric power sector contributes $3.7
billion per year)
• Low case: decrease in CO2 emissions from displaced coal in electric power sector:
=

kWh
10107 Btu(coal) 212.7 lbs CO2
tons 40$
1691 bcf 1025 · 103 mmBtu
·
·
·
·
·
·
year
bcf
10416 Btu(gas)
kWh
mmBtu(coal) 2205 lbs ton

= -6.5 billion dollars per year
• Low case: increase in methane emissions from increased extraction of natural gas:
=

4132 bcf
0.0042
20602 tons
40$
·
·
· 34 GWP ·
year
1 − 0.0042
bcf
ton

= +0.5 billion dollars per year
• Total, low case: +3.0 billion dollars per year

A-14

