NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE U.S. ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY AFTER 20 YEARS OF RESTRUCTURING
Severin Borenstein
James Bushnell
Working Paper 21113
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21113

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

Forthcoming in Annual Reviews, Doi: 10.1146/annureveconomics-080614-115630. The authors thank
Walter Graf for excellent research assistance and participants in the October 2014 Energy Institute
at Haas policy briefing for helpful comments. Bushnell’s work was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation under award 1229008. Bushnell serves on the Market Surveillance Committee
to the California Independent System Operator (CAISO). The MSC is an independent advisory committee
to the CAISO’s Board of Governors. The authors are not aware of any other affiliations, memberships,
funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Severin Borenstein and James Bushnell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The U.S. Electricity Industry After 20 Years of Restructuring
Severin Borenstein and James Bushnell
NBER Working Paper No. 21113
April 2015
JEL No. L51,L94,L97
ABSTRACT
Prior to the 1990s, most electricity customers in the U.S. were served by regulated, vertically-integrated,
monopoly utilities that handled electricity generation, transmission, local distribution and billing/collections.
Regulators set retail electricity prices to allow the utility to recover its prudently incurred costs, a process
known as cost-of-service regulation. During the 1990s, this model was disrupted in many states by
"electricity restructuring," a term used to describe legal changes that allowed both non-utility generators
to sell electricity to utilities — displacing the utility generation function — and/or "retail service providers"
to buy electricity from generators and sell to end-use customers — displacing the utility procurement
and billing functions. We review the original economic arguments for electricity restructuring, the
potential winners and losers from these changes, and what has actually happened in the subsequent
years. We argue that the greatest political motivation for restructuring was rent shifting, not efficiency
improvements, and that this explanation is supported by observed waxing and waning of political enthusiasm
for electricity reform. While electricity restructuring has brought significant efficiency improvements
in generation, it has generally been viewed as a disappointment because the price-reduction promises
made by some advocates were based on politically-unsustainable rent transfers. In reality, the electricity
rate changes since restructuring have been driven more by exogenous factors — such as generation
technology advances and natural gas price fluctuations — than by the effects of restructuring. We
argue that a similar dynamic underpins the current political momentum behind distributed generation
(primarily rooftop solar PV) which remains costly from a societal viewpoint, but privately economic
due to the rent transfers it enables.

Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
severinborenstein@berkeley.edu
James Bushnell
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave.
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
jbbushnell@ucdavis.edu

I.

Introduction

In the mid-1990s, the great majority of electricity customers in the U.S. were served by
an investor-owned, vertically-integrated monopoly utility (IOU) that provided generation,
transmission, local distribution and billing/collections.1 IOUs were closely regulated by
state-level public service commissions under “cost-of-service” regulation, in which utilities
were effectively guaranteed the recovery of prudently-incurred operating costs plus a regulated return on capital expenditures. In the seven years between 1995 and 2002 a wave
of major regulatory reform aimed at introducing competition in various utility functions –
known broadly as “electricity restructuring” – transformed the industry.2 These changes
followed closely on the heels of what was seen as the successful economic deregulation of
many other industries, including airlines, railroads, telecommunications, gasoline retailing,
and the production of oil and natural gas.
At the time, it was widely expected that this transformation would eventually lead the
entire industry to a less-regulated and more market-based structure. Yet in the years
following 2002 – after the 2000-2001 electricity crisis in California’s restructured market –
the movement for electricity deregulation encountered a significant backlash. While there
was some debate over “rolling back deregulation,” public policy after 2002 is more accurately
described as a cessation of any further restructuring. For the last decade, the policy focus
for the electricity industry has turned elsewhere – mostly towards environmental concerns
– and the loud debates from the early 2000s over the merits of restructuring have been
reduced to a background murmur.
The central premise of this paper is that views of restructuring in the electricity industry
over the last two decades have been driven primarily by pursuit of quasi-rents that have
resulted from investments in generation capacity, power purchase agreements, and other
strategies whose payoff is revealed over long time periods. These strategies create fluctuations in the relationship between the average cost and marginal cost of producing and
delivering electricity to consumers. Average cost is the basis for price setting under regulation, while marginal cost is the basis for pricing in a competitive market. During periods
in which these two costs have diverged, consumer and political sentiment has tilted toward
whichever regime (regulation or markets) offered the lowest prices at that time.
The relationship between average and marginal cost in the industry is in turn influenced
by many factors. Some of these – such as productivity, level of investment, and the choice
of type of investment – are influenced by the transitional incentive problems attributed to
cost-of-service regulation. Others are influenced by factors largely beyond the control of
state utility commissioners. Two critical exogenous trends during this period have been
technology innovations adapted from other sectors (such as aircraft engine technology that
changed the design of gas turbines and semiconductor innovations that reduced the cost
of solar power) and trends in the prices of natural gas, which is generally the fuel setting
1 More than 75% of end-use electricity was provided by IOUs. Most other customers received electricity from
publicly-owned municipal utilities or, in some rural areas, local cooperatives. See Energy Information Administration
(1995).
2 Throughout this paper we use the term “restructuring” to describe the suite of changes that impacted both the
organization of electricity firms and the methods by which those firms were regulated.

1

2

marginal costs in most electric systems.
Thus, while the restructuring era dawned with great hope that regulatory innovations, and
the incentives provided by competition, would dramatically improve efficiency and greatly
lower consumer costs, that hope was largely illusory. In fact, rates rose in both regulated and
deregulated states, and more rapidly in the deregulated ones in the early years of reform.
Subsequent studies of retail rates in both groups of states have generally overlooked the
key point that exogenous shocks to the industry often dominated the incremental benefits
that regulatory reform can provide. There is clear evidence that competition has improved
efficiency at power plants and improved the coordination of operations across a formerly
balkanized power grid. But the impact of gas price movements and new technologies have
had a far larger impact.
We argue that many of the same incentive that created political momentum for restructuring 20 years ago are still present in the industry. One way they manifest today is in the
increasing focus on “distributed generation,” the term generally used for electricity generation that takes place on the customer side of the meter and reduces the customer’s retail
electricity demand from the utility. While valid economic and technological arguments can
be made for and against an expanded role for distributed generation, transfers of quasi-rents
play a major role in the policy positions.
In section 2 we review the expectations the drove the push for electricity restructuring in
the 1990s and how those beliefs shaped the market-based models for electricity markets in
each vertical component of the industry: generation, transmission, distribution and retailing. In section 3, we examine the evidence on what effect restructuring has actually had, as
well as the most common confusions that confound electricity restructuring with changes in
input costs and other factors. Section 4 looks ahead to the most pressing challenge the industry will face in the coming years, the increasing role of renewable and intermittent energy
sources, both from utility-scale generation plants and from much smaller scale distributed
generation at households and commercial customers. We conclude in section 5.
II.

Theory and Implementation of Electricity Restructuring

One of the challenges for an analysis of electricity restructuring is that there are several
competing definitions of what restructuring or deregulation actually is. Outside the United
States, a key step in electricity restructuring was the divestiture of the government-owned
assets that had comprised a nationalized power sector. In the United States, government
ownership was never the dominant form of organization and the exceptions in the U.S. –
federally marketed hydro-electric power and municipally-owned generation and distribution
companies – have remained largely unchanged during the restructuring era. Technically,
wholesale electricity markets are still regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) under the authority granted by the 1938 Federal Power Act. The wave of
state-level restructuring did not change this fact, although FERC has applied its authority
flexibly by allowing states and regions to set “market-based” rates. Such authority can be
revoked, however, so it is inaccurate to label even wholesale markets in fully restructured
regions as “deregulated.”
In a market-based system for electricity provision, the industry is generally considered as

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

3

participating in four separate activities: generation of electricity, long-distance transmission
over high-voltage lines, voltage step-down (to the 110V common in the U.S. or 220V used
in Europe and elsewhere) and local distribution to end users, and retailing (marketing and
resale of wholesale power) to end use customers. The last activity includes procurement of
power under long-term contracts, rate setting, billing, and collection. The U.S. restructuring
process was focused on generation, transmission and retailing. The local distribution lines
continued to be considered a natural monopoly that would be subject to either regulation
or municipal ownership.
Changes to generation, transmission and retailing were pursued with varying levels of
commitment in different parts of the country. Independent oversight and control of the
transmission networks was viewed by many as the backbone of restructuring, because transmission was critical to generators accessing a competitive wholesale market into which they
could sell and to retailers accessing competitive sellers from which they could buy. Restructuring of generation resembled most closely the deregulation that had taken place in
other industries, with free entry of unregulated electricity plants (known as “merchant”
generators or independent power producers (IPPs)) that would live or die by their cost of
production and the price they could get for their output. Finally, retail restructuring, in
the limited areas it has taken hold in the U.S., has allowed non-utility companies to become
the wholesale procurement entities for retail customers, offering customers alternative retail
pricing structures, though across a rather limited spectrum as we discuss below.
In theory, at least, the three aspects of restructuring were closely intertwined. Without
independent oversight of transmission, a merchant electricity plant would be at the mercy
of the local transmission owner, which could extract large shares of the quasi-rents available
once the plant was built, thereby discouraging entry of competitive generation. Even with
transmission access, a merchant generator would be in a very weak position if there were only
one retail electricity provider to which it could sell its output. A monopoly retail provider
(a distribution utility) could still engage in competitive procurement, but that creates a
narrower spectrum for competitive generation and it means that the monopoly retailer is
the single determinant of the range of products that might be procured for retail. For
instance, the monopoly retailer might not pursue low-carbon sources even if there are many
retail customers who would be willing to pay a premium for greener energy. Thus, retail
competition potentially makes competitive generation more viable. Likewise, competitive
generation is central to the retailer being able to offer better procurement options, different
generation sources, or alternative billing mechanisms, which the retailer would likely want
to balance with the wholesale contracts it has with producers.
In practice, while pursuit of restructuring in the three activities has been regionally correlated, many areas have developed generation restructuring without retail competition. And
independent transmission operators have taken over large swaths of the U.S. grid in which
both generation and retail competition varies greatly.
A.

Transmission Access Reforms

Transmission restructuring proceeded along two paths, a regulatory path that attempted
to impose rules upon vertically-integrated utilities that would promote third party access

4

to their networks, and an institutional path that encouraged the creation of Independent
System Operators (ISOs) and later Regional Transmission Organizations (RTOs).3 FERC
attempted through a series of orders during the 1990s and 2000s to force the creation of
more transparent online market places for available transmission capacity and to require
vertically integrated utilities to provide transmission service to third-party independent
power producers. These efforts have achieved at best mixed success.
The more successful path to nondiscriminatory grid access appears to have been the creation of the RTO/ISO. These entities are organized as user-supported non-profit companies
and operate essentially as regulated entities overseen by FERC. In the U.S. these transmission companies do not own the transmission assets in their jurisdiction, but rather they
control access to those assets by virtue of approving, and in some cases setting, the production schedules of the power plants within their regions, as well as operating real-time
balancing markets that adjust supply as needed to maintain network reliability. In each
case, the decisions made by the ISOs with regards to generation operations are dominated
by a mandate to respect the constraints of the transmission network and other reliability
considerations. Unlike the vertically integrated network entities, ISOs have no generation
assets or retail consumers, and are therefore credibly impartial as to specific market outcomes as long those outcomes do not threaten reliability.4
Initially the RTO/ISO model was largely restricted to markets undertaking the full suite
of restructuring steps described in this section. The full and unfettered access of disparate
power producers to the available population of electricity customers dictated an institutional
structure that would eliminate concerns over vertical barriers. Conversely, jurisdictions that
wanted no part of retail competition were equally suspicious of the RTO/ISO structure as
an initial step down the slippery slope to full restructuring. Thus, many municipal utilities
and some of the largest and strongest integrated utilities, as well as the Federal Marketing
Agencies, kept their transmission systems organized along traditional structures in which
they directly controlled access and real-time use.
This changed in the latter half of the 2000s. As we discuss below, the pressures to restructure other aspects of utility operations receded in many regions, so joining an RTO/ISO
market no longer implied the inevitable dissolution of the traditional utility franchise. At
the same time, the benefits of better coordination of operations and lowering of transactions
costs within ISOs appear to have been substantial.5 Figure 1 illustrates the geographic reach
of North American ISOs and RTOs as of 2012. Currently, RTOs such as the Midcontinent
Independent System Operator, Southwest Power Pool, and PJM each contain several states
that never seriously considered restructuring their generation or retail sectors.
The creation and expansion of the RTO/ISO model may be the single most unambiguous
success of the restructuring era in the United States. The U.S. has historically suffered
3 Both types of organizations are tasked by FERC to coordinate investment and operations of regional power grids
in a non-discriminatory transparent manner.
4 Indeed, RTO/ISOs have at times been criticized as being too exclusively focused on reliability and not sufficiently
concerned with the costs their instructions and mandates place on the customers and generators operating within
their systems. It is true that the performance of ISOs is generally measured in terms of the reliability of their systems
and the costs of the relatively narrow scope of operations directly housed within ISOs, rather than on the indirect
effects their decisions may have on productivity and prices.
5 See Joskow (2006), Wolak (2011a), and Mansur and White (2012).

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

5

Figure 1. U.S. ISOs and RTOs as of 2012

from a utility system that was highly balkanized relative to most other countries. The
evidence suggests that the lack of coordination across utility control areas impeded Paretoimproving trades worth billions of dollars.6 Although the early momentum for aggregating
utility control areas into more regionally managed RTOs was provided by it being seen as a
necessary step toward the ultimate goal of deregulating generation and retail, the expansion
of the RTO structure has come to be viewed as a valuable legacy of this period even for
states that never showed serious interest in these other aspects of restructuring.
B.

Restructuring of Generation Ownership

The second dimension of restructuring impacted the ownership status and remuneration
of generation assets. Large amounts of generation capacity were converted from utility
status to independent power producer (non-utility or “merchant”) status. Effectively, these
assets transitioned from a cost-of -service regulation model, in which they were compensated
based upon average production cost, to a market-based pricing model, under which these
assets earned a market price for the output they were able to produce.
To the extent one considers the electric sector to be “deregulated,” it is due to this
fundamental shift in the paradigm for compensating owners of generation. In addition
to the divestiture of much of the existing generation fleet previously owned by IOUs in
restructured states, an equally dramatic change impacted the investment in new generation.
The construction of generation assets was no longer coupled with a guarantee to recover a
positive return on those capital costs. In 1997 only 1.6% of U.S. electricity was produced
by generation owned by firms classified as Independent Power Producers. That figure rose
6 See

White (1995), Joskow(1997), Kleit and Reitzes (2008), and Mansur and White (2012).

6

to 25% by 2002 and was just under 35% in 2012. The share of nuclear generation owned by
IPPs rose from zero in 1997 to almost 50% in 2012, as utilities sold off their nuclear assets.

Figure 2. Share of Output from Merchant Generators in 2012

Figure 2 displays the diversity of ownership patterns across the U.S. as of 2012 and
illustrates the strong regional pattern of generation restructuring. The Southeast, with its
large and regionally powerful IOUs, and much of the Pacific Northwest, with its dominance
of federally operated generation and municipal utilities, have largely resisted changes in
generation ownership. Importantly these regions also enjoyed amongst the lowest average
retail rates in the country in 1997. The Northeast and Illinois have almost fully transitioned
to a non-utility form of ownership, while Texas, California and Montana have also seen large
shares of IPPs.
As we will discuss below, we consider this dimension of restructuring to be the most
economically meaningful in its consequence. This is mainly because the majority of costs
still reside in the generation sector and the fact that the most potential variation in costs
and prices resides in this sector.
Political attitudes toward the effects of restructuring during the last 20 years have also
been dominated by outcomes in the generation sector. These attitudes can largely be
captured by comparing average to marginal costs.
In the early 1990s, just prior to the initial years of restructuring, much of the country
experienced large generation reserve margins (see Figure 3). Until the last few years (with
the rise of intermittent renewable generation), this statistic was a very good proxy for measuring the efficient deployment of capital. Larger reserve margins generally imply installed
capacity (and capital) that is underutilized. Lower utilization implies higher average costs
as the capital expenditures are spread across a smaller consumer base. Lower utilization
rates also often implied that generation with relatively low marginal cost was often available,
and marginal, thereby contributing to relatively low regional wholesale prices. Historically

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

7

0

.05

Reserve Margin
.1
.15
.2

.25

.3

low natural gas prices during the 1990s also greatly contributed to low regional wholesale
prices.

1990

1995

2000
Year

National Average
Midwest
West

2005

2010

Northeast
Texas
Southeast

Figure 3. Generation Reserve Margins

The industry during the late 1990s was therefore experiencing very high reserve margins,
leading to unusually low marginal costs and unusually high average costs. This is the
fundamental source of the pressure for restructuring. While, as discussed above, much
of the rhetoric at the time focused on retail deregulation, this needs to be seen from the
perspective of customers (often large industrial customers) who saw great opportunity in
being able to gain “direct access” to the wholesale market. 7
Of course, what appeared as a great opportunity for customers conversely created a real
threat to utilities who were the residual claimants on generation assets for which the market
value in a competitive wholesale market would have been well below the depreciated capital value that remained on the utilities’ books at the time of restructuring. This fact was
quickly internalized by equity markets. Share prices of the largest utilities in California,
Pennsylvania, and New England all experienced sharp declines during the mid-1990s. The
concern among holders of utility stocks soon gave way to a period of reflection and negotiation over an acceptable transition from an average-cost to market-based pricing paradigm.
The political and regulatory process was forced to confront the uncomfortable fact that
much of the consumer appeal of restructuring was rooted not in cost savings and productivity gains, but rather in an opportunity to shift responsibility for paying the sunk costs
of what were considered uneconomic “stranded assets.” This meant that immediate con7 In Borenstein and Bushnell (2000), we pointed out this tension between efficient economic decision making and
incentives for rent shifting.

8

sumer savings were largely dependent upon an equivalent reduction in returns for utility
shareholders. This is an important theme we will return to when we examine the current
rhetoric about the “utility of the future.”
In the end, utilities in all restructuring states persuaded regulators that the implicit agreement between the regulator and the IOU (commonly refered to as a “regulatory compact”)
required that the utility be made whole for any lost asset value from restructuring. Nearly
all the generation assets with market value below the IOU’s remaining book value had been
built with the approval, and in some cases mandate, of regulatory commissions,8 so it was
generally concluded that to force restructuring without compensation for stranded assets
would violate the regulatory compact. Most state restructuring schemes included a plan for
100% recovery by utilities of any stranded investment and the others aimed at nearly 100%
recovery.
The most common mechanism for recovering stranded cost was to allow a transition period in which portions of utility retail prices would be frozen at what were then considered
to be above-market rates during a transition period. Utilities would therefore be allowed
to apply these excess retail margins to pay down the stranded costs on their divested and
retained generation assets. This approach produced devastating consequences for California
where the excess retail margins suddenly turned negative and caused the 2000-01 California
electricity crisis.9 In order to avoid conflict between the goals of fostering retail competition
and recovery of stranded costs, these competition transition charges were generally applied
as surcharges to the bills of distribution companies who maintained a monopoly franchise
over the wires components of the business. Therefore, somewhat ironically, while the customer impetus that started electricity restructuring was a desire to avoid paying for high
average costs during a period when marginal costs were lower, the transition charges largely
guaranteed that utilities recovered something close to those costs anyway.
C.

Restructuring and Reform of Retail Services

The aspect of restructuring to receive the most rhetorical attention and market hype was
the relaxing of the utility monopoly franchise over retailing. Phrases evoking liberty and
freedom, such as “customer choice” and “freedom to choose” were rhetorical staples of the
restructuring process. There was also much hope that electricity retail competition might
spur innovation in retail services in the way that it had for telecommunications. Exactly
how this was supposed to be achieved was never clear.10 Electricity service has proven to
be less amenable to the sorts of usage and complementary product innovation that wired
8 In addition to generation assets operated by utilities, stranded assets in several states included uneconomic longterm contracts with IPPs that were mostly mandated by PUCs under the Public Utilities Regulatory Power Act of
1978. See White (1996).
9 Through a combination of real scarcity and generator market power (caused in part by high local natural gas
prices that followed a pipeline explosion), California wholesale electricity prices skyrocketed in summer 2000 and
remained extremely high into May of 2001. Under the competition transition plan, the two largest utilities in the
state were not allowed to raise retail rates to reflect the high wholesale prices. One of them, Pacific Gas & Electric, was
forced into bankruptcy and the other, Southern California Edison nearly followed. For detailed discussions of these
events, see Joskow (2001), Blumstein, Friedman and Green (2002), Borenstein (2002), Wolak (2003b), and Bushnell
(2004).
10 See Joskow’s (2000) discussion of the potential for new product innovation under electricity restructuring.

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

9

telecom service experienced in the 1980s and 1990s. Perhaps this isn’t surprising given
that the product is so narrow – just the electricity, not any devices that use it – and so
homogeneous. In order to use the grid, electricity must meet exact specifications that make
one provider’s product indistinguishable from another’s. The place where innovation did
seem valuable and likely to occur with retail choice was in financial arrangements: price
schedules, payment plans, and options to bundle purchases with complementary products.
More concretely, retail restructuring involved giving customers access to new “energyonly” retail providers who produced or acquired wholesale power for sale to end users.
The incumbent utility (and the grid operator) maintained a franchise over distribution
and transmission related functions. In many cases the incumbent utility was allowed to
continue to offer a default “bundled” retail rate for customers who did not switch retailers.11
Customers who did switch received a bill for “energy-only” service from the third-party
retailer they chose, and a separate charge, intended to recover transmission and distribution
system investments made by the incumbent utility.

Figure 4. Share of Retail Sales from Retail Power Marketers

The extent to which this transformation has materialized has varied greatly around the
U.S. Figure 4 illustrates the fraction of total sales in each state from entities with an
ownership classification of ’retail power marketer.’12 Texas has far outstripped the rest of
the country on the retail competition front, with the only other significant activity clustered
in the Northeast.

11 The bundled rate combined energy with the incumbent utility’s transmission, distribution and retailing charge.
This was sometimes called the “default provider” or “provider of last resort” (or POLR) rate. In some states, the
default provider franchisee is selected through auctions overseen by local regulators.
12 These data are compiled from EIA form 861.

10

Retail Price Reform. — To understand the potential for efficiency improvements in

pricing electricity, it helps to review the inefficiency concerns raised by the typical 1990s
electricity retail tariff. Throughout most of the history of electric utilities, retail pricing
policy has been driven more by equity than efficiency considerations. Because customers
had little alternative to the monopoly utility provider, and the utility was focused on satisfying the terms of cost-of-service regulation more than maximizing profits, there was little
initiative to improve the efficiency of pricing. However, with greater competition and demand elasticity – from non-utility energy sources and retail suppliers, and more recently
from improved opportunities to generate electricity on the customer side of the meter – the
pressure to align prices with marginal costs has grown.
Efficient retail prices should reflect the short-run marginal cost in every hourly (or even
shorter) time period at every location on the grid. At the beginning of restructuring, nearly
all residential, commercial and industrial customers faced prices that did not vary hour to
hour. Furthermore, utilities recovered nearly all of their costs through volumetric charges,
including the substantial share of costs that are fixed with respect to a customer’s marginal
consumption. For most residential customers, the rate was a simple constant price per
kilowatt-hour (kWh) consumed, regardless of when the energy was used, set to cover all the
utility’s costs, variable and fixed.13
Setting price equal to short-run time-specific and location-specific marginal cost leads to
efficient consumption given the level of investment, but only under a very narrow set of
conditions does it exactly cover total costs.14 In reality, there are almost certainly some
costs that scale less than proportionally with the total quantity sold, so efficient marginal
pricing would result in a revenue shortfall.
A fixed charge can be used to capture the additional needed revenue. A fixed charge
(per month, for instance) is particularly efficient in residential electricity markets because
the elasticity of connecting to the grid with respect to the monthly fixed charge is likely
near zero over a wide range of charges. Thus, the deadweight loss that could result if some
customers chose to consume zero because the fixed charge exceeds their consumer surplus
is likely to be small.
For basically the same reason, however, the distributional consequences of a fixed charge
are of great concern. Moving from a flat volumetric rate and no fixed charge to a lower flat
rate and a fixed charge is very regressive. Borenstein (2011) shows that such a revenueneutral change to a higher fixed charge and lower volumetric rate would raise the average
bills of low-income customers by 69% to 92% of the fixed charge across the three large
investor-owned utilities in California. Equity notions often suggest that the fairest allocation of such a revenue requirement would be in proportion to quantity consumed.15 That
approach, however, steers back towards average cost pricing and the inefficiencies that it is
known to produce.
The problem of average cost pricing is exacerbated in the electricity industry by the na13 Borenstein and Holland (2007) show that the break-even flat price could be higher or lower than the second-best
optimal flat rate, depending on whether peak or off-peak price elasticities are higher.
14 Under constant returns to scale, optimal pricing covers costs if capacity is also set optimally. If capacity is greater
than the optimum level, optimal pricing will generate less revenue than is needed to cover total costs.
15 Or, if data were available, in proportion to consumer surplus gained by each customer.

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

11

ture of the contract between the retail provider and the customer. In nearly all cases, the
customer has an option, but not an obligation, to purchase any quantity at the announced
price, known in the industry as a “requirements contract.” This in itself wouldn’t be a
destabalizing force if price adjusted quickly,16 but with long lags between cost changes and
price adjustment, this creates an opportunity for buyers to switch between alternative suppliers inefficiently. This is the same phenomenon as described earlier for the state decision
to deregulate, but manifest in contemporaneous customer choice among competing sources.
The combination of requirements contracts and average-cost retail pricing could create increasing problems if distributed generation (“behind the meter”) continues to expand, as
we discuss below.
Thus, as restructuring began 20 years ago, retail pricing deviated considerably from the
ideal efficient structure. It seemed at least possible that competitive pressure on the existing
structure would lead to substantial changes in pricing, and the potential for differentiation
among the products retailers sold. The technological and market configuration, however,
turned out to leave much less space for pricing innovation than was suggested at the time.
The principle technological constraint was metering: in the 1990s, virtually all residential
customers, and most commercial and industrial customers, had meters that recorded only
the aggregate amount of electricity that had flowed through them. They did not have the
capability to collect information on when the electricity was consumed. This meant that
time-varying pricing wasn’t feasible without a significant investment in metering. Nor could
a retailer necessarily overcome this constraint just by metering its own customers, because
the arrangements for billing and payments among retailers and the utility providing distribution services were generally not set up to accommodate time-varying pricing. Instead, in
most cases a retailer was deemed responsible for providing power to its customers – either
generating it, signing long-term contracts, or buying on the spot market – based on a standard assumed “load shape” (a time-varying pattern of consumption) that was applied to all
customers within broad location, customer type, and sometimes size, classes. The assumed
load shape was independent of the prices the customer faced, so the retailer had no incentive
to charge time-varying prices. With the expansion of smart meters in the late 2000s, the
groundwork is now being laid for broader use of time-varying pricing, but the vast majority
of residential customers with non-utility retail providers still see no time-variation in the
prices they pay. Commercial and industrial customers have experienced a much greater
shift towards time-of-use pricing, which entails two or three different pre-set prices that
apply at different times of the week. TOU pricing, however, is known to capture a small
share of the hourly variation in wholesale electricity prices.17
A second way in which retailers might have offered greater differentiation was in reliability,
but this too was undermined by the structure of the retail markets that were established.
Because the grid operator must always balance supply and demand to avoid service disruptions, the grid operators in these markets procured enough reserves to make sure that
the full expected demand could be met. If one retailer did not procure sufficient supplies
16 In a sense, sellers in any commodity market operate under requirements contracts, at least over a large range of
purchase quantity, but they can and do change prices rapidly as market conditions change.
17 See Borenstein (2005).

12

to meet its retail demand obligation, the result was not reduced supply to the customers
of that retailer – as would occur with nearly any other product. Instead, the grid operator
drew on its reserves to make sure all demand was met. The cost of those reserves was spread
over all retail quantities whether or not the provider to a particular customer ever caused
the grid operator to need those reserves. Reliability was assured by the grid operator and
charged to every kWh supplied, so there could be no differentiation on reliability. Alternative arrangements – in which the customer either lost power when its supplier had procured
insufficient quantities (which posed technological challenges along the same lines as realtime metering) or the retailer or customer were charged a very high fee for running short of
delivered electricity – would have created a significant cost for insufficient supply and likely
led to greater product differentiation along these lines, but these weren’t widely adopted.
The lack of retailer responsibility for reliability also undermines the incentive to implement
price-responsive demand, which could be a valuable tool for a retailer in balancing its supply
and demand while keeping costs down.
Reliability differentiation also could extend to the ramifications of exit by the retailer. If
a retailer exits the market, what cost is borne by its customers? If customers can easily
switch to another supplier at a pre-determined rate, then a similar moral hazard problem
arises in which a retailer can procure short-term power at spot prices when that price is low,
but exit if the spot price rises, leaving the customer to switch to some default rate. If that
default rate is a price that reflects average procurement costs over a longer period, then once
again the variation in average versus marginal price drives behavior in the market. Enron
and some other retail providers in California took this path when prices in the California
wholesale market spiked in 2000. In Texas, which has the most extensive retail residential
competition (see figure 4), rules have been adjusted so that customers of a retail provider
that exits are moved, by default, to a tariff that reflects the contemporaneous marginal cost
of procuring power.
III.

Electricity Market Performance Since Restructuring Began

Electricity restructuring’s most consequential economic changes took place on the wholesale production and marketing sectors of the industry. We therefore begin by discussing
the evolution of the industry since 1997 at the wholesale level. As discussed above, formal
centralized markets only formed in the parts of the country that embraced the RTO/ISO
structure, which were also the areas with the highest prices and for which the average cost
exceeded marginal cost by the largest amount.
A.

Wholesale Markets

The regions with RTO/ISOs are also the markets for which the best data on wholesale
prices are available. Figure 5 summarizes annual average prices from two data sources.
For 1998 through 2001 we use data from Bushnell, Mansur and Saravia (2008), which are
drawn from ISO websites. For 2001 on, we report data from the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) for trading hubs in Southern California (SP15), western Pennsylvania (PJM) Massachusetts (ISO-NE) and the Pacific Northwest (Mid C) hubs. The dashed line in figure 5

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

13

0

0

2

Elec. Prices ($/MWh)
20
40
60
80

4
6
8
Nat. Gas ($/MCF)

100

10

summarizes the U.S. average city gate natural gas price, taken from the Energy Information
Administration.

1998

2000

2002

2004

New England
West Penn.
Natural Gas

2006
Year

2008

2010

2012

So. California
Pac. northwest

1998−2000 are ISO hourly average prices. 2001−2013 are ICE peak power contracts.

Figure 5. Wholesale Electricity and Citygate Natural Gas Prices

Since 1998, two facts are worth noting. First, although somewhat muted by the annual aggregation in the data, the California market stands out as suffering from sustained extremely
high price levels during the 2000-2001 period. Both academic research and subsequent regulatory findings have determined that this market suffered from a lack of competition made
acute by a combination of tightening capacity and a near total absence of forward contracting.18 Second, in the other markets wholesale power market prices are dominated by natural
gas prices, though somewhat less so in the Pacific Northwest. This is consistent with the
general fact that natural gas fired generation units are the marginal source of power in most
markets during most times, but the Pacific Northwest is influenced more by the availability
of hydro-electric power.
Because gas generation comprises a minority share in most electricity markets, under
average-cost based regulation it did not dominate rate making. Prices for deregulated
generation, however, are driven by the marginal producer, which is much more commonly
gas generation. Thus to a degree that was not appreciated at the time, restructuring of
generation greatly increased the exposure of electricity rates to natural gas costs, even if
a fairly small share of electricity was sourced from gas-fired plants. As natural gas prices
nearly tripled during the first half of the 2000s, the impact on retail rates and the rents
created for infra-marginal generation were far greater than they would have been under
18 See Borenstein (2002), Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002), Joskow and Kahn (2002), Wolak (2003a), Bushnell(2004) and Puller (2007).

14

regulation.
During 2006 and 2008 the U.S. natural gas price peaked above $11/MMBTU. The higher
gas prices drove up generation costs and power market prices. By this time, the relationship
between marginal and average costs of power production had again reversed so that marginal
cost-based market prices were higher than the average costs of operating and producing
from a mixed generation portfolio. Many of the nuclear and coal-fired power plants in
restructured states, which had been considered “stranded” assets in the late 1990s, were
by 2007 tremendously profitable due to their low operating costs and the relatively high
market prices they earned for their output.
The combination of higher prices and healthy profits earned by power producers in restructured states contributed to a strong dissatisfaction with restructuring in several states.19
This mood of ex-post regret in restructured states peaked in 2007-2008. States such as
Illinois, Maryland and Maine initiated proceedings that were characterized as rolling back
deregulation.20 After 2009, however, with plummeting natural gas prices and increasing
reserve margins, momentum for significant changes dissipated.
B.

Restructuring and Plant Operations

One aspect of restructuring that has been studied at a micro level has been its impact
on the performance and efficiency of power plants. Overall the results point to a positive
influence of restructuring on the operations of plants. Unfortunately, while cost data on
regulated plants are extensive, there is much less data available on the costs of non-utility
generation. Thus, studies of plant-level impacts of restructuring have either focused on its
impact on regulated plants or were limited to a focus on the few performance variables
that continue to be reported for deregulated plants. Fabrizio, Rose, and Wolfram (2007)
compared the performance of regulated plants in states that pursued restructuring (by the
Energy Information Administration’s definition, which we discuss further below) against
regulated plants in states that did not initiate restructuring, and against publicly owned
plants in both types of states. They find modest efficiency gains in the restructured states,
much of these focused on employment and labor productivity. There is some evidence
that the efficiency of fuel consumption, the largest single variable expense in power plants,
can be influenced by incentives and skill,21 but to date the evidence on fuel efficiency at
restructured plants has been inconclusive.
The most dramatic documented impact of restructuring on power plant operations has
been on the performance of nuclear plants, shown by Davis and Wolfram (2012). Almost
half of the nuclear generation plants in the U.S. were divested to non-utility producers since
1998.22 Davis and Wolfram show that industrywide U.S. nuclear power plants have greatly
increased capacity factors since 1998, but relative to their regulated counter-parts, output
at the restructured plants increased 10 percent between 1998 and 2010. They estimate this
19 See

Johnston (2007).
Sharp (2007) and Behr (2009).
21 See Bushnell and Wolfram (2009)
22 Since 1998, no new nuclear plants have come online.
20 See

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

15

additional output has a market value of $2.5 billion dollars annually.23
C.

Restructuring and Retail Prices

It is useful to begin a review of retail prices under deregulation by examining conditions
in 2007, when dissatisfaction with restructuring peaked. In 2007, the New York Times ran
a series of articles highlighting the fact that rates had risen faster in restructured states
than in regulated ones. The articles cited studies that relied upon average retail price data
reported to the Energy Information Administration and essentially performed a difference
in difference comparison between restructured and non-restructured states.24
A central challenge in studies like this is to identify what constitutes “restructured” in
order to assign a state to one category or the other. Many papers have relied upon the
Energy Information Administration’s definition, which is focused on the status of retail
competition. An alternative measure of restructured is based upon the fraction of energy
generated in a state that is produced by Independent Power Producers (IPP). Figure 2
illustrates these values for 2012, but we can apply the full panel of values to capture the
underlying points of transition in each state.
As one examines recent data on retail rates, it is clear that many of the conditions of 2007
have since dramatically reversed. Table 1 summarizes the average retail rates in states considered “restructured” according to two alternative measures against those that remained
under traditional regulation25 The first measure is the one used in a study by Showalter
(2007) for Power in the Public Interest (PPI) that is cited in the NY Times article. This
definition excludes from the restructured category states such as Illinois and Pennsylvania
which by 2012 have almost all of their energy provided from non-utility sources. As an
alternative measure, we assign states to the restructured category if they had more than
40% of their energy provided by non-utility sources in 2012.26
From Table 1 one can see that at this level of analysis the definition of restructured
makes only a small difference. The time period examined, however, makes an enormous
difference as rates in restructured states increased at a pace nearly 50% higher than those
in non-restructured states between 1997 and 2007 but have actually declined slightly since
2007. Average rates in states that did not restructure have continued to increase since
2007, though at a slightly lower pace than between 1998-2007. Overall there is almost
no difference in the change in average rates for the two groups over the full sample from
1998-2012.
Figure 6 illustrates the annual levels of rates in restructured and non-restructured states
using our generation-based definition, along with the national average city gate natural gas
23 Hausman (2014) concludes that the gains in utilization were not accompanied by degradation of safety among
deregulated plants.
24 See Showalter (2007) and Tierney (2007).
25 Retail price data come from the EIA form 861, which report sales and revenues by utility. We examine the
average rate across all major rate categories, including residential, industrial and commercial. Several previous
studies, including Showalter (2007) and Apt (2005) have focused on rates paid by industrial customers.
26 The NY Times article lists the restructured states as CA, CT, DC, DE, MA, MD, ME, MI, MT, NH, NJ, NY,
RI, and TX. Our generation-based definition puts CA, CT, DE, IL, MA, MD, ME, MT, NH, NJ, OH, PA, NY, RI,
TX, and VT into the restructured category.

16

Table 1—Summary of Retail Price Changes

Definition

Status

Average Retail Price
Percent Change
1997 2007
2012 97 to 07 07 to 12 98 to 12
PPI Definition Not Restructured 5.89 7.44
8.72
0.21
0.15
0.32
Restructured
8.96 12.53 12.35
0.29
-0.01
0.27
At least 40%
IPP in 2012

Not Restructured 5.67 7.23
Restructured
8.83 11.99

8.57
11.95

0.22
0.26

0.16
0.00

0.34
0.26

0

Retail Electric and Citygate Gas Price
2
4
6
8
10
12

price. Restructured states experienced higher rates during the 1990s, a major factor in their
election to adopt restructuring. The gap between traditionally regulated and restructured
states narrows around 1998, reflecting the impact of legislation that required immediate rate
reductions accompany restructuring in several states. Since that time, rates in restructured
states more closely follow the trajectory of gas prices up during the early 2000s and back
down since then.

1990

1995

2000
Year

Non−restructured States
Elec. Price Difference

2005

2010

Restructured States
Natural Gas Price ($/MCF)

Figure 6. U.S. Average Retail Rates and Natural Gas Prices

To further test this relationship between natural gas prices, restructuring and electricity
rates we estimate the following regression on state level annual changes in electricity prices
and city-gate natural gas prices.

(1)

∆Elecs,t = α + β1 F ractionIP Ps,t + β2 ∆N Gass,t + β3 F ractionIP Ps,t ∗ ∆N Gs,t ,

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

17

where ∆Elecst = ln(Rates,t ) − ln(Rates,t−1 ) and ∆N Gass,t = ln(N G CityGates,t ) −
ln(N G CityGates,t−1 ) are the annual changes in log state average electricity rates, and log
state average city-gate natural gas prices, respectively. We estimate for 1998 (the change
from 1997) to 2012. Table 2 presents the summary statistics for these variables in the years
1997 and 2012.27 We estimate (1) clustering standard errors at the state level.
Table 2—Summary Statistics of Retail Electric and Natural Gas Prices

Variable
Mean
Data for 1997
Variable
Mean
Price
6.72
Fraction IPP 0.03
Nat. Gas
3.54
Data for 2012
Price
9.70
Fraction IPP 0.35
Nat. Gas
4.90

S.D.

Min

Max

S.D.
2.03
0.07
0.64

Min
3.87
0.00
2.12

Max
11.66
0.46
5.18

2.30
0.33
0.97

6.90
0.00
3.46

15.54
0.99
7.73

The results of regression (1) are reported in table 3. As table 1 suggests, restructuring,
which we are representing with fraction of energy generation from non-utility sources in
that year (F raction IP P ), has no statistically discernible effect on average changes in
rates over the 1997 to 2012 period. The point estimate implies that a state with 100%
merchant generation has a 0.6% higher average annual rate increase, but one cannot reject
no effect at conventional significance levels. Changes in local natural gas prices, however,
do influence rates. The second column of table 3 suggests that a 1% increase in natural
gas prices implies a 5% increase in electricity prices on its own. The third column in the
table yields greater clarity on the mechanism. When the change in natural gas price is
interacted with the F raction IP P , the results suggests that the effect of natural gas is
much greater in restructured states as the earlier discussion would suggest. The influence
of natural gas price on retail rates is estimated to be nearly twice as large in a state with all
merchant generation than in a state with none. The effect of natural gas prices in a state
with no merchant generation is not statistically significant, while the interacted effect with
F raction IP P is highly significant.
We do not intend this to be an exhaustive analysis of the drivers of retail prices.28 However these data are strongly supportive of the argument that, apart from the California
electricity crisis, any harm that electricity restructuring has done to consumers was a sideeffect of changes in the price of natural gas. In restructured markets, natural gas generation
27 Both time series are from the Energy Information Administration.
Electricity rates are the
“Total Electric Industry” average price across all customer classes, per state, as reported at
http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/state/ and derived from EIA form 861 data. Natural Gas prices are available at
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/ng pri sum dcu nus a.htm, and derived from EIA form 857 data.
28 Others such as Apt (2005) and Taber, Chapman and Mount (2006) have performed more extensive exercises, but
only utilizing data during the early years of restructuring.

18

Table 3—Analysis of Retail Price Changes

Pct IPP

1
0.006
(0.005)

2
0.007
(0.005)
0.051
(0.016)
NA

720

720

Pct Change in
Nat. Gas
∆NGasxPctIPP
N

3
0.006
(0.005)
0.023
(0.016)
0.018
(0.005)
720

Dependent variable is change in log annual state-level average electricity rates. Standard Errors are clustered by state.

determines market prices and therefore the remuneration for all the non-utility assets. The
more non-utility assets featured in a state’s generation mix, the more exposed that state is
to the natural gas market.
Simply put, restructuring in the U.S. was in hindsight very poorly timed. Assets that
were viewed as stranded in 1998 were sold as white elephants at prices far below what they
would have fetched in 2007. Conversely, large customers in the 1990s were motivated by low
wholesale prices to push for restructuring, but the switch to market pricing, which increased
their exposure to the natural gas market, came just as natural gas price increases starting
a long climb up to a peak in 2007. This timing is not coincidental: the same factors that
contributed to the low valuation of utility assets in the late 1990s (low wholesale prices)
were the ones that made the prospect of restructuring so appealing to customers and policy
makers.
D.

The Evolution of Retail Price Structures

Unfortunately, data on retail price structures are much less available than data on average
retail price levels. Nonetheless, it is clear that there has been gradual movement towards
time-varying pricing, primarily for commercial and industrial customers. In the last decade
– partially in response to funding from the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act (ARRA) – many utilities have rolled out so-called “smart meters” to even residential
customers. Estimates vary, but by 2013 it is likely that more than 40% of all customers in
the U.S. had smart meters.29
These meters record total electricity consumption in hourly or shorter periods, and can facilitate much wider use of pricing that changes frequently to reflect real-time supply/demand
balance, known as dynamic pricing.30 So far, such granular and timely pricing has appeared
for only a narrow slice of large industrial and commercial customers, but with smart meters
29 See

FERC (2013).
meters also communicate information to the utility without onsite visit by a meter reader. Savings on meter
reading labor have been the largest benefits projected by utility installing smart meters.
30 The

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

19

now in place, most of the financial cost of dynamic pricing down to even residential customers has been sunk. Still, there remains substantial resistance to dynamic pricing among
residential consumers and groups that represent them. Data from a 2012 EIA survey of
utilities suggest that only a few percent of customers are on tariffs that have any dynamic
pricing component.31
Of course, the efficiency gain from dynamic pricing depends on the ability and willingness
of customers to respond to those prices. Opponents have generally argued that households
won’t pay the attention necessary to adjust thermostat settings, washer/dryer use, and
other electricity-consuming activities in response to dynamic prices. Simple calculations,
such as in Borenstein (2013), show that the financial gain from paying attention to such
price fluctuations has been modest. Still, increased penetration of intermittent generation
resources (wind and solar) is likely to increase wholesale price volatility and raise the social
return to such attention, while automation is likely to continue lowering the cost of the
necessary attention.
A very large literature has now developed using randomized control trials, randomized
encouragement designs and quasi-experiments to analyze just how much consumers do respond to dynamic pricing. The evidence is fairly consistent that even without automation,
customers respond significantly on average, though with a fairly small elasticity, generally
estimated to be in the -0.1 to -0.2 range.32 The research suggests that the larger elasticities
result from interventions that include technology to convey information, such as emails,
text messages, and in-home electricity usage displays.
The literature on elasticity with automated demand response is much thinner; it is pretty
much non-existent in economics outlets. But programmable controllable thermostats –
which can permit a person to automate response to a price or other warning signal or allow
an authorized third party to do so – have been in use for more than a decade. Industry
publications suggest these technologies greatly increase potential demand response.33
IV.

The Next 20 Years

After a tumultuous period from 1996 to 2005, the regulatory/legal status of electricity
restructuring – in generation, transmission, distribution and retailing – has changed little
in the last decade. In recent years, however, the continuing evolution in technology and in
environmental concerns has disrupted the industry in new ways. These changes are ongoing
and are likely to continue for many years.
The greatest change occurring in electricity markets today – and likely going forward for
many years – is the increased recognition of environmental costs of electricity generation,
most notably (but not exclusively) greenhouse gas emissions. Environmental issues have
played a significant role in electricity for decades, but most of the emphasis in past years
was on limiting the local air and water pollution from traditional generation sources. Of
course, appropriate pricing of the environmental externalities – either through a tax or a
31 See

FERC (2013) and EIA Form 861.
Jessoe and Rapson (2014), Ito (2014), and Wolak (2011b).
33 See Faruqui and George (2002).
32 See

20

0

100

Generation in TWh
200
300

400

cap-and-trade program – would be the simplest and most efficient way to incorporate these
environmental costs.34 Currently, most U.S. utilities either pay zero for their greenhouse
gas emissions, while a minority pay prices well below the most common estimates of the
social cost of those emissions. In that situation, raising marginal retail price above the
utility’s private marginal cost can be efficient, of course, and it can at the same time reduce
the need for fixed charges discussed earlier.

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Biomass
Solar

Geothermal
Wind

Figure 7. Electricity produced from non-hydro renewable sources (excludes distributed generation)

In the last decade, with growing concern about climate change and with improving technology, environmental stakeholders have turned more and more to goals for increasing generation from renewable sources. While hydro-electric and nuclear generation are by far the
largest low-carbon sources in the U.S., wind and solar are growing rapidly, as shown in
figure 7.
The growth of wind and solar generation sources raises two issues that are now coming to
dominate policy discussions among utilities and policy makers: (1) economic and technical
management of intermittent-production resources for which costs are largely sunk before
production begins and (2) policy towards distributed generation resources that are on the
property of the end user (so-called “behind the meter” generation). The latter is primarily
an issue with rooftop solar PV today, but could expand to batteries and other generation
or storage devices in the future.
34 “Appropriate” is a key word here. Simply setting a tax or a quantity cap addresses the issue efficiently only if
the tax or quantity limit is set correctly. This is an obvious point, but one that seems to be missed or ignored by
many policymakers.

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

A.

21

Management of Intermittent Generation Resources

Numerous regulatory and legislative initiatives, including President Obama’s Clean Power
Plan proposed in 2014, are pressuring electricity providers to reduce the greenhouse gas
footprint of the power they supply. Many options exist for reducing GHG emissions from
electricity, but among the most prevalent today are greater use of wind and solar power.
Economic and technical integration of these intermittent renewable generation resources is
likely to be one of the principal challenges facing the electricity industry in the next few
decades.
The technical challenge stems primarily from the fact that production from these resource
occurs intermittently and largely outside the control of the owner – when the wind blows or
the sun shines.35 Because the physics requires that quantities supplied and demanded in an
electrical grid must balance at all times for the system to be stable – and because storage is
still quite expensive – the intermittency of wind and solar implies that either other flexible
supply resources must be available to offset these fluctuations or demand must change in
response. Both solutions are technically feasible, though supply-side responses have been
the focus of more discussion.
Intermittency problems occur on both short and long timescales. Large fluctuations in
electrical generation can occur second by second from solar PV, and minute by minute
from wind. On a longer scale, both wind and solar can exhibit many hours of higher or
lower production than was forecast even a day in advance.36 Short scale intermittency is
generally localized and idiosyncratic, so a diversity of locations may substantially mitigate
the problem, though studies suggest that some additional balancing resources or demand
responsiveness will still be necessary at high penetration.37
Longer-scale intermittency is likely to be a more formidable problem if wind and solar
become a large share of generation capacity. Absent inexpensive electricity storage, days or
weeks without much sunshine or wind would create energy supply fluctuations that would
be very costly for demand to follow. If the existence of those days requires full or nearly-full
capacity coverage from conventional fossil resources, then the full cost of supplying power
with high renewables penetration grows significantly.
Further complicating the technical challenge, conventional fossil generation is constrained
in how quickly it can “ramp” output up and down to offset large changes in output from
renewable resources. In general, the most flexible conventional generation is from gas-fired
peaker plants, which are also the least efficient and most expensive. Larger combined-cycle
gas turbine plants are somewhat less flexible, but lower cost, and coal and nuclear plants
are the least flexible.
A well-know concern is illustrated in what has become known as the “duck chart” shown
in figure 8. The duck chart presents the forecast total demand and net demand for the
35 In reality, these resources can be adjusted downward, just not upward if wind or sun aren’t present. Both wind
and solar PV are potentially curtailable, but require communication between the grid operator and the resource.
Wind turbine blades can be positioned so as not to catch the wind and stop turning. Solar PV curtailment requries
a smart inverter that can be told to disconnect the PV system from the grid. The inverters currently on nearly all
residential and small commercial systems do not have this capability.
36 See Joskow (2011) and Schmalensee (2012).
37 See Mills and Wiser (2010) and Tabone and Callaway (2013).

22

Figure 8. Projected Hourly California Demand and Solar Production (on a sunny, cool March weekday)
with Increased Solar Penetration

California electricity grid on a sunny spring day with high penetration of solar PV.38 The
lowest line shows the net demand after subtracting solar PV generation from total electricity consumption with solar penetration projected for 2020. Even if solar generation were
perfectly forecastable, the rapid drop in net demand as the sun rises and increase in net demand as the sun sets would be difficult to meet with the current mix of gas-fired generation
in California.
The most cost-effective solution proposed by a recent study would be to run more gasfired plants in the middle of the day and curtail production from solar PV.39 In other words,
the least costly engineering solution at this point may be to forego electricity that has zero
marginal cost. It seems quite possible that if retail prices at these times were set at or near
zero to reflect this situation, consumers would find innovative ways to use nearly costless
electricity, but that requires adoption of high-frequency, time-varying pricing. While such
pricing is completely feasible with current smart-meter technology, it has not been widely
adopted, as mentioned earlier. In this way, technical challenges to integration overlap a
great deal with economic policies.
Further economic challenges arise with the addition of subsidized renewable resources,
because they change the economic returns to conventional generation. The most notable
change is that because solar and wind generation have near-zero marginal cost they are
generally used virtually all the time they are available. This pushes out the supply curve
and lowers the market clearing price for electricity, reducing profits for all conventional
generation in the market. In the longer run, this worsens the economics of conventional
generation and can lead to exit. All of that would be a description of an efficiently operating
38 This could be seen as a worst case, because a sunny spring day with relatively cool temperatures maximizes
afternoon solar PV production while minimizing demand from air conditioning.
39 See Energy & Environmental Economics (2014).

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

23

competitive market if no generation sources were subsidized, all sources paid their full social
marginal cost, and electricity prices reflected the social value of marginal production at every
point in time. However, renewable generation costs are artificially low due to investment and
production subsidies, while conventional generation does not pay for its negative pollution
externalities. And wholesale prices do not reflect the value of marginal power at a specific
point in time or space; instead, the system operator separately arranges for electricity needed
to maintain voltage in specific areas, to offset fluctuation of intermittent resources and for
other operational constraints, and to respond to un-forecasted demand volatility. One of
the common ways to assure needed capacity does not exit is through capacity payments,
which generally pay companies to have generation available regardless of the electricity it
is called upon to generate.40
B.

Policy towards distributed generation

Cost reductions in solar PV technologies have also changed the economics of self-generation
by end-use customers, known as distributed generation. In California, Hawaii and other
sunny locations with high electricity prices, falling PV system costs have combined with
substantial federal and state subsidies to make installing solar PV a money saver for some
customers. The result has been a booming market in behind-the-meter solar PV. In the
U.S., distributed solar PV capacity installation has increased from 400 MW in 2009 to
about 1900 MW in 2013, with about half of new installations occurring in California.41
This trend has led some observers and utility executives to predict a “death spiral” in
which a significant number of customers self-generate much of their electricity, forcing the
utility to raise rates for the electricity they still sell in order to cover fixed investments,
in turn making solar PV economic for a larger set of customers who then reduce their
purchases, leading to a greater revenue shortfall and another rate increase, and restarting
the cycle. Ultimately, some argue, the monopoly utility disappears. This scenario has
triggered widespread debate – both positive and normative – about the future and viability
of the utility. The regulator in New York state has even proposed a complete redesign of
utility systems that is focused on customers also being generators.42
The social welfare gain from increasing reliance on distributed PV generation, however,
is still far from clear. Even the most optimistic cost scenarios suggest that the full social levelized cost of electricity from residential solar PV is likely at least $0.20/kWh in
relatively sunny areas, more than double the full cost of gas-fired generation including a
greenhouse gas cost of $40/ton.43 Distributed PV generation is eligible for the same tax
benefits as large scale solar, a 30% tax credit through the end of 2016 and accelerated
depreciation. Borenstein (2015) estimate that the accelerated depreciation amounts to an
40 See

Joskow (2008) for a broad overview of the role of capacity payments.
Sherwood (2014). These numbers are the sum of residential and non-residential installations that are nonutility scale.
42 See NYS Department of Public Service (2014).
43 The $0.20/kWh figure uses the calculations in Borenstein (2012) and recent system cost figures reported by
Barbose, Weaver and Darghouth(2014) to be as low as $4 per watt of installed capacity. Most estimates of the longrun private cost of gas-fired generation are around $0.06/kWh and emissions of about 0.0004 tons of GHG per kWh.
Valuing the social cost of GHG emissions at $40/ton yields a full social cost of $0.076/kWh.
41 See

24

additional effective subsidy of about 15%.44
Distributed PV generation also benefits from being compensated at retail prices for the
power it produces. Under “net metering,” which has been adopted in most of the U.S.,
customers are credited for all power produced from their PV system by deducting the
quantity from the customer’s consumption.45 In reality, calculations by Darghouth, Barbose
and Wiser (2013) suggest that less than two-thirds of the power produced by a typical
household PV system is consumed onsite – actually reducing the customer’s retail demand
– but net metering treats all power as demand reduction, thereby crediting it at the retail
rate the customer would have paid.46 If the full benefits that DG solar PV power brings to
the market are less than the marginal rate the customer pays, then net metering policies
lead to over-compensation of DG solar production. A simple calculation suggests this is
very much the case, but the full system benefits are a matter of some dispute.47 What
is clear is that retail electricity rates are set in ways that are not closely tied to long-run
marginal cost, so incentivizing DG solar through net metering will conflate solar policy with
rate design policy and will have unpredictable effects on the incentive to install residential
solar.
Probably the clearest illustration of perverse incentives from net metering policy is in
California, where more than half of U.S. residential PV has been installed and where the
gap between marginal retail rates and marginal cost may be highest. Most California
utilities use increasing-block residential electricity pricing, meaning that the marginal price
a customer faces increases in steps as the customer’s consumption increases during the
billing period. The two largest California utilities, each of which has an average residential
retail price around $0.18/kWh, have four blocks in their residential tariffs with prices from
about $0.12/kWh up to more than $0.35/kWh on the highest block. Borenstein (2015)
reports that a greatly disproportionate share of California households installing PV from
2007 to 2013 had consumption levels that reached into the two highest price tiers. He also
finds that installations have been calibrated to eliminate consumption on the highest-price
tiers, but not to crowd out the lower-price consumption. Borenstein (2015) estimates that
the average bill savings from installing DG solar for customers of these utilities was about
25%-50% greater due to increasing block pricing than it would have been if the utility
charged a flat rate equal to their average residential price per kWh. He estimates that the
bill savings were more than double what they would have been if the utilities had charged
$0.10/kWh, a rough approximation of social marginal avoided cost.48
44 Actually, the accelerated depreciation benefit is available only if the system is owned by a company, not an
individual. This has been a significant factor behind the rapid growth of third-party owned residential systems in
which the third-party owner leases the system to the homeowner or, more commonly, sells the electricity from the
system to the homeowner. Third-party owners of these systems point out that this model also greatly lowers, or
eliminates, the up-front payment the homeowner would otherwise have to make.
45 See http://dsireusa.org/solar/solarpolicyguide/?id=17 for timely information on U.S. state net metering policies.
46 This is for a system that generates electricity equal to about 60% of the household’s demand. The figure would
be even lower for a system that is larger relative to household demand.
47 See Borenstein (2012) and Cohen and Callaway (2013).
48 The best estimates of long-run marginal cost from gas-fired generation is about $0.06/kWh as mentioned earlier,
but DG solar PV consumed onsite also avoids the 7%-9% of electricity that is dissipated through line losses as the
power flows from generation through transmission and distribution lines to the end user. See Borenstein (2008).
Accounting for line losses, the electricity delivered for consumption from conventional generation has a marginal cost

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

25

Talk of a “death spiral” and questions of the viability of utilities, however, raises a question
that extends far beyond these issues of implicit and explicit subsidies and the value of
incremental DG solar generation. Can DG really function without the grid? Without lowcost electricity storage, and tolerance of less reliable electricity at some times (e.g., a week
without sunshine), it seems unlikely that most customers will be ready to operate off the
grid anytime soon. If the grid is needed, how should it be paid for? The utility pricing model
to date has been based on volumetric average cost pricing. Distributed generation at this
point looks very much like the push for restructuring discussed in section 2: a comparison
of average cost to marginal cost that ignores that the difference is not a real savings, but
rather cost shifting. To the extent that a DG solar household has costs greater than or
equal to the social marginal cost of grid-supplied electricity, the private savings are offset,
or more than offset, by a revenue shortfall at the utility. That shortfall must then be made
up by utility shareholders or, more likely, remaining rate payers. In fact, the notion of a
death spiral – with rising retail rates as consumption declines – necessarily implies that
price is above marginal cost, and an excessive incentive to install DG.
V.

Summary

The changes in the electricity industry over the last two decades have been dramatic, but
many were not the changes that were anticipated at the beginning of the industry’s grand
experiment with market-based pricing of generation and retail services. While the revenues
for much of the nation’s conventional and nuclear generation sources are now based upon
market prices rather than production costs, retail pricing for the vast majority of residential
customers remains dominated by state regulatory processes.
In the mid-1990s, the strong momentum for restructuring was driven by a large gap
between market-based prices – which were based upon marginal cost in competitive markets
– and regulated rates – which were based upon average production costs. During this
period of relatively large capacity margins and low natural gas prices, market-based pricing
appealed to customers and terrified utility shareholders whose assets would become stranded
absent other compensation. However, despite the allure of market-based pricing, the reality
of the regulatory process, and of case law, dictated that utilities be allowed to recover the
bulk of what appeared at the time to be stranded costs.
The great irony of this period is that a half decade after transition arrangements largely
compensated utilities for the losses incurred in selling or transferring these assets, the market
value of those same assets had fully recovered. By the mid-2000s the relationship between
average and marginal cost had largely reversed, and many states expressed a great deal of
regret about the decision to restructure. However, since the formerly regulated generation
assets were now largely held by private, deregulated firms, there was no clear path to
closer to $0.065/kWh. The timing of power from solar PV also boosts its value, or the cost of alternative sources.
Solar PV generation produces more at peak times, so it is replacing power at times when marginal electricity costs are
higher. Borenstein (2008) estimates that in real-world grid operation this increases the cost of the alternative power
source by an average of 20%, bringing marginal cost of alternative generation to around $0.078/kWh. Inclusion of the
cost of GHG emissions raises the cost of alternative generation by $0.015-$0.02 per kWh at a GHG price of $40/ton,
bringing the alternative marginal cost to about $0.10.

26

dramatically “re-regulate” the industry without paying full market value for those assets.
Looked at this way, one can view the disappointment with restructuring as being driven
by magnificently poor market timing. Utilities sold off their assets at the nadir of their
value; then, as natural gas prices climbed throughout the 2000s, those assets became quite
valuable under market-based pricing.
Since 2009, this story has largely reversed yet again. Natural gas prices have declined
sharply, nearly to the levels seen at the dawn of the restructuring movement. The attention
of policymakers has now been consumed by environmental priorities, particularly the implications of coal generation decline and renewable generation growth for costs and greenhouse
gas emissions. A surge of subsidized renewable generation, combined with low natural gas
prices, has driven wholesale prices steadily lower. As one would expect, in the short run
this has benefited consumers in market-based states disproportionately more than those in
regulated states.
Going forward, the role of intermittent renewable generation at both the wholesale and
distributed level is likely to continue to dominate the economics and policy of the industry.
The low wholesale prices that have resulted from expansion of subsidized renewables are not
sufficient to cover the total cost of renewable or conventional sources, so the prominence of
extra-market sources of revenue – such as above-market contracts and capacity payments –
is likely to continue to grow. This will mean that even in the “market” states, the true cost
of supply will increasingly diverge from the underlying price of the fundamental commodity,
electrical energy.
At the retail level, distributed energy threatens to unravel the economics of retail distribution supply. Again the juxtaposition of average and marginal cost is a driving force
here, although the differences are exacerbated by inefficient rate-making and political economy. Current rate-making practices encourage individuals to install distributed generation,
such as solar PV, that is privately economic because rates, which include the fixed costs
of transmission and distribution, exceed the marginal cost of generated energy by a large
margin. The next natural step in the rate-making process will be a move to two-part tariffs
that include monthly charges decoupled from the volume of electricity consumed. There is
speculation that the cost of storage technologies, perhaps deployed in a joint application
such as with electric vehicles, could decline enough that households might bypass the grid
completely.49 Such an outcome would be a giant leap forward in technology, but it could
be a step backward in economics if such decisions would again be motivated by an ability
to shift sunk costs – this time of grid assets – onto other customers or utility shareholders.
Policymakers again have a chance to make economically rational decisions based on true
incremental costs. We can only hope that this time they will grab that opportunity.
VI.

References

Apt J. 2005. Competition Has Not Lowered U.S. Industrial Electricity Prices. The Electricity Journal, 18:52-61.
Barbose GL, Weaver S, Darghouth N. 2014. Tracking the Sun VII: An Historical Summary
49 See

Lacey, 2014

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

27

of the Installed Price of Photovoltaics in the United States from 1998-2013. Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory Report #.
Behr P. 2009. Showdown looms over Md. electricity re-regulation. The New York Times:
Greenwire. April 11.
Blumstein C, Friedman LS, Green R. 2002. The History of Electricity Restructuring in
California. Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade. 2:9-38.
Borenstein S. 2002. The Trouble with Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s
Restructuring Disaster. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 16:191-211.
Borenstein S. 2005. Time-Varying Retail Electricity Prices: Theory and Practice. In Griffin
and Puller, eds., Electricity Deregulation: Choices and Challenges. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2005.
Borenstein, S. 2008. The Market Value and Cost of Solar Photovoltaic Electricity Production. Center for the Study of Energy Markets Working Paper #176, U.C. Berkeley.
Borenstein S. 2011. Regional and Income Distribution Effects of Alternative Retail Electricity Tariffs. Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper #225, U.C. Berkeley.
Borenstein S. 2012a. The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity Generation. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 26:67-92
Borenstein S. 2012b. The Redistributional Impact of Non-Linear Electricity Pricing. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 4:56-90.
Borenstein S, 2013. Effective and Equitable Adoption of Opt-In Residential Dynamic Electricity Pricing. Review of Industrial Organization. 42:127-160.
Borenstein S, Bushnell JB. 2000. Electricity restructuring: deregulation or reregulation?
Regulation. 23(2):46-52.
Borenstein S, Bushnell JB, and Wolak FA. 2002. Measuring Market Inefficiencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market. American Economic Review. 92:13761405.
Borenstein S, Holland S. 2005. On the Efficiency of Competitive Electricity Markets With
Time-Invariant Retail Prices. RAND Journal of Economics. 36:469-493.
Borenstein S. 2015. The Private Net Benefits of Residential Solar PV: And Who Gets
Them. Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper #, U.C. Berkeley.
Bushnell, JB. 2004. California’s electricity crisis: a market apart? Energy Policy 32:10451052.
Bushnell JB, Mansur ET, Saravia C. 2008. Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and
Competition: An Analysis of Restructured U.S. Electricity Markets. American Economic Review. 98:237-266.
Bushnell JB, Wolfram C. 2008. The Guy at the Controls: Labor Quality and Power Plant
Efficiency. in International Differences in the Business Practices and Productivity of
Firms. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 79-102.
Bushnell JB, Wolfram C. 2005. Ownership Change, Incentives and Plant Efficiency: The
Divestiture of U.S. Electricity Generating Plants. Center for the Study of Energy
Markets Working Paper #140, U.C. Berkeley.
Cohen MA, Callaway DS (2013). Modeling the effect of geographically diverse pv generation on California’s distribution system. Smart Grid Communications. 2013 IEEE

28

International Conference:702-707.
Darghouth N, Barbose G, Wiser R. 2013. Electricity Bill Savings from Residential Photovoltaic Systems: Sensitivities to Changes in Future Electricity Market Conditions.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Report #LBNL-6017E.
Davis LW, Wolfram C. 2012. Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency: Evidence from
U.S. Nuclear Power. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 4:194-225.
Energy & Environmental Economics. 2014. Investigating a Higher Renewables Portfolio
Standard.
Available at https://ethree.com/public projects/renewables portfolio standard.php
Fabrizio K, Rose NL, Wolfram C. 2007. Do markets reduce costs? Assessing the impact
of regulatory restructuring on U.S. electric generation efficiency. American Economic
Review. 97:1250-1277.
Faruqui A and George SS. 2002. The Value of Dynamic Pricing in Mass Markets. Electricity
Journal. 15:45-65.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 2013. Assessment of Demand Response & Advanced Metering. Staff Report. October 2013, Washington D.C.
Hausman C. 2014. Corporate Incentives and Nuclear Safety. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 6:178-206.
Ida T, Ito K, Tanaka M. 2014. The Persistence of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation:
Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper #.
Ito K. 2014. Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing. American Economic Review, 104:537-563.
Jessoe K, Rapson D. 2014. Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence from Residential Energy Use. American Economic Review, 104:1417-1438.
Johnston DC. 2007. Competitively Priced Electricity Costs More, Studies Show. The New
York Times. November 6.
Joskow PL. 1997. Restructuring, competition and regulatory reform in the U.S. electricity
sector. Journal of Economic Perspectives 11:119-138.
Joskow PL. 2001. California’s electricity crisis. Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 17:
365-388.
Joskow PL. 2006. Markets for power in the United States: An interim assessment. The
Energy Journal 27: 1-36.
Joskow PL. Capacity payments in imperfect electricity markets: Need and design. Utilities
Policy. 16:159-170.
Joskow PL. 2011. Comparing the Costs of Intermittent and Dispatchable Electricity Generating Technologies. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings. 101: 23841.
Joskow PL. 2012. Creating a smarter U.S. electricity grid. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 26: 29-48.
Joskow PL, Tirole J. 2006. Retail electricity competition. RAND Journal of Economics
37:799-815.
Joskow PL, Kahn E. 2002. A quantitative analysis of pricing behavior in California’s wholesale electricity market during Summer 2000. Energy Journal 23: 1-35.

ELECTRICITY RESTRUCTURING

29

Kleit AN, Reitzes JD. 2008. The Effectiveness of FERC’s Transmission Policy: Is Transmission Used Efficiently and When Is It Scarce? Journal of Regulatory Economics.
34:1-26.
Lacey, S. 2014. Morgan Stanley: Fixed Charges on Solar May Cause ‘Tipping Point’ for Grid
Defection. Greentech Media. August 4. http : //www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/Solar−
F ixed − Charges − M ay − Cause − Grid − Def ection?utms ource = Daily
Mansur ET. 2007. Upstream Competition and Vertical Integration in Electricity Markets.
Journal of Law and Economics 50:125-156.
Mansur ET. 2008. Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets. Review of
Economics and Statistics 90:369-386.
Mansur ET, White MW. 2012. Market Organization and Efficiency in Electricity Markets.
Dartmouth University Working Paper. http : //www.dartmouth.edu/ mansur/papers/mansurw hitep jma
Mills A, Wiser R. 2010. Implications of Wide-Area Geographic Diversity for Short-Term
Variability of Solar Power. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Report #LBNL3884E.
New York State Department of Public Service. 2014. Reforming the Energy Vision. Case
14-M-0101, 2/24/2014. (Available at http://www3.dps.ny.gov/W/PSCWeb.nsf/96f0fec0b45a3c6485257688
Puller SL. 2007. Pricing and firm conduct in California’s deregulated electricity market.
Review of Economics and Statistics. 89:75-87.
Schmalensee, R. 2012. Evaluating policies to increase electricity generation from renewable
energy. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 6:45-64.
Sharp D. 2007. Utility rates in Maine on the rise; State lawmakers consider rollback of
deregulation. Bangor Daily News. April 21.
Sherwood L. 2014. U.S. Solar Market Trends 2013. Interstate Renewable Energy Council,
Inc.
Showalter M. 2007. Price Trends for Industrial Electricity, Deregulated vs. Regulated
States. Power in the Public Interest (PPI) Report. November 6. http://www.ppinet.org/PDFs/PPIrp-INDjul07data-nov07.pdf
Taber J, Chapman D, Mount T. 2006. Examining the effects of deregulation on retail
electricity prices. Cornell University Working Paper WP-2005-14.
Tabone MD, Callaway DS. (2013). Parameterizing fluctuations in solar photovoltaic generation using Hidden Markov Models. Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PES).
(pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Tierney S. 2007. Decoding Developments in Todays Electric Industry Ten Points in the
Prism. Analysis Group, Prepared for the Electric Power Supply Association.
White MW. 1995. Valuing market trading mechanisms: Evidence from electricity markets.
POWER Working Paper #PWP-033, University of California Energy Institute.
White MW. 1996. Power Struggles: Explaining Deregulatory Reforms in Electricity Markets. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 1996: 201-267.
Wolak FA. 2003a. Measuring unilateral market power in wholesale electricity markets:
the California market, 1998-2000. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings.
93:425-430.

30

Wolak FA. 2003b. Diagnosing the California Electricity Crisis. Electricity Journal. 16(7):1137.
Wolak FA. 2011a. Measuring the Benefits of Greater Spatial Granularity in Short-Term
Pricing in Wholesale Electricity Markets. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings. 101:247-252.
Wolak FA. 2011b. Do Residential Customers Respond to Hourly Prices? Evidence from
a Dynamic Pricing Experiment.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
101:8387.
Wolfram C. 2005. The Efficiency of Electricity Generation in the U.S. After Restructuring,” in James Griffin and Steve Puller, eds., Electricity Deregulation: Choices and
Challenges. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 1995. Electric Power Annual 1994, Volume II
(Operational and Financial Data). Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Energy.

