NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE WEAKER SEX? VULNERABLE MEN, RESILIENT WOMEN, AND VARIATIONS
IN SEX DIFFERENCES IN MORTALITY SINCE 1900
Mark R. Cullen
Michael Baiocchi
Karen Eggleston
Pooja Loftus
Victor Fuchs
Working Paper 21114
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21114

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We are very grateful to Yong CAI for sharing with us his micro data on county-specific S70 and GDP
per capita derived from China’s 2000 census data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mark R. Cullen, Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor Fuchs. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Weaker Sex? Vulnerable Men, Resilient Women, and Variations in Sex Differences in
Mortality since 1900
Mark R. Cullen, Michael Baiocchi, Karen Eggleston, Pooja Loftus, and Victor Fuchs
NBER Working Paper No. 21114
April 2015
JEL No. I14,I15,J10,J16
ABSTRACT
Sex differences in mortality (SDIM) vary over time and place as a function of social, health, and medical
circumstances. The magnitude of these variations, and their response to large socioeconomic changes,
suggest that biological differences cannot fully account for sex differences in survival. We document
“stylized facts” about SDIM with which any theory will have to contend. We draw on a wide swath
of mortality data, including probability of survival to age 70 by county in the United States, the Human
Mortality Database data for 18 high-income countries since 1900, and mortality data within and across
developing countries over time periods for which reasonably reliable data are available. We show
that, in each of the periods of economic development after the onset of demographic and epidemiologic
transition, cross-sectional variation in SDIM exhibits a consistent pattern of female resilience to mortality
under adversity. Moreover, as societies develop, M/F survival first declines and then increases, a “SDIM
transition” embedded within the demographic and epidemiologic transitions.

Mark R. Cullen
Stanford University School of Medicine
1265 Welch Rd X338
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mrcullen@stanford.edu

Pooja Loftus
Stanford University
Medical School Office Building
1265 Welch Road, Mail Code 5411
Stanford, CA 94305-5411
ploftus@stanford.edu

Michael Baiocchi
Stanford University
Medical School Office Building, Room 318
1265 Welch Road, Mail Code 5411
Stanford, CA 94305-5411
baiocchi@stanford.edu

Victor Fuchs
6WDQIRUG8QLYHUVLW\
796 Cedro Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
vfuchs@stanford.edu

Karen Eggleston
Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center
Stanford University
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
karene@stanford.edu

Introduction
It has been long appreciated that women consistently outlive men in developed countries
(Kalben 2002; Verbrugge 2012; Waldront 1976). More recently, it has become evident that not
only do women have longer life expectancy from birth (LE) in such societies, but their mortality
rates at every age are lower, starting in utero (Catalano and Bruckner 2006). So pervasive are
these observations that some demographers now equate the longevity of the human species, at
any given time and place, with the highest observed LE of women (Horton and Lo 2013; Oeppen
and W.Vaupel 2002). However, sex differences in mortality (SDIM) vary widely over time and
place. In this paper we explore this variation in search of insights into why women live longer.
In particular, we are motivated by the hope that insight into the sources of this variation will
reveal opportunities to reduce the disparity between the sexes and, thereby, the excess
mortality of men.
Efforts to explain the observed sex differences in mortality are not new, with empiric and
theoretical reports appearing in such diverse scientific literatures as demography,
anthropology, human biology, medicine, epidemiology, economics and evolutionary biology as
well as in actuarial studies and reports (Kalben 2002; Kruger and Nesse 2004; MacIntyre et al.
1996; Møller et al. 2009; Taylor et al. 2009; Waldron 1983; Waldront 1976; Yang and Kozloski
2012). Research on SDIM to date has centered on three broad themes: genetically determined
biological differences; observable differences between the sexes in health behaviors; and
differential “socio-biology”—differences in experiences and behavior such as child-rearing
activities and social network structures whose relationship to survival advantage is postulated
but not yet proved (Gorman and Read 2007; Ristvedt 2014; Umberson and Montez 2010). In
the first category are salient sex differences such as the long-recognized benefit of female
hormonal patterns on delay in the onset and progression of vascular disease in regions where
chronic diseases dominate, i.e. high- (and increasingly middle-) income countries. Moreover,
there are credible health-survey and utilization data—again drawn for recent periods of time in
high income countries—documenting that while prevalence of many lethal diseases is

2

comparable, mortality rates due to these diseases have been consistently higher for men,
whether due to biologic resilience among women or behavioral differences, such as in self-care
(Case and Paxson 2005; Cook et al. 2011; Rahman et al. 1994). On the other hand, the longstanding relatively higher male vs. female mortality in infancy—“when behavioral differences
should be minimal”—seems more likely biologic, though it too has shown variation, increasing
for many years before more recently declining (Drevenstedt et al. 2008). A recent conjecture,
combining observations from infancy and later life, proffers the intriguing proposition that a
possible biologic foundation for the differential survival for many important causes of death is
that women are less prone to anoxic brain death from fetal life onward (Liu et al. 2014; Mage
and Donner 2006).
Differential health behaviors—ranging from engaging in dangerous occupational and
avocational activities, to physical risk taking and use of harmful substances—are obvious
explanations for at least some of the SDIM now and historically (Concha-Barrientos et al. 2004;
Cutler et al. 2011; Ezzati et al. 2008; Gabel and Gerberich 2002; Hunter and Reddy 2013; Kalben
2002; McCartney et al. 2011; Norström and Razvodovsky 2010; Tomkins et al. 2012). Although
almost certainly distributed differently from one context to another, we are unaware of any
large population for which women exceed men in the most lethal behaviors. The impact of
these risky behaviors as determinants of higher male mortality from accidents—especially in
adolescence and early adult life—demands little explanation. Likewise, differential abuse of
tobacco, alcohol and other substances is both well documented and easily demonstrable as a
component of SDIM, as is evident examining relative causes of mortality from lung cancer,
obstructive lung disease and cirrhosis. Significantly, changes in these specific sex-differential
behaviors are a frequently-cited explanation for variation in SDIM over time in various
populations (Bhattacharya et al. 2012; McCartney et al. 2011; Preston and Wang 2011). If
behavioral differences contribute in particular to differential decline in mortality among young
men relative to young women even as longevity increases overall, then this could be one
mechanism for explaining sex differences in lifespan inequality over time and across countries
(Gillespie et al. 2014).

3

A third broad area of interest has been in socio-biologic differences in male/female behavior.
Inspiration for this perspective derives form observations of relatively consistent female
survival advantages among well-studied animal species, including most primates (Kohler et al.
2006). Evolutionary theory points to the potential communal benefit of surplus care-givers—
grandmothers as it were—deriving from the survival pressures created at the dawn of our
species when women often died of complications of repeated childbirths (Chu and Lee 2012).
Such observations point to fundamental, “hard-wired” differences in the way females live
compared to males that cannot be easily explained by differential exposure to (evolutionarily
irrelevant) determinants of chronic diseases or biologic predisposition to chronic vascular
disease due to hormonal influences. Proponents of this perspective point to the survival
advantages for individuals of either sex with stronger family and other support networks for
which abundant empiric evidence has been presented (Braveman et al. 2011).
In this paper we shall not attempt to weigh directly the evidence for or against each of these
mutually compatible pathways. Rather, our ambition is to establish “stylized facts” about
patterns of SDIM across time and place with which any theory will ultimately have to contend.
We begin our investigation with the data that is of highest quality: the contemporary developed
world. We then study patterns of SDIM using a wide swath of available mortality data, within
and between developing and developed countries and over the time periods for which
reasonably reliable data are available. We focus exclusively on variation in sex-specific mortality
ratios. Of particular interest is the relationship between SDIM and “demographic and
epidemiologic transition,” that period in the history of most regions of the world when
transformation of the economy occurred in close association with marked demographic
changes including reduction in fertility and maternal mortality rates, better nutrition and
control of infectious disease, and rapid improvements in life expectancy (Mooney 2002; Omran
1971). We adopt this perspective as a means for relating changes in SDIM in developed
countries—from which almost all published work on this subject has emerged—to those

4

presently evolving in other parts of the world, an approach that suggests the patterns we
identify may constitute a more general “SDIM transition”.
Given our ambition to describe and explore SDIM variation over time and place, our approach
in this paper is to present the available comparative mortality data in the simplest way, limiting
explanatory analyses largely to correlations and univariate regressions to quantify associations
already evident. We shall discuss in more detail below, but it warrants mention at the outset
that our choices for markers of social condition within countries or regions are based entirely
on availability and “generalness”; it is not our intent to quantify the relationship between SDIM
and any specific causal factor, but rather to identify broad patterns that might, later, encourage
precisely such exploration.
The paper is organized as follows: we begin by describing our data sources and methods, to
make as clear as possible why we chose some sources and not others. Next we present our
observations, dividing them into four sections. In the first we set the stage by examining current
US variation in probability of survival to age 70 (S70) by county, work previously presented as
part of a study by two of us to explore race and geographic differences in the United States
(Cullen et al. 2012) and recently extended. This section explores current cross-sectional
variation in SDIM and reveals a core observation: while measured social, environmental,
behavioral and medical variation from county to county largely can explain geographic and
racial disparities within each sex subgroup, these same variables cannot explain the sex
disparity, as men and women of each race have roughly the same social measures in each
county; if anything women are slightly more “deprived” than their male neighbors, rendering
women’s survival advantage even more puzzling. However, in this paper we show that the M/F
survival ratio across US counties does exhibit a strong correlation with some social measures:
women consistently exhibit greater survival “resilience” to social adversity. A very similar
pattern characterizes the relationship between the M/F survival ratios and per capita GDP both
between and within the world’s most developed countries.

5

In part II we explore changes in M/F mortality over time, starting with the post-World War II
period. The SDIM in the US and almost all other high income countries have changed in parallel,
albeit at slightly different rates: early accentuation of women’s survival advantage over men—
M/F declining—until some point between 1970 and 1980 when the direction of change
“flipped,” with men starting to catch up. Within each cross-sectional slice, however, the
relationship between per capita income and M/F has remained fundamentally the same as that
observed in part I—M/F is higher (men do relatively better) at higher levels of per capita
income, with a strengthening of the correlation between SDIM and income (or education or
other social predictor) over time.
For 18 high-income countries of Europe and North America, we then explore available data
back to 1900—around the onset of epidemiologic and demographic transition. This extended
time window allows observation of the pre-transition period when M/F exceeded 1: males had
the survival advantage, presumably due to the combination of high fertility rates and excess
maternal mortality. The historic data of the early 20th century shows the onset of epidemiologic
and demographic transition and stunning turnaround in SDIM, as female survival gains
exceeded those of men and M/F declined below 1. Perhaps even more strikingly, within a
couple decades of the onset of transition, we also observe the cross-sectional pattern of female
“resilience” to social adversity, a pattern that continues (and strengthens) thereafter through to
the present.
In the third section we examine the evolution of SDIM in the contemporary developing world,
drawing on the increasing availability of reasonably reliable mortality data. The data show that
current middle-income countries like Argentina, Brazil, Thailand and Iran experienced a pattern
of SDIM since 1970 very similar to that of the world’s most developed countries decades earlier
when they were developing—namely, rapidly declining M/F, with a cross-sectional pattern of
female “resilience” under social adversity. It appears at least some of these countries have
reached by 2000 the “inflection” point where M/F starts to rise as it had in the most developed
countries 30 years before. The more recently developing countries, like India, Vietnam and

6

Nigeria, appear to be passing through the same pattern of change in SDIM. Examining these
low-income countries can provide valuable insight about the robustness of the SDIM stylized
facts, primarily because the data extend back to the onset of their epidemiologic transition. The
pattern of change in their SDIM proves remarkably comparable to the beginning of the 20th
century in the current high-income countries.
Part IV turns to the Former Soviet Union (FSU) and Eastern Europe to exploit the great natural
experiment unleashed by Gorbachev’s social investments of the late 1980’s and the subsequent
fall of socialist central planning, associated with unprecedented change in mortality rates over a
very short period of time as per capita income plummeted in “transformational recessions.”
Here, too, as for western developed countries that have consistently grown richer year over
year, we observe the same pattern of female “resilience”— the best explanation for why
women in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were largely shielded from the
catastrophic and stunningly abrupt rise in mortality that afflicted men, especially in socially
disadvantaged settings.
The next section draws these observations together to present a set of “stylized facts” about
variation in SDIM over time and place. Linking together the threads of evidence reveals two
critical conclusions: First, in each of the periods of economic development after the onset of
demographic and epidemiologic transition, cross-sectional variation in SDIM exhibits a
consistent pattern of female resilience to mortality under adversity. That is, at a given point in
time, M/F survival is positively correlated with socio-economic conditions. Second, as societies
develop over time, M/F survival tends first to decline and then to increase. The later phase of
declining SDIM—when M/F asymptotes toward 1—is fully evident only thus far in the most
privileged of the world’s countries, but is beginning to emerge in middle-income countries as
well.
We qualify these tentative conclusions by reviewing the limitations of the data used to establish
them, as well as by emphasizing the need for careful subsequent causal analyses. For these two

7

major reasons, we caution the reader to take our interpretation with a healthy dose of
skepticism.
We conclude our discussion by returning to the questions that prompted our exploration of
SDIM: why do women live longer than men, and what are the implications for reducing excess
male mortality? We conclude, based on the patterns of change recapitulated in virtually every
society once it has begun to develop, that while women enjoy some unbreachable biologic
advantage, it does not account for more than a small portion of the historically observed
mortality difference between the sexes. Likewise, though differential indulgence in risky and
harmful behaviors is a likely important proximate cause of SDIM at every point in time, the
evidence in the aggregate provides a basis for belief that there is also an underlying, universal
proclivity among women towards self-preservation in the face of harm and risk, likely a hardwired adaptation to environmental adversity usually referred to as “socio-biology.” As gender
roles have tended to converge in highly affluent societies, so too have mortality rates, so that
the female survival advantage is compressed toward the biological minimum.
Data and methods
We chose as our metrics of mortality either survival to age 70 (S70) or LE. We prefer the former
because of its reliability of estimation in small populations for which rates of mortality among
older age groups are unstable. However, we have yielded to the reality that for many
populations and subpopulations of a priori interest, full sex-specific life tables were not
available, only published estimates of LE, secondarily derived. As our measure of differential
mortality we have chosen M/F (either M/F70 where possible, or M/FLE) as our outcome
measure. The preference for M/F as a statistic is twofold: first, it is almost uniformly between
0.6 and 1 in the data, conferring some ease of presentation; and second, it is consistent with
the evolving demographic concept that in high income, low fertility societies, female mortality
represents at a place and time the species longevity “gold standard,” a target we would ideally
hope men could emulate, i.e. that M/F70 or M/FLE would approach unity. However, it should be
noted from the outset that in other societies—particularly those plagued by poverty and high

8

maternal mortality and/or rampant discrimination against women—a M/F70 or M/FLE
approaching or exceeding unity implies the opposite: a red flag signaling that female survival is
far below potential.
Despite the noted similarities between M/F70 or M/FLE—and the strong positive correlation
between them—the two metrics are not interchangeable. We caution the reader against any
direct comparison of the magnitudes of the two metrics, as the meaning of an M/FLE of 0.90 is
not the same as an M/F70 of the same numeric value: the former is about average in our LE data
sets, the latter so high as to be seen only in the very wealthiest and poorest of populations.
Arguably the most challenging research decision was the choice of appropriate data,
particularly historic mortality trends which are of significant interest but also of suspicious
quality. We have made a few overarching choices. First, we decided for quality and practical
reasons to confine our study to the last 5 decades, a time period for which reasonable mortality
data, and some relevant covariate data, are available. The only exception was data from the
Human Mortality Database, which enables a look back to 1900 for a group of 18 now highincome countries.
Others have previously published the average life expectancy for 187 countries by decade since
1970 (Wang et al. 2012). We grouped these countries using data from the Global Burden of
Disease project (Lozano et al. 2012). Specifically, we defined five groups of countries (Group 1
most developed) based on the country’s 2010 Human Development Index, modified to exclude
LE as a core measure to avoid autocorrelation in our analyses, as discussed below. The decision
to classify based on stage of development at the end of the observation period, not the
beginning, was arbitrary, and was designed to facilitate observation of SDIM patterns with
foreknowledge of the countries’ economic/social development “endpoint” after the fact.
Likewise we separated out the former Warsaw Pact countries because of their distinct survival
and SDIM patterns, as will be more evident in the presentation devoted to that region below;

9

we designate this group as 1E. The countries classified in each of the five groups are listed in
Supplemental Table 1.
A third a priori decision was to exclude from detailed consideration period-place combinations
where we had reason to expect maternal mortality risk and its interaction with high fertility
rates and infectious disease was of sufficient magnitude that women frequently died in
childbirth or of closely related disorders such as rheumatic fever, influenza, etc. In societies
where women are more likely than men to die between their teen years and 40, the meaning of
high M/F is sharply shifted (as noted above)—a source of variation of global public health and
development importance but not directly our focus. Indeed, lingering effects of this era are
evident as we trace M/F over time in both developed and developing countries. In practical
terms this means we have not analyzed data on M/F in any countries before 1900 or in
contemporary Group 4 countries—the world’s very poorest—except for presenting a single
comparison with other developing countries that have entered transition.
Finally, despite the lure, we have largely refrained from examining cause-specific mortality
data. We recognize that much of the published effort to explain sex differences in mortality has
relied on such data. However, because of substantial limitations in its availability and quality
going back in time, especially for the low- and middle-income countries which proved so
informative to our exercise, we decided that using the fragments available—and having to
choose among them which were of adequate quality—would distract from our purpose, a
limitation we revisit in the discussion.
Data Sources are listed in Supplemental Table 2.
Outcome

10

For the US analyses of the level of state and county, we obtained S70 data using CDC/NCHS
Compressed Mortality Files for the year 2010. Due to the established association between race
and mortality in the US (Cullen et al. 2012) we only utilized data for non-Hispanic Whites.
For international intra-country analyses, we used country-specific census records for the latest
available year to study SDIM at the region or province level (Cai 2005, 2009). Where S70 was not
available, we used LE. We acquired mortality data for Russian oblasts for years 1978, 1988, and
1998, through the population-based HAPIEE (Health, Alcohol, and Psychosocial factors in
Eastern Europe) study.
We used the Human Mortality Database (HMD) and to obtain country-level time-series S70
data for developed countries around the world for years 1900-2010.
We obtained country-level time-series LE data from the Global Burden of Disease project for all
countries for years 1970-2010 (Wang et al. 2012).
Data Sources for Explanatory Variables
Except for limited purposes, we restricted our consideration of possible “explanatory variables”
to the handful of measures of socioeconomic status that were 1) widely available for the
different comparisons of interest; 2) generally accepted as measures of social and economic
development; and 3) reasonably comparable despite differences in definitions within each
historic and national context. Using these criteria we identified four metrics: per capita income
or GDP; educational attainment; percent living below nationally defined poverty levels; and the
Human Development Index, which we modified by excluding the LE component to avoid
autocorrelation. These metrics were not chosen because of any strong prior belief in their
importance relative to other SES measures and should not be construed as causally linked to
the observed patterns of SDIM in different places and times. Additional behavioral data were
collected to compare our approach with hypotheses presented previously in the literature, such
as the roles of smoking and drinking in specific contexts.

11

We utilized numerous sources to collect these social, economic, and environmental variables.
For the US analyses, we used the 2010 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Surveys (BRFSS)
County database to obtain county-level data on obesity, poverty, and smoking rates. We
supplemented this with data from the American Community Survey on population size, high
school graduation rates, and per capita income. To explore lifestyle convergence in the US, we
constructed a county-level occupational similarity index, measuring the difference between the
male and female distributions of occupations, treating “not in the labor force” as an
occupation. The index is 1 minus the sum of the changes in the male (or female) distribution
required to make the sex distributions in a county identical (6).
We used other country-specific censuses to obtain Japanese income data, Sri Lankan education
data, and Brazilian poverty data. We obtained data on country-level smoking prevalence for
1980-2010 through a recent study which provided the relevant data in their supplement section
(Ng et al. 2014).
Per capita GDP data for 1970-2010 for countries was obtained from the World Bank. In addition
to GDP, we collected maternal mortality data for each country for 1970-2008 using data
collected to evaluate progress on Millennium Development Goal 5 (Hogan et al. 2010).
In each instance where we fit an OLS regression, we weighted by log population, which we
obtained through country-specific censuses and the World Bank.
Part I: M/F in the US and other Group 1 Countries in 2010
The left panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution of S70 for white men and women in the US by
county. The modes for the populations are 0.67 for men and 0.80 for women and the variances
0.003 and 0.001, respectively. As can be seen, women enjoy a sharp advantage and a smaller
variance than men. As previously noted, within sex geographic variation in US mortality can be

12

largely explained by a small set of social, environmental and health care-related variables, as
can between-race differences (Cullen et al. 2012), but these same variables do not explain the
gulf between the sexes. Moreover, all are less than unity—there is no US county in which males
have equal or better survival than females, though there are some counties for which the ratio
approaches 1.
In figure 2 A-C, we see more clearly that these ratios are not distributed randomly across the
counties, illustrating one of our main points: women consistently exhibit greater survival
“resilience” to social adversity. More or less identical relationships emerge with respect to
percent in poverty, per capita income, or low educational attainment. Although survival is
associated with each of these social measures, men are far more “elastic” in response (i.e. more
vulnerable to adverse social circumstances). OLS regressions, shown in Table 1, reveal the
relationships quantitatively. Though each variable is itself a potent univariate predictor of
mortality, obesity and tobacco use correlate weakly with SDIM after controlling for other
covariates and add little to the model’s predictive power. Conditional on the other variables,
M/F smoking ratios appear minimally related to M/FS70 (Figure S1). Counties in the 16 Southern
states have lower M/FS70 after adjusting for the other covariates. The reader will also note
substantial variation explained by the occupational similarity index, seen graphically in Figure
2D. We shall return to these observations in the discussion.
The variation in M/F among and within other Group 1 countries reveals comparable
relationships between SDIM and indicators of SES. Switching to M/FLE, Figure 3 shows that log
per capita GDP is strongly correlated with M/FLE across high-income countries. This same
relationship appears to hold among geopolitical regions within Spain and Japan, analogous to
the US data above (Figure 4). Ecologic analyses of income strata in Canada and Denmark mirror
this as well (Helweg-Larsen and Juel 2000; Trovato and Lalu 2005); to our knowledge there are
no counter-examples among high-income countries.
Part II: M/F in the US and other Group 1 Countries over Time

13

We begin our inspection of the longitudinal change in M/F after World War II, when mortality
data are more robust than for earlier periods. Figure 5 shows the respective changes in M/FS70
for all of the Group 1 countries. Japan exhibits a distinctive downward trend, but all of the
other countries show a consistent “U” with the nadir somewhere between 1970 and 1985.
This “inflection point” of SDIM in the 70’s and 80’s has already been the subject of considerable
scrutiny, if for no other reason than actuarial application to insurance and pension schemes
(Gjonça et al. 2005). Some have explained the plateau, occurring as early as the late 60’s in the
most developed countries and over the following decade in the rest, by the impressive change
in smoking behavior over that period, namely the start of decline in active smoking among men
and uptake of the habit by women (Preston et al. 2012). While this theory is compelling, given
the prevalence of smoking and its lethal impact, the burden imposed on any theory is to explain
the general symmetry of SDIM for both between-country and within-country data, and its
consistent trend over time since at least 1950. This relatively homogenous pattern may not be
easily explained by the wide diversity of smoking behavior—on average and between sexes
over time—that the epidemic has produced, depicted for Group 1 countries in Figure S2, and
reinforced further by evidence from Asia where historic smoking patterns are quite different. *
As an alternative perspective, encouraged by our initial cross-sectional observations of relative
resilience of female mortality rates to socially adverse environments in Part I, we show in Figure
6 in cross-section the relationship in the US between M/F and per capita GDP (by State because
of availability) at the nadir of M/F (around 1970) and forward to the present. This suggests that
the “female resilience” pattern is already ensconced by 1970 and persists. Striking too,
although the slopes appear to remain more or less unchanged over time, the correlation
strengthens in both regressions. Indeed, comparing group 1 countries with each other during
this 40-year period, depicted in Figure S3, the same pattern appears to be occurring.

For example, Jiaying Zhao’s analysis of mortality data in East Asia from the 1970s reveals that changes in
smoking patterns are unlikely to explain the dramatic changes in cause-specific SDIM there (to oversimplify,
largely because women never smoked and men always have in societies like China, Japan, and Korea) (Zhao
2013).
*

14

It is instructive to investigate the pattern within Japan, perhaps the world’s fastest developing
country post-World War II and with a very different set of cultural norms. As seen in Figure 7,
several things are apparent at a glance, notably that the growth in per capita income was
remarkable, and that with growth came greater disparities among the regions of the country in
mean per capita income. The evolution towards the resilience pattern observed for Japan in
Figure 4 is also evident, with a hint that some prefectures are “slipping” towards lower M/F,
consistent with the less marked “U” shape longitudinal pattern in Japan compared with that
seen in other Group 1 countries (Figure 5).
Next we examine the data from the early 20th century to observe (available) Group 1 countries
during their epidemiologic transition (Fink 2013; Omran 1971). Figure 8 reveals this was a
period of steady M/F decline in the U.S. and other affluent countries for which we have data
(compare Figure S4); this downward trend in M/F reflects gradually increasing relative female
survival, and would appear to merge continuously into the curves depicted in Figure 5. Notably,
several countries—including the United States—started the 20th century with an M/FLE ratio
exceeding 1.0, suggesting that during the centuries before the demographic and epidemiologic
transition women suffered a mortality disadvantage that may hint at evolutionary origins for
the later-emerging “female resilience.” †
Figure 9, in which we (reluctantly) use average LE as the independent variable for lack of a
consistent measure for GDP or human development, shows how M/F varies across a sample of
Group 1 countries in each decade between 1900 and 2010. In the first two decades the reverse
of the later resilience pattern is evident—women did relatively best in the higher LE countries—
followed by a flattening of the relationship by 1920 before the familiar “resilience” pattern
emerges and strengthens over time, reinforcing the picture we observed in the US (Fig. 6) and
in the later decades for Group 1 countries as a whole (Fig. S3). We will return to the possible
interpretations of the “flip” which occurs around 1920 after we have examined the evolving

There is evidence from some pre-industrial societies to suggest that M/F survival ratios may have varied
considerably in the past, along with fertility rates (Hollingsworth 1957)(Jones n.d.).
†

15

patterns of male and female mortality in developing countries, as the latter shed considerable
intuitive light on the subject.
Part III: M/F in developing countries (LMIC’s) in Groups 2, 3 and 4
Moving from developed countries to the low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), three
different patterns are salient, depicted in Figure 10. In the most advanced of these (Group 2,
including such countries as Brazil, Mexico, Thailand and South Africa), we see a steady decline
in M/FLE throughout the period 1970-2010, resembling the Group 1 countries between 1900
and 1970 with a suggestion of a “turnaround” in 2000 reminiscent of the trough in Group 1
countries 2-3 decades before. Group 3 countries, by contrast, show high levels of M/FLE before
the decline which appears to start around 1990-2000; M/F in Group 4 countries—the world’s
poorest—remains, by contrast, high throughout the period, and for a few actually exceeds 1.0
(Sub-Saharan African countries, data not shown) (Lozano et al. 2012).
Figure 11 includes regressions of the relationship between M/FLE and log per capita GDP in
cross-section by decade for countries in groups 2 and 3. It appears that for Group 2 countries,
about a decade after the M/F begins to decline—1980 (compare with Figure 9)—the pattern of
“resilience” for women begins to emerge and strengthens in extent of variation explained; by
2010 the relationship is robust. This evolution of SDIM is not unlike what was observed
between 1900 and 1980 for Group 1 countries. For the Group 3 countries, the relationship
remains flat through 1990, after which M/F starts to fall (Figure 10). The cross-sectional
resilience pattern emerges about a decade thereafter (Figure 11), by 2010 explaining slightly
less than 50% of the variance. For Group 4 countries M/F stays very high and in cross-section
shows no clear relationship to GDP (data not shown) for reasons we explore further below.
Figure 12 shows recent within-country variation in cross section for two populous countries for
which reasonable quality data are available. On the left panel we see Brazil, a Group 2 country
now of middle income, revealing the “resilience” pattern of M/FLE, here in a scatter against %

16

poverty, similar to the pattern which emerged in Group 1 countries several decades earlier. Sri
Lanka, on the other hand, is a Group 3 country which as recently as 1963 still had sufficiently
high rates of maternal mortality that national rates of mortality were higher for women ages
15-40 than for men (Fink 2013; Omran 1971). This pattern provides a hint that the “preresilience” pattern of M/FLE, reminiscent of that in Group 1 countries in 1900-1910 (Figure 9),
may reflect persistent excessive maternal mortality in the poorer parts of the country. This
same concept would appear to explain the high M/F in the Group 4 countries as a whole,
consistent with high maternal mortality, shown in Figure S5; by contrast, maternal mortality
rates are detectable but low in Group 3 countries, and much lower in Groups 1 and 2 (Hogan et
al. 2010).
That the lingering effects of maternal mortality may partially explain the pattern of female
resilience emerging a decade or two after national rates of M/F start to fall is further suggested
by modern China, a country that would have ranked as a Group 3 country as recently as 1980
but has become Group 2 (and classified as such by our schema). Figure 13 shows M/F70 for over
2300 county-level units in China based on county-specific life-tables calculated by Cai Yong from
the year 2000 census (Cai 2005). Looking at the aggregate data (left panel) there appears to be
no relationship between county log per capita GDP and M/F70. Stratification by rural/urban
status reveals a more nuanced picture: rural areas (middle panel) resemble the pattern
observed in Sri Lanka (Figure 12), with the highest M/F among the poorest counties, in several
cases here exceeding 1, consistent with China’s large sex ratio at birth; whereas the urban areas
(right panel) distribute more like Brazil or the US, with higher M/F70 in more-developed areas
(although M/F70 exceeds 1 in a few poor urban counties in the same range of GDP per capita as
rural counties). Moreover, change over time is also consistent with the patterns of M/F survival
noted earlier: based on census data on LE for three of the poorest provinces (Guizhou, Qinghai
and Yunnan) with data extending back to 1981, average M/F decreased from 0.98 in 1981 to
0.93 in 2010. By contrast, M/F life expectancy in China’s wealthiest city, Shanghai, increased
from 0.94 in 1981 to 0.95 in 2000 (Cai 2005).

17

Part IV: M/F in Eastern Europe and FSU (Group 1E)
The experience of Eastern European countries, including the former Soviet Union, adds a
unique dimension to our understanding of sex differences in mortality. These nations display
the lowest values for M/F of any group of countries in the world, based on the most current
data available, evident from even cursory inspection of the map shown in Figure S6. Moreover,
as shown vividly in Figure 14, the current situation is actually an improvement for men relative
to the nadir seen two decades ago. The figure illustrates another remarkable feature not
evident elsewhere in the world, which is volatility of SDIM, matched otherwise only in
demographic disasters such as epidemics and wars (note the points off the line in Figure S4). Of
course this latter observation must be viewed in the context of the enormous political change
that swept this region during the 1980’s and 90’s, namely the liberalization of state communism
during the 80’s consequent to Gorbachev’s policies in the USSR (associated with rapid and
demonstrable improvement in the relative mortality of men), the subsequent demise of that
system in the FSU and former Warsaw Pact countries and replacement with market systems in
all. This was accompanied by a devastating “transformational recession” that depressed real
standards of living for most of the population (Kornai 1994), associated with rapidly rising
mortality for men for some years. For completeness we depict the somewhat “melded”
experience of Germany (Figure 15). Like other non-FSU Warsaw pact countries, men faltered in
the late 80’s and even more so after the collapse of the Berlin wall, but since have followed a
more typical “Group 1” pattern as part of greater Germany (Vogt and Kluge 2014).
Because of the historic heavier use of alcohol in this region of the world than any other, and the
plausibility of its role as mediator for mortality rate gyrations, toxic levels of alcohol
consumption have been the focus of much study (Gerry 2012; Mckee and Shkolnikov 2001;
Murphy et al. 2006; Tulchinsky and Varavikova 1993; Weidner and Cain 2003; Zaridze et al.
2014; Zatoński 2011). Many analysts credit reduction in excess male mortality to one specific
aspect of the Gorbachev reforms—alcohol consumption taxes—in the 80’s, and blame the
subsequent spike in male mortality on the elimination of those alcohol taxes after 1990 (see for

18

example Bhattacharya et al. 2012); this account is consistent with the biphasic change in SDIM
in the FSU during the 1980’s seen in Figure 14, with a smoother decline in M/F in the
neighboring states (including East Germany) not directly impacted by the Gorbachev alcohol
controls. That said, comparative data associating male survival decline with changes in the rate
of mortality from acute intoxication among the Russian Oblasts may suggest a different
interpretation, or at least raise the question whether alcohol was the root cause of the rapid
increase in male mortality, or only one of its mediators. As shown in Figure S7, the gyrations in
SDIM in 6 of the 8 oblasts were accompanied by dramatic changes in the rate of acute alcoholrelated hospital deaths (Gerry 2012; Mckee and Shkolnikov 2001; Murphy et al. 2006;
Tulchinsky and Varavikova 1993; Weidner and Cain 2003; Zaridze et al. 2014; Zatoński 2011);
however, comparable changes in M/FLE occurred in the other two—the North Caucasus and
South—with virtually no evidence of substantial acute alcohol-related death or change over the
period, likely because these regions, albeit of modest comparative population size, are
predominantly Muslim. This is not to suggest previous studies have inappropriately targeted
the role of alcohol as a rapid and epidemic killer of (young) men, but rather to suggest the role
may be better viewed as mediating a relationship between social conditions and male mortality
rates—seen here as M/FLE—that finds differential expression in different social and geopolitical
contexts. This intuition would appear to be consistent with the fact that despite an abrupt and
impressive “transformational recession” in which per capita GDP nosedived, the “resilience”
patter of M/F appears moderately well preserved across the Group 1E countries, shown in
Figure 16.
Discussion
From the above observations we draw a series of ten conclusions and inferences, presented
roughly in the order of those least to most speculative:
1. Sex differences in mortality (SDIM) vary over time and place as a function of social and
medical conditions. The magnitude of these variations, and their abruptness in response

19

to large socioeconomic changes, suggest that biological differences alone cannot fully
account for observed sex differences in survival.
While many have previously observed the variation in SDIM over time and place, the assembled
evidence suggests that such variation follows distinct and identifiable patterns of social change.
While some of the underlying patterns are more readily explained than others (as discussed
below), there would appear to be little “randomness” in M/F for any population of reasonable
size to stably estimate either survival probabilities or LE (with the possible exception of the
world’s poorest states, for which reliable data is lacking).
2. A “SDIM transition” unfolds as part of the demographic and epidemiologic transitions,
beginning with the emergence of the now near-universal “female survival advantage”
(M/F survival<1), heralded by significant reductions in fertility and maternal mortality
and associated causes of death during the reproductive years.
It is almost certain, though data are incomplete, that there was a time in the history of all now
developed (Group 1) countries, and those now developing (Groups 2 and 3), wherein female
mortality exceeded that of men. In developed countries the turning point likely occurred
between the late 19th century (for northern Europe and Switzerland, for example) and 1910
(see Figure S4). In Group 2 countries this change occurred later, most likely in the midtwentieth century (although confirmation is problematic because we do not have reliable data
on these countries for this time period). We observe this same SDIM transition, occurring
between 1970 and 1990, in countries less far along in development (Group 3). Tragically, in
some Group 4 countries M/F>1 remains true still today. Omran in his seminal presentation of
the epidemiologic transition in 1971 (Omran 1971) opines this was due to maternal mortality at
a time when fertility rates were high and the combination of medical knowledge and resources
insufficient to prevent frequent maternal deaths from bleeding and infection in developing
countries. This conclusion would appear to be reinforced by our observations of Group 2 and 3

20

countries as they have entered transition, and the data on maternal mortality presented in
Figure S5.
Subsequently, within each of these societies, as the survival of women begins to improve, a
distinctive cross-sectional pattern emerges wherein M/F is lower where development is higher
(Figures 9, 11 and 12 (left), 13 (middle)), a pattern we have referred to above as “preresilience”. While we do not have sufficient local data to formally test this hypothesis, this early
transition pattern likely reflects a “lag” in the decline of maternal mortality in poorer parts of
newly transitioning countries.
3. Shortly after the onset of SDIM transition, a pattern of “female resilience” emerges in
which the survival advantage of women is greatest in cross-section in places where SES
or development is least. In other words, M/F survival is positively correlated with SES,
when M/F survival<1.
Simultaneously, a striking and not immediately intuitive pattern emerges in cross-section: M/F
becomes positively correlated with indices of development, i.e., the worse off a country or
region within it (after taking developmental “Group” into account), the worse (proportionately)
men survive and the better (proportionally) women survive. This “female resilience” pattern as
we have referred to it above, illustrated in Figures 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12 (right) and S3 is a
positive relationship between indices of SES and M/F that appears to persist thereafter.
This “resilience” pattern emerges within a couple of decades after the residual effects of
maternal mortality as a female cause of death dissipates, as it did in the period 1900-1940 in
the most developed countries (Figure 9), perhaps around 1990 for the Group 2 countries
(Figure 11 upper panel), and is just beginning to emerge in the last decade in Group 3 countries
(Figure 11 lower panel). That this relationship emerges so predictably as epidemiologic
transition progresses—in more or less every observable culture and society (except those
poorest of the Group 3 countries [Figures 11, 12] and the Group 4 countries which have not yet

21

entered transition)—suggests that the pattern is unlikely to be best explained by any specific
policy, custom, habit, medical treatment or its availability, or health behavior which vary
idiosyncratically over time and place.
4. M/F continues to decline even after the immediate contribution of declines in maternal
mortality is accounted for.
Then, what might not, ex ante, have seemed inevitable is observed: a decade or two after the
impact of maternal mortality has largely dissipated—e.g. developed countries after 1950 or
Group 2 countries after 1980—M/F continued to decline for some further decades (Figures 5, 8,
10). We discuss below what we can presently surmise about the causes, but note here the
universality of the pattern among Group 1 counties—including Japan which is in other regards
an outlier—and the initial evidence in Figure 10 that Group 2 countries are following the same
pathway.
5. At a certain point late in transition, the longitudinal pattern of declining M/F turns
around—M/F rises as “men start to catch up”. This inflection point in the SDIM transition
is evident in almost all high-income (group 1) countries, as well as most middle-income
(group 2) countries.
Best observed presently for the most advanced (Group 1) countries, with a strong signal that
Group 2 is poised to follow (Figure 9), a further change in SDIM appears to occur: men are
catching up, with M/F slowly rising in the US since about 1970 and in the rest of the developed
world (Groups 1 and 1E) between that time and 1990, while improvement in the survival of
men appears to have begun in Group 2 countries between 2000 and the present (Figures 5, 9).
In this pattern Japan appears to represent an outlier (Figures 7, 9) in which the pattern of M/F
since 1970 has first risen (like other Group 1 countries) only to decline again, reaching a second
nadir around 2000; and even with evidence of small relative gains for men since that time, still

22

Japan has a lower M/F in 2010 than 50 years before. We speculate further on this below. It is
worth noting, however, that Japan’s case clearly supports our assumption that the narrowing of
M/F in the wealthiest countries is not merely an artifact of approaching some biological limit on
survival to age 70 (which Japan, of all countries, would be approaching rapidly) or life
expectancy (Lee 2011; Oeppen and W.Vaupel 2002). Although expert opinions differ, it appears
that “mortality is declining as rapidly in those countries like Japan and Sweden where it is
already lowest, as it is in lagging countries like the US, suggesting that life expectancy is not yet
approaching a biological limit” (Lee 2011).
6. Over time, the female resilience pattern—the positive association of M/F with SES—
strengthens, even as “men start to catch up” overall.
Whether comparing within groups of countries (Figures S3, 9, 11) or within regions in a single
country (Figures 6,7, 16), there is compelling evidence that the resilience pattern, in which
women survive relatively better in circumstances of lesser advantage, strengthens over time,
with the correlation (Spearman’s Rho) between M/F and several measures of SES eventually
reaching the range of 0.8 or higher. Noteworthy is the perpetuation of this resilience pattern
after the tipping point where male survival improves relatively (approximately 1970 for Group 1
and 2000 or so for Group 2).
7. It would appear that the patterns of SDIM observed through the epidemiologic transition
for high-income (group 1) countries are being recapitulated by low- and middle-income
countries (groups 2 and 3).
Our observations would also appear to provide a new perspective on the stages of
epidemiologic transition as originally defined in 1971 (Omran 1971; Fink 2013). Omran was
writing, as chance would have it, at a critical historic moment that he could not have
foreseen, as Group 1 countries were moving from the era of ever-improving relative survival
for women into the modern era in which men have begun to catch up. At that very time,

23

those countries we now dub Group 2 were beginning to “make their move” towards
development. Omran defined the “quartet” now generally appreciated to be the
cornerstones of epidemiologic transition: 1) decline in fertility rates with a concomitant
decline in maternal mortality; 2) rise in labor wages and productivity, with associated social
welfare benefits including better nutrition and housing; 3) decline in malnutrition and
infections as the major causes of death, with emergence of chronic diseases as has been
seen in Group 1 and now evident in groups 2 and 3 as well; and 4) despite the emergence of
NCDs, a dramatic rise in overall LE.
Based on our own observations, we would add to Omran’s list a fifth phenomenon: the
emergence of the female survival advantage, characterized here as “resilience” from the
emerging NCD epidemic. Moreover, we would speculate that the cresting of that advantage
as development proceeds, now evident in all developed countries, may demarcate yet a
further phase in the demographic transition, though it is too early to do more than
prognosticate, as Group 2 countries as a group have just entered this phase, and Group 3
countries have yet to arrive.
Perhaps more importantly, from the perspective of SDIM, transition appears to
demonstrate an impressively consistent pattern, at least based upon the data available.
Viewing Figure 10 through the lens of what was learned from examination of earlier
decades for Group 1 (Figures S4, 8, 9), one could readily imagine that the x-axis represents
not 4 decade-markers for each of four groups of nations, but 16 “place-time” markers,
structured like a classical “rondo” in which each group embarks on the transition pathway
30-40 years after the previous one, then replicates its path. Obviously it is premature to
consider this empirically proved, but there is scant evidence to support an alternative
prognosis.
8. In wealthy countries, and wealthiest regions within such countries, M/F approaches—
but does not reach—unity.

24

From Figures 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and S3 it is clear that some Group 1 countries as a whole, e.g. Iceland,
and within highly developed nations some states or counties, such as Santa Clara California ‡,
have M/F ratios that are approaching 0.96 or 0.97 for LE and 0.95 for S70. We use the term
“approach” with great intention, as we not only can observe these high values but also the slow
assent which preceded, demarcating these settings from others—earlier in time or in poorer
countries—in which identical M/F numerical values, would of course, have an altogether
different interpretation.
It is equally noteworthy that we observe in this context no cases of M/F>1 as we would expect
if these near-unity values represented “mean” levels around which there was random variation.
In point of fact a value in excess of 1 is not encountered in a single country or sub-region of a
Group 1 country, nor even in a Group 2 country (except perhaps a handful of Chinese counties,
mostly rural in a unique setting for which there are other plausible explanations related to
family planning policies, son preference, and their unintended social consequences). This would
suggest that something around M/FLE =0.97 represents an upper bound of the data at least
barring any major change in causes of mortality that might uniquely impact the sexes
differentially.
9. Several sex-specific behaviors, such as smoking or alcohol consumption, have been
identified in some settings as causal or contributory to the observed variation in SDIM.
However, the consistency of the pattern in different countries and cultures suggests
more “upstream” determinants driving the disproportionate gains in female survival
over time and the strong ubiquitous “resilience” pattern that has emerged.
What factors might underlie this phenomenon? As noted it is unlikely that maternal mortality,
or other adverse health impacts associated with reproduction, play a role—even lingering—in
this phenomenon that seems very robust to variation in geography, culture and ethnicity. It
‡

from which we write

25

might be tempting to attribute this phase to the more rapid adoption by men than women of
particular subsets of “bad behavior”—tobacco and alcohol abuse, dangerous use of motor
vehicles, violence, or work in dangerous occupations, to name the more obvious contenders—
or that the advantage relates to women’s known greater propensity to use the health care
system (Bertakis et al. 2000; Sindelar 1982; Oksuzyan et al. 2008); indeed, there is substantial
evidence that each of these is a proximate cause of differential mortality between men and
women in some settings (Concha-Barrientos et al. 2004; Cutler et al. 2011; Ezzati et al. 2008;
Hunter and Reddy 2013; Kalben 2002; McCartney et al. 2011; Norström and Razvodovsky 2010;
Tomkins et al. 2012). That said, the ubiquity of the pattern globally, after adjusting for stage of
development as illustrated in Figures S1, S2, S6 and Table 1—despite differences in sex-specific
behaviors in different regions, cultures and societies—suggests that the resilience of women to
socio-economic adversity during the “post-maternal mortality” era of development may have a
more fundamental “upstream” origin. Plausibly evolutionary pressures created a social and
biological propensity for women to be resilient to other mortality causes when childbirthrelated mortality was very high (during most of our species’ history); according to this theory,
the “smoking guns” of higher relative male mortality, such as tobacco and alcohol abuse, would
be better viewed as vehicles than underlying cause.
10. The convergence of M/F towards 1 in advanced societies appears to be associated with
convergence of the lifestyles of men and women.
It might be tempting to explain the “inflection point” in SDIM by one or another
social/behavioral changes that occurred in this time frame—in some countries women began to
smoke more, but also join the traditionally male sectors of the workforce or the like. However,
the most parsimonious theory is that with further development, fewer and fewer of the “least
developed” parts of most countries remain undeveloped. Furthermore, populations
undoubtedly have migrated on average towards the economically developed parts of each
country, as is so obvious with the rapid urbanization in most developing countries (e.g. Figure
12) (Fink 2013), although we have not explored the role of migration systematically.

26

Another way to conceptualize the phenomenon of convergence of M/F towards 1 is to consider
broadly the lifestyles emerging in the richest parts of the developed world. On the one hand,
women are achieving greater role parity, as legal and social barriers to their advancement in
formerly male-dominated arenas such as construction and manufacturing but also business,
academics, politics and the professions erode. At the same time men, now more often in
marital or other relationships in which women share many of the same needs and interests as
their own, are far more likely to provide child-care and other family roles formerly delegated to
women. Moreover an increasing fraction of households have single or same-sex heads.
However these cultural phenomena are perceived, there can be little doubt that the formerly
distinct sex roles are themselves converging in such societies; viewing this convergence as
relevant to the near convergence of M/F seems inescapable. Of particular interest in this regard
may be the experience of Japan, in which uniquely among Group 1 countries M/F is receding
from 1 (Figures 5 and 7). Although many interpretations are plausible and research is ongoing,
Figure 17 suggests some support for our claims regarding lifestyle convergence both
graphically and in an ordinary least squares regression: once one controls for lifestyle
differences using the “Economic Gender Equality Score” component of the 2010 “Gender Equity
Index” (Hausmann and Tyson 2010), Japan is no longer an outlier in the strongly positive
relationship between M/FLE and GDP per capita. This theory is supported for US counties by the
regression presented in Table 1 (Model 2, Full): the occupational similarity index remains a
significant correlate of M/FS70 even when controlling for all the other predictors. Like the Group
1 country comparison, the US has “its Japan”: Alaska, despite being in the top 10% of US states
by SES measures, has a low occupational similarity index and a far lower-than-expected M/F70
(Table 2). Arguably, the regional impact on M/FS70 noted in the US South, even after adjustment
for occupational similarity (Table 1), may be a signal supporting a similar mechanism.
Caveats

27

There are of course important limitations to our approach that must be considered:
1. First, as we conceded at the outset, our effort has required use of very diverse data sets,
each with quirks and opportunities for imprecision and bias. In many cases we have
relied on life table analyses of others to impute sex-specific S70 or life expectancy.
Perhaps most significantly, we have been limited to what was available; in many cases
data do not extend back in time far enough nor geographically widely enough, leaving
multiple empiric gaps (such as lack of evidence on Group 2 countries when M/F
exceeded 1, as would appear likely from the “surrounding” data).
2. We do not consistently address over time and place the roles of sex-specific causes of
death, with the exception of maternal mortality, and even that we have addressed
superficially for lack of detailed data for most times and countries. Assuming that after
epidemiologic transition mortality rates from cardiovascular disease (heart attack,
stroke, heart failure) are at once the major causes of mortality and of its change, as well
as diseases that have excessively killed men, it is tempting to explain all of the late
changes in M/F by sex-differential risks related to that single disorder and its major risk
factors: smoking, diet, physical inactivity, etc. Indeed, the positive correlation between
M/F and SES has strengthened during the period cardio-vascular disease evolved from a
disease of the relatively affluent to a disease largely afflicting poorer populations in
Group 1 countries, a pattern evidently recurring in LMICs (Harper et al. 2011; Saquib et
al. 2012). Nothing in our analysis can, in and of itself, disprove such a simplifying
assertion. However, as noted, any theory of SDIM must be able to account for
observations from myriad countries, cultures and ethnicities in which the distributions
of many risks, and their timing in relationship to other developmental and medical
changes, are variable. For example, there is compelling evidence that in south Asian
countries women, more than men, are afflicted by inactivity, poor diet and obesity, even
if they smoke far less (Saquib et al. 2013). The limited availability and quality of diseasespecific mortality data has precluded our further exploration of such considerations.

28

3. For numerous independent covariates of a priori interest—e.g. differential educational
attainment and career experience among men and women, differences in opportunity
for managerial and professional roles for women relative to men, religious laws and
customs which one might anticipate could impact or mediate some of our observations,
differential access to, and quality of health care, indeed any component of the gender
equity index—we had no available metric to directly test across datasets, and have
refrained largely from testing in any. The importance or lack thereof for such
unmeasured covariates in our analyses cannot individually or even collectively be
estimated.
4. We have no way to account for yet another compelling difference well documented in
many societies, namely differential health seeking behavior; women utilize
approximately double the healthcare services of their male counterparts in developed
societies (Bertakis et al. 2000; Oksuzyan et al. 2008; Sindelar 1982). The importance of
this difference as a cause rather than a result of SDIM, outside the context of
improvements in obstetric care, is impossible to assess from our data.
5. Even for those “explanatory variables” that we have tested—per capita GDP,
educational attainment, percent in poverty—we lack consistent definitions and metrics
over time to enjoy a high level of confidence in comparisons, even those which appear
quite robust to variable choice.
Implications for pathways mediating SDIM
We return in closing to the question with which we started: why do women live longer than
men? Our study aims to better understand the underlying basis of the century-long female
survival advantage (in current high-income countries)—with the reminder that this has not
always been true. Indeed, the reverse appears to have been true in even the most advanced
countries until the late 19th century, and in many parts of the world until mid-late twentieth
century, because of the high burden of death in women consequent from a life-course of
continuous reproduction, in the absence of life-preserving health services. Regrettably, in a few

29

of the world’s poorest countries, women still have worse survival than men. That said, women
in the rest of the developing and developed world do now enjoy an unmistakable survival
advantage.
We noted in the introduction three broad theories that have received attention, and we now
return to each with the benefit of our observations, with full regard for their limitations
enumerated in the last section. The first notion is that women enjoy some hard-wired, biologic
advantage, selected during human evolution. This might owe to some differential survival of Ychromosome negative cells themselves, whose longevity is the underpinning of survival of the
organism, or a systemic effect such as the impact of reproductive hormones on modification of
certain pathologies (e.g. retarding the accretion of atherosclerotic plaque in our blood vessels,
the cause of cardiovascular disease). It could be that the female immune system resists the
decline which begins to appear in our sixth and seventh decades (Goodwin et al. 2006; Goronzy
and Weyand 2012), or such benefit could be very organ-specific, such as the possibility the
female human brain can withstand great stress from lack of oxygen for longer, the core idea
underlying the observation that even from infancy females appear to die less frequently of
assaults to their respiration (Liu et al. 2014; Mage and Donner 2006). It has recently been
suggested that women are able to adapt more readily to their educational environment, based
on observation in Europe between 1920 and 1950 (Weber et al. 2014). The long observed
better survival of female fetuses suggests yet other evolutionary advantages (Drevenstedt et al.
2008). Owing in part because of our inability to examine specific causes of death in any
universal fashion, we cannot distinguish amongst such hypotheses, nor determine to what
extent such advantage might accrue owing to evolutionary pressure created by the benefit to
clans of “grandmothers” to raise children in the face of high maternal mortality (Chu and Lee
2012). What we can say, however, is that there almost certainly is a biologic advantage, one
that seems impervious to—indeed, becomes more evident under—environmental or social
stress. How else could we explain the universality of the female survival advantage over time,
culture, religion, political regime and place, once the scourge of maternal mortality has been
overcome? In not one single US county, nor in any single country in Groups 1-3 including 1E, do

30

more men survive to age 70 than women do. There would appear to be no escaping that some
of the advantage is “hard”.
But despite the data limitations, we can actually infer more. For while some sex-specific
difference in either S70 or LE appears to be constant, the magnitude is not. We have seen, with
the benefit of longitudinal and cross-sectional observations, that M/FLE is asymptotically
approaching 0.97 and M/F70 is approaching 0.95, which translates to 2-3 years of extra life on
average for women, or a 5% higher likelihood of survival to age 70.
So if the life expectancy difference in the Group 1-3 and 1E countries averages perhaps 6-8
years currently, and the difference in survival to 70 still exceeds 10% in many Group 1
countries, including the US, what accounts for the remainder? Differences in health behaviors
beg consideration, and indeed have received a great deal, with special attention to tobacco and
alcohol (Bhattacharya et al. 2012; McCartney et al. 2011; Preston and Wang 2011). Differences
between the sexes in their proclivities toward violence, dangerous occupations, risky driving,
and athletic behaviors are generally observed, and none can be dismissed as contributory,
especially to differences in mortality rates at younger ages. On the contrary, each provides a
critical pathway for intervention to improve male mortality in the appropriate context. But in
the face of our observations, two thorny questions cannot be readily dismissed. First is the
need to explain the universality of the pattern of female resilience to social adversity, which
appears to be as true of countries like Russia and Japan as in western Judeo-Christian ones, and
is emerging in the rapidly developing countries of the world—including such diverse places as
Brazil, China, Iran and Thailand—in almost identical pattern. Without the ability to formally test
any one of these hypotheses, we would suggest, following Popper’s famous dictum regarding
hypothesis testing, that while we cannot directly observe if all swans are white, we have
spotted a few possibly “black” ones, and suspect that on closer inspection others will emerge.
But even accepting that there are in almost all societies striking and lethal differences between
male and female behavior choices and opportunities relating to risk and habit, the question

31

remains as to why the different life choices arise, and why in the face of such choices women
still seem to fare better, at least regarding mortality. Here we come to the third broad area of
speculation—socio-biologic differences between the sexes, which has come to mean hereditary
biologic differences whose expression is not manifest in “biology” per se but in social behavior.
Most notable among these behaviors are nesting and family-protecting roles, in which sex
differences appear common throughout human society and also in lower primates—indeed,
observed among other animal kingdoms as well. As such one would distinguish the roles of sex
hormones as mediators of pathologic changes in blood vessels from their contribution to the
social planning and networking behaviors of women, which differ so markedly from men’s, at
least historically. How, mechanistically, such inborn differences may contribute to the
remarkable resilience of women to social adversity that we have seen in every culture once
epidemiologic transition takes hold is of course is something about which we can only
speculate.
To this end it may be worth more closely examining the “advanced phase” of epidemiologic
transition in which men have started to catch up. True, we can presently only observe this
period in the most developed countries, hence it would be premature to assume that this, like
the earlier phases, will be recapitulated fully by Group 2 and 3 countries over the coming
decades. Nevertheless, the narrowing sex difference in survival does not owe to any obvious
worsening in female survival; to the contrary, female survival continues to improve (Figure 8).
Rather, the narrowing SDIM stems from a relative change in rates of improvement, with a
relative acceleration of improvement for men. This “turn around” in diverse countries and
contexts could be attributed to simultaneous improvements in male decision making regarding
behavior, such as less smoking or improved health care. The decline in cardiovascular mortality
consequent to treatment for hypertension and hyperlipidemia would stand out, along with
widespread use of aspirin and impacts of interventional cardiology, albeit to greater degrees in
some countries than others. But it would seem not unreasonable to speculate that this late
phase in development represents, overall, a period of societal “feminization”, in which the lives
of men and women, historically divergent in even the most liberal western societies, have

32

begun increasingly to converge. And while more women work outside the home, relatively
more smoke, and some like guns, the net effect of “social welfare societies” would appear
consistent with the rising dominance of women’s superior—at least from a survival
perspective—socialization, auguring an era in which only the (modest) female genetic
advantage should prevent men from achieving survival parity.
Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Cai Yong for sharing with us his micro data on county-specific S70 and
GDP per capita derived from China’s 2000 census data.

33

Bibliography
Bertakis, K. D., Azari, R., Helms, J. L., Callahan, E. J., & Robbins, J. A. (2000). Gender differences
in the utilization of health care services. The Journal of Family Practice, 49(02), 147–152.
http://www.jfponline.com/index.php?id=22143&tx_ttnews[tt_news]=168476
Bhattacharya, B. Y. J., Gathmann, C., & Miller, G. (2012). The Gorbachev Anti-Alcohol Campaign
and Russia’s Mortality Crisis (No. 18589) (pp. 1–45).
Braveman, P., Egerter, S., & Williams, D. R. (2011). The social determinants of health: coming of
age. Annual Review of Public Health, 32, 381–98. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031210101218
Cai, Y. (2005). National, Provincial, Prefectural and County Life Tables for China Based on the
2000 Census (No. 05-03) (pp. 1–20). Seattle, WA.
Cai, Y. (2009). Regional Inequality in China: Mortality and Health. In D. Davis & W. Feng (Eds.),
Creating Wealth and Poverty in Post-Socialist China (1st ed., pp. 143–155). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Case, A., & Paxson, C. H. (2005). Sex Differences in Morbidity and Mortality. Demography, 42(2),
189–214. doi:10.1353/dem.2005.0011
Catalano, R., & Bruckner, T. (2006). Secondary sex ratios and male lifespan: Damaged or culled
cohorts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(5), 1639–1643.
Chu, C. Y. C., & Lee, R. D. (2012). Sexual dimorphism and sexual selection: a unified economic
analysis. Theoretical Population Biology, 82(4), 355–63. doi:10.1016/j.tpb.2012.06.002
Concha-Barrientos, M., Nelson, D. I., Driscoll, T., Steenland, N. K., Punnett, L., Fingerhut, M. A.,
et al. (2004). Selected occupational risk factors. In M. Ezzati (Ed.), Comparative
Quantification of Health Risks, Vol.1: Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attributable to
Selected Major Risk Factors (1st ed., pp. 1651–1802). World Health Organization.
Cook, M. B., McGlynn, K. a, Devesa, S. S., Freedman, N. D., & Anderson, W. F. (2011). Sex
disparities in cancer mortality and survival. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention,
20(8), 1629–37. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-11-0246

34

Cullen, M. R., Cummins, C., & Fuchs, V. R. (2012). Geographic and racial variation in premature
mortality in the U.S.: analyzing the disparities. PloS One, 7(4), e32930.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032930
Cutler, D. M., Lange, F., Meara, E., Richards-Shubik, S., & Ruhm, C. J. (2011). Rising educational
gradients in mortality: the role of behavioral risk factors. Journal of Health Economics,
30(6), 1174–87. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.06.009
Drevenstedt, G. L., Crimmins, E. M., Vasunilashorn, S., & Finch, C. E. (2008). The rise and fall of
excess male infant mortality. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(13),
5016–21. doi:10.1073/pnas.0800221105
Ezzati, M., Friedman, A. B., Kulkarni, S. C., & Murray, C. J. L. (2008). The reversal of fortunes:
trends in county mortality and cross-county mortality disparities in the United States. PLoS
Medicine, 5(4), e66. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050066
Fink, G. (2013). Urbanization and child mortality – Evidence from the demographic and health
surveys (pp. 1–22). http://globalhealth2035.org/sites/default/files/workingpapers/urbanization-and-child-mortality.pdf
Gabel, C. L., & Gerberich, S. G. (2002). Risk factors for injury among veterinarians. Epidemiology,
13(1), 80–6. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11805590
Gerry, C. J. (2012). The journals are full of great studies but can we believe the statistics?
Revisiting the mass privatisation - mortality debate. Social Science & Medicine, 75(1), 14–
22. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.12.027
Gillespie, D. O. S., Trotter, M. V., & Tuljapurkar, S. D. (2014). Divergence in age patterns of
mortality change drives international divergence in lifespan inequality. Demography, 51,
1003–1017. doi:10.1007/s13524-014-0287-8
Gjonça, A., Tomassini, C., Toson, B., & Smallwood, S. (2005). Sex differences in mortality, a
comparison of the United Kingdom and other developed countries. Health Statistics
Quarterly, 26, 6–16.
Goodwin, K., Viboud, C., & Simonsen, L. (2006). Antibody response to influenza vaccination in
the elderly: a quantitative review. Vaccine, 24(8), 1159–69.
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.08.105

35

Gorman, B. K., & Read, J. G. (2007). Why Men Die Younger than Women. Geriatrics and Aging,
10(3), 179–181.
Goronzy, J. J., & Weyand, C. M. (2012). Immune aging and autoimmunity. Cellular and
Molecular Life Sciences, 69(10), 1615–23. doi:10.1007/s00018-012-0970-0
Harper, S., Lynch, J., & Smith, G. D. (2011). Social determinants and the decline of
cardiovascular diseases: understanding the links. Annual Review of Public Health, 32, 39–
69. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031210-101234
Hausmann, R., & Tyson, L. D. (2010). Global Gender Gap Report (pp. 1–334). Geneva,
Switzerland: World Economic Forum.
Helweg-Larsen, K., & Juel, K. (2000). Sex differences in mortality in Denmark during half a
century, 1943-92. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 28(3), 214–221.
doi:10.1177/14034948000280031101
Hogan, M. C., Foreman, K. J., Naghavi, M., Ahn, S. Y., Wang, M., Makela, S. M., et al. (2010).
Maternal mortality for 181 countries, 1980–2008: a systematic analysis of progress
towards Millennium Development Goal 5. The Lancet, 375(9726), 1609 – 1623.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60518-1Cite
Hollingsworth, T. H. (1957). A Demographic Study of the British Ducal Families. Population
Studies, 11(1), 4–26.
Horton, R., & Lo, S. (2013). Investing in health: why, what, and three reflections. Lancet,
382(9908), 1859–61. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62330-2
Hunter, D. J., & Reddy, K. S. (2013). Noncommunicable diseases. The New England Journal of
Medicine, 369(14), 1336–43. doi:10.1056/NEJMra1109345
Jones, J. H. (n.d.). Female survival prior to 1900s. Personal communication December 1, 2014.
Kalben, B. B. (2002). Why men die younger: Causes of mortality differences by sex. North
American Actuarial Journal, 4(4), 83–111.
Kohler, I. V., Preston, S. H., & Lackey, L. B. (2006). Comparative mortality levels among selected
species of captive animals. Demographic Research, 15(14), 413–434.
doi:10.4054/DemRes.2006.15.14

36

Kornai, J. (1994). Transformational recession: The main causes. Journal of Comparative
Economics, 19, 39–63.
Kruger, D. J., & Nesse, R. M. (2004). Sexual selection and the Male : Female Mortality Ratio.
Evoloutionary Psychology, 2, 66–85.
Lee, R. (2011). The outlook for population growth. Science, 333(6042), 569–73.
doi:10.1126/science.1208859
Liu, J., Yang, N., & Liu, Y. (2014). High-risk factors of respiratory distress syndrome in term
neonates: A retrospective case-control study. Balkan Medical Journal, 31(1), 64–68.
doi:10.5152/balkanmedj.2014.8733
Lozano, R., Naghavi, M., Foreman, K., Lim, S., Shibuya, K., Aboyans, V., et al. (2012, December
15). Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and
2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61728-0
MacIntyre, S., Hung, K., & Sweeting, H. (1996). Gender differences in health: Are things really as
simple as they seem? Social Science & Medicine, 42(4), 617–624.
Mage, D. T., & Donner, M. (2006). Female resistance to hypoxia: Does it explain the sex
difference in mortality rates? Journal of Women’s Health, 15(6), 786–794.
McCartney, G., Mahmood, L., Leyland, A. H., Batty, G. D., & Hunt, K. (2011). Contribution of
smoking-related and alcohol-related deaths to the gender gap in mortality: evidence from
30 European countries. Tobacco Control, 20(2), 166–8. doi:10.1136/tc.2010.037929
Mckee, M., & Shkolnikov, V. (2001). Understanding the toll of premature death among men in
eastern Europe. British Medical Journal, 323(November), 1051–1055.
Møller, A. P., Fincher, C. L., & Thornhill, R. (2009). Why men have shorter lives than women:
effects of resource availability, infectious disease, and senescence. American Journal of
Human Biology, 21(3), 357–64. doi:10.1002/ajhb.20879
Mooney, G. (2002). Shifting sex differentials in mortality during urban epidemiological
transition: the case of Victorian London. International Journal of Population Geography,
8(1), 17–47. doi:10.1002/ijpg.233

37

Murphy, M., Bobak, M., Nicholson, A., Rose, R., & Marmot, M. (2006). The widening gap in
mortality by educational level in the Russian Federation, 1980-2001. American Journal of
Public Health, 96(7), 1293–9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2004.056929
Ng, M., Freeman, M. K., Fleming, T. D., Robinson, M., Dwyer-Lindgren, L., Thomson, B., et al.
(2014). Smoking prevalence and cigarette consumption in 187 countries, 1980-2012.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 311(2), 183–92.
doi:10.1001/jama.2013.284692
Norström, T., & Razvodovsky, Y. (2010). Per capita alcohol consumption and alcohol-related
harm in Belarus, 1970-2005. European Journal of Public Health, 20(5), 564–8.
doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckq011
Oeppen, J., & W.Vaupel, J. (2002). Broken limits to life expectancy. Demography, 296, 1029–
1031.
Oksuzyan, A., Juel, K., Vaupel, J. W., & Christensen, K. (2008). Men: good health and high
mortality. Sex differences in health and aging*. Aging Clinical and Experimental Research,
20(2), 25–28.
Omran, A. R. (1971). The epidemiologic transition: a theory of the epidemiology of population
change. The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 49(4), 509–538. doi:10.1111/j.14680009.2005.00398.x
Preston, S. H., Stokes, A., Mehta, N. K., & Cao, B. (2012). Projecting the effects of changes in
smoking and obesity on future life expectancy in the United States. NBER Working Paper
Series, (18407), 1–45. http://www.nber.org/papers/w18407
Preston, S. H., & Wang, H. (2011). Sex Mortality Differences in the United States: The role of
cohort smoking patterns. Demography, 43(4), 631–646.
Rahman, O., Strauss, J., Gertler, P., Ashley, D., & Fox, K. (1994). Gender Differences in Adult
Health: An International Comparison. The Gerontologist, 34(4), 463–469.
doi:10.1093/geront/34.4.463
Ristvedt, S. L. (2014). The evolution of gender. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(1), 13–14.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.3199.Conflict

38

Saquib, N., Khanam, M. A., Saquib, J., Anand, S., Chertow, G. M., Barry, M., et al. (2013). High
prevalence of type 2 diabetes among the urban middle class in Bangladesh. BMC Public
Health, 13(1), 1032. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-1032
Saquib, N., Saquib, J., Ahmed, T., Khanam, M. A., & Cullen, M. R. (2012). Cardiovascular diseases
and type 2 diabetes in Bangladesh: a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies
between 1995 and 2010. BMC Public Health, 12(1), 434. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-434
Sindelar, J. L. (1982). Differential use of medical care by sex. The Journal of Political Economy,
90(5), 1003–1019.
Taylor, M. D., Whiteman, M. C., Fowkes, G. R., Lee, A. J., Allerhand, M., & Deary, I. J. (2009). Five
Factor Model personality traits and all-cause mortality in the Edinburgh Artery Study
cohort. Psychosomatic Medicine, 71(6), 631–41. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181a65298
Tomkins, S., Collier, T., Oralov, A., Saburova, L., McKee, M., Shkolnikov, V., et al. (2012).
Hazardous alcohol consumption is a major factor in male premature mortality in a typical
Russian city: prospective cohort study 2003-2009. PloS One, 7(2), e30274.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030274
Trovato, F., & Lalu, N. M. (2005). A Continuing Pattern of Decline of the Sex Differential in Life
Expectancy in Canada: Early 1970s – Late 1990s. In International Population Conference of
the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population (IUSSP) (pp. 1–61).
Tulchinsky, T. H., & Varavikova, E. A. (1993). Addressing the epidemiologic transition in the
former Soviet Union: Strategies for health system and public health reform in Russia.
American Journal of Public Health, 86(3), 313–320.
Umberson, D., & Montez, J. K. (2010). Social relationships and health: A flashpoint for health
policy. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 51 (Suppl), 1–16.
doi:10.1177/0022146510383501.Social
Verbrugge, L. M. (2012). The twain meet : Empirical explanations of sex differences in health
and mortality. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 30(3), 282–304.
Vogt, T. C., & Kluge, F. A. (2014). Can public spending reduce mortality disparities? Findings
from East Germany after reunification. The Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 1–7.
doi:10.1016/j.jeoa.2014.09.001

39

Waldron, I. (1983). Sex differences in human mortality: The role of genetic factors. Social
Science & Medicine, 17(6), 321–333.
Waldront, I. (1976). Why do women live longer than men? Social Science & Medicine, 10, 349–
362.
Wang, H., Dwyer-Lindgren, L., Lofgren, K. T., Rajaratnam, J. K., Marcus, J. R., Levin-Rector, A., et
al. (2012). Age-specific and sex-specific mortality in 187 countries, 1970-2010: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. The Lancet, 380(9859), 2071–94.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61719-XCite
Weber, D., Skirbekk, V., Freund, I., & Herlitz, A. (2014). The changing face of cognitive gender
differences in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(32), 11673–8.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1319538111
Weidner, G., & Cain, V. S. (2003). The gender gap in heart disease: Lessons from Eastern
Europe. American Journal of Public Health, 93(5), 2002–2004.
Yang, Y., & Kozloski, M. (2012). Change of sex gaps in total and cause-specific mortality over the
life span in the United States. Annals of Epidemiology, 22(2), 94–103.
doi:10.1016/j.annepidem.2011.06.006
Zaridze, D., Lewington, S., Boroda, A., Scélo, G., Karpov, R., Lazarev, A., et al. (2014). Alcohol and
mortality in Russia: prospective observational study of 151,000 adults. The Lancet,
383(9927), 1465–73. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62247-3
Zatoński, W. A. (2011). Epidemiological analysis of health situation development in Europe and
its causes until 1990. Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine, 18(2), 194–202.
Zhao, J. (2013). Changing cardiovascular disease mortality and advancing longevity: Hong Kong,
Shanghai and Taipei. Ph.D. Dissertation, Australia National University. The Australian
National University.

40

Table 1. Regression Table
Table cells: Regression Coefficient / Beta Coefficient
Outcome: M/F S70

Predictors
Univariate (n=3,059)
% Poverty
Log Income PC
% Lower Edu /<12
Yrs)
Occupational
Similarity Index

***

-0.005 / -0.657

***

0.154 / 0.650

***

-0.003 / -0.541

Model 2, Full

Model 3a, South

Model 3b, NonSouth

Model 4a, Full

Model 4b, Full

(n=3,059)

(n=3,059)

(n=1,112)

(n=1,938)

(n=3,059)

(n=3,059)

***

-0.002 / -0.297

***

0.117 / 0.459

***

-0.001 / -0.119

***

***

-0.003 / -0.354

***

0.059 / 0.323

**

-0.000 / -0.088

***

0.276 / 0.320

***

-0.004 / -0.405

***

0.081 / 0.387

**

-0.001 / -0.092

***

0.289 / 0.337

***

-0.003 / -0.348
0.043 / 0.319

***

*

-0.000 / -0.081
0.272 / 0.316

***

***

0.000 / 0.007

-0.000 / -0.007

0.000 / 0.014

***

-0.001 / -0.012

-0.000 / -0.010

-0.001 / -0.013

***

0.001 / 0.010

0.001 / 0.019

0.001 / 0.007

***

0.000 / 0.022

*

0.001 / 0.072

*

0.000 / 0.005

***

-0.013 / -0.135

-0.002 / -0.251

Fem Smoke

-0.003 / -0.279

Male Obesity

-0.006 / -0.419

Female Obesity

-0.006 / -0.444

South

-0.042 / -0.449

2

Model 1, Limited

0.437 / 0.643

Male Smoke

R

Outcome: Male S70 Outcome: Female S70

***

0.628

0.720

***

-0.001 / -0.195

***

0.091 / 0.437

0.000 / 0.004
***

0.202 / 0.270

***

***

-0.000 / -0.152

*

0.020 / 0.058

-0.001 / -0.010
-0.000 / -0.012
**

-0.000 / -0.070
***

0.602

0.012 / 0.172

-0.000 / -0.015

-0.006 / -0.097
0.575

**

-0.000 / -0.095

0.709

0.000 / 0.060*
0.548

Inference: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001
Data from the 2006-2010 NCHS's Compressed Mortality Files and US Census Bureau's 5-Yr 2010 ACS at the county level.
Data restricted to Non-Hispanic Whites in counties with >100 Non-Hispanic White deaths under age 70 between 2006-2010.
41

Table 2: Alaska and Alaskan Counties
I. Alaska

Alaska
Mean, All States

M/F

Predicted M/F

S70

S70*

0.85

0.92

0.90

0.90

% Poverty

Income per

% Low Education, <12

Occupational

Capita

Yrs School

Similarity Index

7.5

51,971

10.0

0.39

13.2

41,948

12.3

0.51

II. Five Largest Counties in Alaska
Income per

% Low Education,

Occupational

Capita

<12 Yrs School

Similarity Index

7.9

56,634

14.4

0.35

0.90

8.6

57,096

12.4

0.37

0.85

0.93

5.8

58,945

7.1

0.45

Juneau, AK

0.85

0.94

5.2

70,092

6.8

0.62

Anchorage, AK

0.84

0.94

3.6

76,228

7.7

0.64

Mean, All Counties

0.84

0.82

15.2

45,308

20.7

0.56

Matanuska-Susitna

M/F

Predicted M/F

S70

S70*

0.80

0.89

0.82

% Poverty

Borough, AK
Kenai Peninsula
Borough, AK
Fairbanks North Star
Borough, AK

*Predicted M/F S70 is predicted using % Poverty, Income per Capita, and % Not Graduate High School

42

Figure 1: Frequency Distribution of S70 for US Counties for Whites, Males and Females, and M/FS70

10
20
8

Frequency

15
6

10
4

5
2

0

0
.5

.6

.7

.8

MS70

.9

.6

FS70

3,059 counties with at last 100 deaths/year between 2006-2010

.7

.8

.9

1

M/FS70
43

Figure 2 . MS70, FS70, and M/FS70 vs Poverty, Log Income, Education, and Occupation
(A1)

(B1)
Female

S70

(D1)

.9

.9

.9

.8

.8

.8

.8

.7

.7

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

.5

.5

.5

.9

.6

Male

.5
0

10

20

30

40

10

50

10.5

11

20

0

11.5

(B2)

(A2)

M/F S70

(C1)

40

60

80

.3

(C2)

1

1

1

.9

.9

.9

.9

.8

.8

.8

.8

.7

.7

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

.6

10

20

30

40

% Poverty

50

10

10.5

11

Log Income PC

11.5

0

.5

.6

.7

.8

.5

.6

.7

.8

(D2)

1

0

.4

20

40

60

80

% Lower Education
(<12 Years)

.3

.4

Occupational
Similarity Index

44

Figure 3: M/FLE v. log per cap GDP for Group 1 countries, 2010

.96
Iceland

.95
Sweden

M/FLE

Denmark

Israel

Luxembourg

Netherlands
Canada Norway
UK
Switzerland
Singapore
Ireland

.94

USA

Australia
New Zealand
Italy
Germany
Japan
Austria
Belgium
Spain

.93

Malta
Finland
Portugal
South Korea
France

ρs = 0.8121
.92

Greece
Cyprus

8
Murray, Lancet

9

Year
2010

Coef.
0.00956

10

Std Err
0.00105

t
p-value
9.11 <0.0001

11

Adj R Sq
0.7521

12

Log GDP PC
45

Figure 4: M/Fs70 v. log GDP for Spain and M/FLE v. log Income for Japan (2005)

M/FLE vs Log Income PC, Japan, 2005,
by Prefecture

M/FS70 vs Log GDP PC, Spain, 2005
by Region
.91

Gipuzkoa

.93

Toledo
Navarra

.9

Saitama

Madrid

Aichi

Tokyo

Kanagawa

.89

.92

.88
León
Sevilla

.87

Osaka

M/FLE

M/FS70

Barcelona

Hiroshima

Valencia

Granada

Fukushima

.91

Nagasaki

.86
Okinawa

.85

ρs = .53

.9

Jaén

2.8

Aomori

3

3.2

3.4

Log GDP per Capita

3.6

7.6

7.8

8

8.2

8.4

Log Income per Capita
46

Figure 5: M/FS70 over Years 1950-2010, 20 Wealthiest OECD Countries

.97

Netherlands
.96

Iceland
M/FS70

.95

Sweden

.94

Japan
.93
.92
.91

USA

.9
1950

1960

*Curves are LOESS with bw=0.20

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
47

Figure 6: M/FS70 vs Average HS Grad Rate and Average Income, by Decade, US States

1

1
ρ s = 0.91
2010

M/FS70

.9

ρ s = 0.70
2000

.9

ρ s = 0.85
2000

ρ s = 0.65
1990

ρ s = 0.79
1990

.8

ρ s = 0.82
2010

ρ s = 0.58
1980

.8

ρs = 0.63
1980

.7

.7
ρ s * = 0.54
1970

ρ s * = 0.43
1970

.6

.6
3.6

3.8

4

4.2

4.4

4.6

Log % High School Graduates
*Spearman Correlation Coefficients

9.5

10

10.5

11

Log Income per capita, 2010 USD
48

Figure 7: M/FLE vs Income, by Japanese Prefecture

.95

1975

1965

1985

.94
1995
2005

M/FLE

.93

.92

.91

.9
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

Income per capita (real 2010 Yen, thousands)
49

Figure 8: Male and Female LE and M/FLE over Years for USA (Top Row) and Other Developed Countries (Bottom Row), 1900-2010

1.05

80
Female

75

Male

65

M/FLE

LE

70
60

1

.95

55
50

.9

45
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000
1.05

80
70

M/FLE

Female

75

LE

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000

Male

65
60

1

.95

55
50

.9

45
1900

1920

Year

1940

1960

1980

2000

1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
50

Figure 9: M/FLE vs Average LE for 18 Group 1 Countries, by Decade, 1900-2010

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

1.05
1
.95
.9

M/FLE

.85
1.05
1
.95
.9
.85
1.05
1
.95
.9
.85
40

50

60

70

80

40

50

60

70

80

40

50

Average LE

60

70

80

40

50

60

70

80

51

Figure 10: M/FLE over Years, by Development Group

.94

Group 4

Group 3

Group 2

Group 1

.93

.94

.92

M/FLE

.93

.91

.92

2010

2000

1990

2000
2010
1970
1980

1980
1990

2000
2010
1970

2010
1970
1980
1990

1990
2000

1980

1970

.91

Years
Group mean weighted by ½ log population of countries within group
52

Figure 11: M/FLE vs Average LE for Countries in Groups 2 and 3, by Decade

M/FLE

Group 2, Mid-Upper Income
3, 1970
1970

3,
1980
1980

3, 1990
1990

3,
2000
2000

3,
2010
2010

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

2,
1980
1980

2, 1990
1990

2,
2000
2000

2, 2010
2010

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

40 50 60 70 80

1
.95
.9
.85
.8

Group 3, Low-Mid Income
2,
1970
1970

1
.95
.9
.85
.8
40 50 60 70 80

Average LE
Dependent Var: M/FLE, Independent Var: LE
Year
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010

Coef.
0.0004
0.0006
0.0011
0.015
0.0017

Group 2

Std Err
0.0006
0.0007
0.0005
0.0005
0.0003

t p-value
ρs
0.45 0.652 0.2300
1.01 0.32 0.3576
2.23 0.033 0.4178
2.93 0.006 0.5200
5.69 <0.001 0.7810

Year
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010

Coef.
-0.0009
-0.0004
0.0005
0.0011
0.0016

Std Err
0.0009
0.0007
0.0007
0.0006
0.0004

t
-0.8
-0.45
0.95
1.78
3.34

p-value
0.428
0.655
0.348
0.083
0.002

ρs
-0.0094
-0.0125
0.1122
0.4550
0.6877

Group 3
53

Figure 12: M/Fs70 v. education (% without a 10th grade graduation) for Sri Lanka (2002) and M/FLE v. % in poverty
for Brazil (2000)

M/FS70 vs % Poverty, Brazil, 2000-01,
by Region

M/FS70

M/FS70

M/FS70 vs % Not Graduate 10th Grade,
Sri Lanka, 2002-03, by Province

ρs = -.71

% Not Graduate 10th Grade

ρs = .45

% Poverty

Department of Census and Statistics District Report, Sri Lanka, 2002-03; 2000-01 Brazil Census
54

Figure 13: M/FS70 vs Log GDP per capita, China Provinces, Stratified by Urban and Rural

M/FS70

All

Rural

Urban

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.1

1.1

1.1

1

1

1

.9

.9

.9

.8

.8

.8

.7

.7

.7

.6

.6

.6

0

2

4

6

0

2

4

6

0

2

4

6

Log GDP PC
Outcome

N

Coef.

Std Error

p-value

ρs

All M/F S70

2358

-0.01

0.003

0.006

-0.0199

Rural M/F S70

1610

-0.37

0.002

<0.0001

-0.2118

Urban M/F S70

748

0.44

0.002

<0.0001

-0.4564

55

Figure 14: M/FS70 by Decade for IE Countries, 1950-2010

Russia
Latvia

.91

Ukraine
Lithuania
Estonia

.9

M/FS70

.89
.88
.87
.86
.85
.84
.83
.82
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
56

.94

Figure 15: M/FLE by Year, East and West Germany, 1958-2010

West Germany

.93

.94

.92

.92

.91

East Germany

.91

.9

M/F LE

.93

.9

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year
Vertical line represents fall of Berlin Wall
57

Figure 16: M/FS70 vs per capita Log GDP for available Group IE Countries by Decade, 1980-2000

1990

1980
.94

ρs = .4286

2000

ρs = .7023

ρs = .7822

.92

M/FLE

Hungary
Hungary

.9

Hungary

Russia

.88

Russia

Lithuania

.86

Latvia
Russia

.84
6

7

8

9

6

7

8

9

6

Estonia
Ukraine
Belarus

7

8

9
58

Figure 17: M/FLE vs Economic Gender Equality, Group 1 Countries, 2010
M/FLE vs Economic Gender Equality, Group 1 Countries,
2010

Added variable graph: M/FLE vs Log GDP PC, Economic
Gender Equity held Constant, Group 1 Countries, 2010

.96

Iceland

.01
apan
Ja
embourg
Luxe

Iceland

.95

ngapore
Sin
Italy
Austria
Netherlands
Denmark
Sweden
South Korea UK
Switzerland
Israel
Ireland
Spain
Canada

.005
Sweden
Denmark
Luxembourg
Israel
Netherlands
CanadaNorway
UK
Switzerland
Singapore
USA
Ireland

.94

0

Malta

New Zealand
Australia

Australia
NorwayGermany
Belgium

Italy
Germany

Japan Austria

-.005

Belgium

Portugal

Spain

.93

Malta
South Korea

USA

New Zealand

France

Portugal
France

Finland

-.01

Greece
Cyprus

Finland

.92

Greece
Cyprus

.5

.6

-.015
.7

.8

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

OLS Regression Diagnostics, Group 1 Countries, 2010
Outcome = M/FLE
Vars

Unadjusted Spearman
Correlation

Adjusted Spearman
Correlation

Standardized Regression
Coefficient

P-value

Econ Gender Equality

0.73

0.27

.285

0.018

Log GDP PC

0.81

0.85

.693

<0.001

59

Supplemental Table 1: Countries included in each of the five groups based on the Human Development
Index with life expectancy removed and Eastern Europe considered separately.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

Group 4
(HDI<0.5)
Afghanistan
Angola
Bangladesh
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
CAR
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem.
Equ Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Niger
Rwanda
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Tanzania
Timor-Leste
Togo
Uganda
Zimbabwe
North Korea

Group 3
(0.5<=HDI<0.7)
Bhutan
Bolivia
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
El Salvador
Fiji
Gabon
Ghana
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iraq
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Kiribati
Laos
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Morocco
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Philippines
Samoa
Sao Tome
Senegal
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland

Group 2
(0.7>=HDI>0.8)
Algeria
Argentina
Bahrain
Barbados
Botswana
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
Grenada
Iran
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Namibia
Oman
Panama
Peru
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Suriname
Thailand
Trinidad
Tunisia
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela

Eastern Europe
Albania
Armenia
Belarus
Bosnia
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Rep.
Estonia
Georgia
Hungary
Latvia
Lithuania
Macedonia
Moldova
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Ukraine

Group 1
(HDI>=0.8)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Singapore
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

S1

38

39
40
41
42
43
44
45

Group 4
(HDI<0.5)

Syria
Group 3
(0.5<=HDI<0.7)
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia

Group 2
(0.7>=HDI>0.8)

Eastern Europe

Group 1
(HDI>=0.8)

S2

Supplemental Table 2: Data Sources

Umbrella Organization

Division within
Organization

Location

Data
Year

URL

2006-2010 American
Community Survey 5year estimates

US Census Bureau

Population Estimates
Program (PEP)

Suitland,
Maryland

2010

http://factfinder2.census.gov

03-Sep-14

2010 World
development indicators
– GDP per capita

World Bank

International Comparison
Program

2010

http://data.worldbank.org/ind
icator/ny.gdp.pcap.pp.cd

18-Feb-14

Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System
Survey Questionnaire

U.S. Department of
Health and Human
Services

Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC)

2010

http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/dat
a_tools.htm

02-Jun-14

Census of Population
and Housing 2003

Department of Census
and Statistics (DCS)

2003

http://www.statistics.gov.lk/p
age.asp?page=Population%20
and%20Housing

18-Feb-14

Compressed Mortality
File, 2010 (machine
readable data file and
documentation, CDROM Series 20, No. 2P)
as compiled from data
provided by the 57 vital
statistics jurisdictions)

National Center for
Health Statistics

Hyattsville,
Maryland

2012

http://wonder.cdc.gov/cmficd10.html

02-Jun-14

Contabilidad Regional
de España

Instituto Nacional de
Estadı ́stica

Madrid, Spain

2005

http://www.ine.es/en/inebme
nu/mnu_cuentas_en.htm

02-Jun-14

Demographic Census:
Tabela 1.8 Esperança
de vida ao nascer,
segundo as Grandes
Regiões e Unidades da
Federação

Instituto Brasileiro de
Geografia e Estatística
(IBGE)

Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil

2005

http://www.ibge.gov.br/home
/estatistica/populacao

22-Jan-13

Name of Database

Atlanta, GA

Sri Lanka

Vital Statistics Cooperative
Program

Date accessed

S3

Human Mortality
Database

University of California
and Max Planck Institute
for Demographic
Research (Germany)

Life Expectancy by
Prefecture

Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare

Per Capita Income by
Prefecture

Ministry of Internal
Affairs and
Communications

Prefecture income and
GDP deflator data

Economic and Social
Research Institute

Tablas de mortalidad
de la población
española.

Instituto Nacional de
Estadı ́stica

Trends in Life
Expectancy by
Prefectures in Japan

Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare

Berkeley and
Rostock,
Germany

2010

www.mortality.org

11-Feb-14

Vital Statistics

Tokyo, Japan

2005

http://www.mhlw.go.jp/englis
h/database/db-hw/index.html

18-Feb-14

Statistics Bureau

Tokyo, Japan

2005

http://www.stat.go.jp/english/
data/kakei/ct2005.htm

18-Feb-14

2005

http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/jp/s
na/kouhyou/kouhyou_top.ht
ml#d

18-Feb-14

2005

http://www.ine.es/daco/daco
42/idb/idb.htm

02-Jun-14

1999

http://www.mhlw.go.jp/englis
h/database/dbhw/vs_8/vs0.html

18-Feb-14

Cabinet Office

Tokyo, Japan

Madrid, Spain
Vital, Health, and Social
Statistics Division

Tokyo, Japan

S4

Figure S1: M/FS70 vs Excess Male Smoking (M/F Smoking Prevalence) after adjusting for Education, Income, Poverty, and
Obesity, 2010 US Counties, Whites

.1
coef = -.01146631, se = .00530313, t = -2.16
spearman's rho = -0.19

M/FS70 | X

.05

0

-.05

-.1
-.5

0

.5

1

1.5

M/F%% Smoke
Smoke | X
X = % High School Grad, Average Income, % Poverty, % Obese, by County

S5

Figure S2: Smoking for Group 1 countries M/FLE vs. M/F Smoking Prevalence

.96

1980

1990

2000

2010

ρs* = -0.1316

ρ s = -0.1518

ρ s = -0.1695

ρ s = -0.1602
Iceland

Iceland

.95

Iceland

M/FLE

.94

USA

Iceland
USA

.93

Japan

Japan

Japan

Japan
South Korea
USA

.92
USA

Greece

Greece

South Korea
Greece

Greece

.91
South Korea

.9

South Korea

-.2 0

.2 .4 .6 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 -.2 0

.2 .4 .6

Log M/F Smoking Prevalence
S6

Figure S3: M/FLE vs. Log PC GDP for Group 1 Countries, by Decade

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

.96
Iceland

.95

Iceland

M/F LE

Iceland

.94

USA
Iceland
USA

Iceland

.93
.92

USA

USA

.91

USA

.9
6

8 10 12 6

8 10 12 6

8 10 12 6

8 10 12 6

8 10 12

Log GDP per capita, nominal
Coef.

Std Err

t

p-value

ρs

1970

0.0068

0.0023

2.95

0.007

0.53

1980

0.0095

0.0022

4.33

<0.0001

0.67

1990

0.0120

0.0021

5.78

<0.0001

0.71

2000

0.0128

0.0020

6.51

<0.0001

0.86

2010

0.0096

0.0011

9.11

<0.0001

0.93

S7

Australia

Belgium

Canada

Denmark

England

Finland

France

Iceland

Ireland

Italy

Netherlands

New Zealand

Norway

Scotland

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

USA

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950

Figure S4: M/FLE FOR THE 18 Developed Countries, 1900-1950

1.05
1
.95
.9
.85

M/FLE

1.05
1
.95
.9
.85
1.05
1
.95
.9
.85

Note: Line does not connect values for 1920 and 1940, as those years had Spanish Influenza and World War Two.
S8

1,500

1,000

500

0

2000
2010

Gr 4
Gr 3
Gr 2
Gr FSU
Gr 1

2,000

1990

Gr 4
Gr 3
Gr 2
Gr FSU
Gr 1

1980

Gr 4
Gr 3
Gr 2
Gr FSU
Gr 1

Gr 4
Gr 3
Gr 2
Gr FSU
Gr 1

Maternal Mortality Rate
Figure S5: Maternal Mortality Rate over each Group, 1980-2010

S9

Figure S6: M/FLE by Country, 2000

M/F LE, Quintiles
0.951-1.021
0.912-0.950
0.889-0.911
0.862-0.888
0.750-0.861

S10

Supplemental Figure 7: M/FLE vs Alcohol Death Rate, by Oblast and Region, 1978 to 1988, 1988 to 1998

N Cauc

South

Central

Volga

N West

Ural

Siberia

Far East

.9

.9

1978
1988

.8

.8

M/FLE

.85

.85

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

0

50 100

.9

.9

.85

1988
1998

.85

.8

.8

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

0 50 100

Death Rate from Alcohol Poisoning
-Death Rates, per 100,000
-Regions N Cauc and South have highest Muslim populations
-Plots are at level of oblast, by region ordered geographically from SW to NE (same a most to least Muslim by % population)

S11

