NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE IMMIGRANTS A SHOT IN THE ARM FOR THE LOCAL ECONOMY?
Gihoon Hong
John McLaren
Working Paper 21123
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21123

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We are grateful to seminar participants at the University of Virginia, Notre Dame, and the University
of California at Merced, as well as to conference participants at the Barcelona Graduate School of
Economics Summer Forum, the NBER International Trade and Investment Program Meeting, the Princeton
International Economics Section Summer Workshop, and the Southern Economic Association annual
meetings. Support by the Bankard Fund for Political Economy at the University of Virginia is gratefully
acknowledged. Special thanks go to Joan Monras, Jim Tybout, David Weinstein, Brian Kovak, and
Abigail Wozniak. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Gihoon Hong and John McLaren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Are Immigrants a Shot in the Arm for the Local Economy?
Gihoon Hong and John McLaren
NBER Working Paper No. 21123
April 2015
JEL No. F22,F66
ABSTRACT
Most research on the effects of immigration focuses on the effects of immigrants as adding to the supply
of labor. By contrast, this paper studies the effects of immigrants on local labor demand, due to the
increase in consumer demand for local services created by immigrants. This effect can attenuate downward
pressure from immigrants on non-immigrants' wages, and also benefit non-immigrants by increasing
the variety of local services available. For this reason, immigrants can raise native workers' real wages,
and each immigrant could create more than one job. Using US Census data from 1980 to 2000, we
find considerable evidence for these effects: Each immigrant creates 1.2 local jobs for local workers,
most of them going to native workers, and 62% of these jobs are in non-traded services. Immigrants
appear to raise local non-tradables sector wages and to attract native-born workers from elsewhere
in the country. Overall, it appears that local workers benefit from the arrival of more immigrants.

Gihoon Hong
Judd Leighton School of Business and Economics
Indiana University South Bend
P.O. Box 7111
South Bend, IN 46634-7111
honggi@iusb.edu
John McLaren
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
jmclaren@virginia.edu

we ﬁnd considerable evidence for these eﬀects: Each immigrant creates 1.2
local jobs for local workers, most of them going to native workers, and 62% of
these jobs are in non-traded services. Immigrants appear to raise local nontradables sector wages and to attract native-born workers from elsewhere in
the country. Overall, it appears that local workers beneﬁt from the arrival of
more immigrants.

Most economic research on the eﬀects of immigration focuses on the eﬀects of
immigrants as adding to the supply of labor. Prominent examples include Card
(1990), Borjas (2003), and Aydemir and Borjas (2011) who look for wage eﬀects of
immigration as a rightward shift of the labor supply curve; and Ottaviano and Peri
(2012), who argue that immigration adds a new factor of production, labor with a
diﬀerent skill mix. See Friedberg and Hunt (1995) for numerous other examples. This
is also the approach to immigration implicit in some objections to immigration in
the political arena. For example, Senator Jeﬀ Sessions of Alabama recently objected
to a proposed immigration reform bill on grounds that it would lead to a rise in the
supply of labor and a drop in some native-born workers’ wages.1
However, in general equilibrium immigrants will aﬀect not only labor supply,
but also labor demand. Many accounts by journalists and other non-economists
emphasize the point that immigrants do not serve only as additional workers, but
also as additional consumers, and as a result can provide a boost for the local labor
market by increasing demand for barbers, retail store workers, auto mechanics, school
teachers, and the like.
This paper studies the eﬀects of immigrants on local labor demand, due to the
1

Dylan Matthews, “No, the CBO report doesn’t mean immigration brings down wages,” Washington Post, June 19, 2013.

2

increase in consumer demand for local services created by immigrants. We show how
in a simple general equilibrium model this demand eﬀect can provide two beneﬁts
to local native-born workers: It can soften the eﬀect of the increase of labor supply
on wages, by shifting the demand for labor to the right just as the supply is also
shifting to the right; and it can lead to an increase in the diversity of local services,
conferring an indirect beneﬁt on native-born consumers. Taken together, these eﬀects
mean that local real wages can rise as a result of immigration, even in a model where
native-born and immigrant labor are perfect substitutes. We take these propositions
to US Census data from 1980 to 2000, and ﬁnd that each immigrant on average
generates 1.2 local jobs for local workers, most of them going to native-born workers,
and 62% of them in the non-tradables sector. These ﬁndings are consistent with a
strong eﬀect of local labor demand, generating substantial increases in local services
diversity.
Along the way we oﬀer a modest innovation in empirical technique: We use a new
measure of ‘non-tradedness’ that is easy to implement and has enormous explanatory
power, and which is related to the techniques used by Jensen and Kletzer (2006) and
Gervais and Jensen (2012).
The eﬀect of local services demand has had much informal discussion, but little
scholarly attention. In journalistic accounts of crackdowns on illegal immigrants,
for example, local consumer demand eﬀects are sometimes presented as a central
part of the story. For example, following more stringent immigration enforcement in
Oklahoma City, some residents complained that the moves were ‘devastating’ to the
local economy:2
2

Devona Walker, “Immigration crackdown called devastating to economy,” Washington Post,
September 18, 2007.

3

At Maxpollo, a Hispanic-owned restaurant on S Harvey, Tex-Mex music is
played a little above conversation level. The late-afternoon lunch crowd,
primarily Hispanic workers, has thinned.
“All of our customers here are Hispanic, said Luiz Hernandez, whose
father Max Hernandez owns Maxpollo. “We are going to lose a lot of
business. While restaurant employees are not illegal, he assumes many
customers are.
Similar stories followed a major federal raid on illegal immigrants in Postville,
Iowa in 2008 that incarcerated 10% of the town’s population. From one journalist’s
account:3
Empty storefronts and dusty windows break up a once vibrant downtown. Businesses that catered to the town’s Latino population have been
hardest hit. Most closed last summer.
A similar story from the Washington Post:4
For now, Postville residents – immigrants and native-born – are holding
their breath. On Greene Street, where the Hall Roberts’ Son Inc. feed
store, Kosher Community Grocery and Restaurante Rinconcito Guatemalteco sit side by side, workers fear a chain of empty apartments, falling
home prices and business downturns. The main street, punctuated by
3

Jens Manuel Krogstad, “Postville economy in shambles,” Waterloo/Cedar Falls Courier, Monday, May 11, 2009.
4
Spencer S. Hsu, “Immigration Raid Jars a Small Town; Critics Say Employers Should Be
Targeted.” Washington Post Sunday, May 18, 2008, p. A01.

4

a single blinking traﬃc signal, has been quiet; a Guatemalan restaurant temporarily closed; and the storekeeper next door reported a steady
trickle of families quietly booking ﬂights to Central America via Chicago.
“Postville will be a ghost town,” said Lili, a Ukrainian store clerk who
spoke on the condition that her last name be withheld.
As one writer summarized the point in general:
Population growth creates jobs because people consume as well as produce: they buy things, they go to movies, they send their children to
school, they build houses, they ﬁll their cars with gasoline, they go to
the dentist, they buy food at stores and restaurants. When the population declines, stores, schools, and hospitals close, and jobs are lost. This
pattern has been seen over and over again in the United States: growing
communities mean more jobs. (Chomsky (2007), p.8).
We formalize these eﬀects in a simple model of a local economy, or ‘town,’ with
both a tradeables sector and a sector that produces non-tradable services (such as
haircuts, food services, and the like). To capture the importance of diversity in local
services, that sector is assumed to be monopolistically competitive. The demand
for labor in the tradeables sector is exogenous, depending on world markets for
the tradable goods, but the demand for labor in the non-tradable services sector is
aﬀected by the size of the local population. Adding immigrants to this local economy
shifts the labor supply curve to the right but also, by adding to the demand for local
services, shifts the labor demand curve to the right (to a smaller degree). The
latter shift we term the ‘shot in the arm’ eﬀect. The net eﬀect is to lower the local
5

equilibrium wage in terms of tradables, but raise the wage in terms of non-tradable
services, because of the increased local diversity of those services. The overall real
wage could go up or down, depending on how strong the shot-in-the-arm eﬀect is; if
it goes up, then in equilibrium 1, 000 immigrants will result in the creation of more
than 1, 000 local jobs.
Local demand eﬀects have not been the focus of the majority of immigration research, but there are exceptions. Giovanni, Levchenko, and Ortega (2015) present a
rich many-country model of immigration and trade in which local non-traded services
respond in a manner similar to what we study in this paper. The paper is calibrated
rather than estimated, but the simulation shows that for realistic parameter values
the potential welfare beneﬁts of increased service variety due to immigration are
large. Cortes (2008), focussing on supply-side eﬀects on the service sector, shows
that immigration is correlated with reductions in the local price of labor-intensive
services. Mazzolari and Neumark (2012) examine the eﬀect of immigrants on local
diversity of services in California. The study ﬁnds that more immigrants are associated with fewer small retail stores and more big-box retailers, but that immigrants
support a wider range of ethnic restaurants. The focus is quite diﬀerent from ours,
however. That paper focusses on the eﬀect on a higher share in immigrants in the
local population, controlling for size (p. 1123). The thought experiment under study
can be thought of as adding 1,000 immigrants and removing 1,000 native-born workers. In our case, however, the relevant thought experiment is simply adding 1,000
immigrants. Olney (2012) shows that low-skill immigration in the US is correlated
with increases in entry of small establishments in the same city, concentrated in lowskill intensive industries. Olney shows that the eﬀect is more plausibly due to the

6

labor-supply eﬀect of immigrants than the eﬀects of immigrants as consumers because the eﬀect is found in mobile low-skill intensive industries but not in non-traded
services. However, as with Mazzolari and Neumark (2012), the focus is on changes in
the share of immigrants in the local population rather than an increase in the local
population due to immigration. Another diﬀerence between our study and these is
that by examining decennial Census data rather than annual data we are looking at
more long-run eﬀects.5
An important theory paper closely related in spirit to what we do here is Brezis
and Krugman (1996), in which manufacturers use labor, capital and local nontraded inputs to produce tradeable output. Non-traded inputs are produced in a
monopolistically-competitive industry. Immigration into a town expands the local
labor force, initially lowering wages; this encourages entry into the non-traded services sector, expanding the range of inputs for use by local manufacturers, thereby
raising labor productivity and encouraging capital to ﬂow into the town. In the new
steady state, wages are higher than they were before the immigration. Our approach
stresses increased variety of non-traded consumer services – which we will show has
strong support in the data – rather than non-traded inputs produced by ﬁrms, but
the mechanism that drives the stories is similar. Another related study is Moretti
(2010), which measures the eﬀect of one additional tradeable sector job on employment in the local non-traded sector, implicitly through local demand eﬀects such as
we emphasize.
We also draw on the literature that investigates whether immigrants to a town
5

Altonji and Card (1991) also discuss local-demand eﬀects of immigrants, but without making a
distinction between traded and non-traded goods, or raising the issue of local diversity of services.
General-equilibrium eﬀects on the non-traded sector also feature prominently in some work on trade
reform; see Kovak (2013).

7

displace or attract non-immigrant workers, or in other words, whether the immigrants
induce non-immigrants to move away from the town, or attract a net movement of
non-immigrant workers to the town. For example, Wozniak and Murray (2012) ﬁnd
no displacement eﬀect with annual data from the American Community Surveys,
and a modest attraction eﬀect for low-skill native workers, which they argue could
be caused by low-skill workers unable to move away due to liquidity constraints.
Wright, Ellis, and Reibel (1997) ﬁnd either attraction or at least no displacement
eﬀect once city size has been adequately controlled for. Peri and Sparber (2011) review the evidence on displacement, reviewing the diﬀerent estimation methods that
have been used to test for it, and create simulated data to test the reliability of the
diﬀerent methods. They ﬁnd that studies that have found a signiﬁcant displacement
eﬀect have used an estimator that is biased in favor of that ﬁnding, and that studies
that use a more reliable estimator have found either no displacement or a modest attraction eﬀect. We will use ﬁndings from these papers in designing our own empirical
approach.
In the following section we present the basic theory model we use to clarify
these issues, and some reﬁnements. The following sections present our empirical
method, the data, and our empirical results, respectively. The ﬁnal section presents
a summary and conclusion.

1

A Basic Model.

We look at a model with a monopolistically competitive local-services sector of the
Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) variety, in order to be able to discuss endogenous diversity

8

of such services, and a tradeable-goods sector, which for simplicity we specify as
perfectly competitive. The model is similar in spirit to Brezis and Krugman (1996).
For the time being we employ three simplifying assumptions: (i) we ignore the eﬀects
of immigration on the housing market; (ii) we assume that local labor supply is
perfectly inelastic (thus disallowing mobility of native-born workers); and (iii) we
treat native-born and immigrant workers as perfect substitutes. Later we will relax
these assumptions.

1.1

Preferences

Consider a model of a local economy that we can refer to as a ‘town.’ Everyone who
lives there has the same utility function:

U (S, T ) =

S θ T 1−θ
,
θθ (1 − θ)1−θ

(1)

where S is a composite of non-tradable services consumption and T is a composite
of tradable goods consumption. Composite services consumption is deﬁned by:
(
∫
S=

n

( i ) σ−1
c σ di

σ
) σ−1

,

(2)

0

where ci is consumption of service i, n is the measure of services available, and σ > 1
is a constant. The indirect utility function derived from maximizing (2) subject to a
given expenditure on services is:
S=

ES
,
PS

9

(3)

where E S is total spending on services and P S is a price index for services given by:
(∫

1
) 1−σ

n

S

1−σ

P =

p(j)

dj

,

(4)

0

where p(j) is the price of service variety j.
There are n diﬀerent tradeable goods. Composite tradables consumption is deﬁned by:
T = uT (cT ),

(5)

where cT is the n-dimensional vector of consumptions of the diﬀerent tradable goods
and uT is an increasing, concave, linear homogeneous function. The indirect utility
function derived from uT is:
v T (E T , q) =

ET
,
κ(q)

(6)

where E T is expenditure on tradeables, q is the price vector for tradeables, and κ is
the linear homogeneous price index derived from uT . The prices for tradeables are
ﬁxed and exogenous (the town is not large enough to aﬀect prices for tradeables on
its own). Without loss of generality, we choose units so that the aggregate price of
tradeables is unity:
κ(q) = 1.

(7)

As a result, all prices in the model can be said to be denominated ‘in terms of
tradeables.’

10

1.2

Technology.

There is free entry into the services sector. Production of x units of any service
requires
α + βx

(8)

units of labor, where α and β are positive constants.
Each tradeable good i is produced with labor Li and sector-speciﬁc capital K i
through a linear homogeneous production function f i . The capital available in each
tradeables industry is ﬁxed and exogenous,6 and each producer takes all prices as
given. Each tradeables ﬁrm will choose the level of employment to maximize its
proﬁts, taking wages and output prices as given. In the aggregate, this generates an
allocation of labor within the tradables sector that solves:
r(q, w, K) ≡ max{Li }

{
∑

}
q i y i − wLi |y i = f i (Li , K i )

(9)

i

Here K ≡ (K 1 , . . . , K n ) is the vector of industry-speciﬁc capital endowments, y i is
the output of tradables sector i, and r(q, w, K) is the income capital-owners receive
from tradable-goods production. We can add up the labor demands from the various
traded-goods industries to ﬁnd the total labor demand for the tradeables sector,
∑
LT ≡ i Li . By the envelope theorem,
r2 (q, w, K) = −LT < 0,

(10)

where a subscript denotes a partial derivative. If we vary w and trace out the values of
6

Allowing for capital mobility reinforces the main story, a point made forcefully both by Brezis
and Krugman (1996) and by Olney (2012).

11

LT that result, we derive a labor-demand curve for the tradables sector. By standard
arguments, r is convex with respect to w, and so the value of LT that maximizes (9)
is a decreasing function of w, or:

r22 (q, w, K) > 0.

(11)

In other words, the tradeables sector’s labor-demand curve slopes downward.

1.3

Equilibrium.

Free entry in the services sector leads to zero proﬁts. This together with proﬁt
maximization by each ﬁrm leads to a price pj for each service-providing ﬁrm j equal
to:

(
j

p =

σ
σ−1

)
βw,

(12)

a quantity xj equal to:
xj =

(σ − 1)α
,
β

(13)

and a total number of services equal to:

n=

ES
,
σαw

(14)

where E S is total expenditure on services, all as in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). Since
zero proﬁts imply that total expenditure on services is equal to the wage bill in the
service sector, the demand for labor in the service sector must satisfy:
LS =

ES
.
w

12

(15)

In addition, the price index for services (4) reduces to:
S

P =n

1
(1−σ)

(

σ
σ−1

)
βw,

(16)

which is decreasing in the number of varieties n. This is a crucial feature of monopolistic competition. Variety matters to consumers, so if the price of each service is
unchanged but the variety of services increases, the utility obtained from one dollar spent on services rises, so the cost of one util falls. Of course, this drop in the
real price index for services consumption due to increased variety is not captured by
oﬃcial consumer price statistics.
By the Cobb-Douglas preferences, E S must be equal to θ times total town income.
Total income is equal to labor income plus capital income, and can be written as:

I(w, L) = wL + r(q, w, K).

(17)

Consequently, labor demand in services can be written:
θI(w, L)
w
r(q, w, K)
= θL + θ
( w
)
1
1
= θL + θr
q, 1, K .
w
w

LS =

(18)

From (18) it is clear that labor demand in services is decreasing in w but it is also
increasing in L for a ﬁxed value of w. This is because an increase in local population
increases the local demand for services. In eﬀect, holding w constant, each new

13

arrival to the town will generate θ jobs in the services sector.
The demand for labor in the tradeables sector can be taken from (10) and is
also decreasing in w but is independent of L because the tradeables sector does not
depend on local demand. The two labor-demand relations (10) and (18) can be
represented as downward-sloping curves in a diagram with w on the vertical axis and
employment on the horizontal axis, and summed horizontally to produce total labor
demand. Now suppose that the total labor supply is composed of LN native-born
workers and LI immigrants, and is denoted LT OT ≡ LN + LI . The intersection of
the labor-demand curve with the vertical labor-supply curve at LT OT units of labor
deﬁnes the equilibrium wage.

1.4

The eﬀects of immigration.

Immigration in this simplest version of the model then simply amounts to an increase
in LI , say △LI . From (18), this shifts labor demand to the right by an amount equal
to θ△LI . We will refer to this shift in labor demand as the ‘shot-in-the-arm’ eﬀect,
and is depicted in Figure 1. Since the labor-supply curve shifts to the right by more
than labor-demand, the equilibrium wage w must fall. Recall that this is the wage in
terms of tradeables, not the real utility wage, because it does not reﬂect any change
in the prices or variety of services. In addition, the equilibrium values for LT and
LS will both rise compared to the case with no immigrants, with their combined
increase equal to the rise in LI .
Note that the shot-in-the-arm eﬀect does not eliminate the drop in the wage in
terms of tradables, but it does attenuate it. In Figure 1, the shift in labor supply
without this eﬀect would reduce the wage from w0 to w1 , but the shot-in-the-arm
14

eﬀect pulls it up to w2 . This may help explain why researchers have consistently
found modest if any eﬀects of immigration on local wages. Indeed, since we will later
argue empirically for a value of θ equal to about 83%, once this labor demand eﬀect
is taken into account it is hard to see a reason to expect anything else. Most of the
new labor supply generates its own demand.
GDP in both sectors will rise as a result of the new immigrants. To see this, note
ﬁrst that, since w has fallen but tradeables prices have not changed, each tradeable
good will increase output and so GDP in the tradeables sector will rise. Now note
that in equilibrium the value of tradeables production will be equal to the value
of tradeables consumption (otherwise the town’s consumers are not spending their
whole income).7 Therefore, the rise in tradeables GDP implies a rise in the value
of tradeables consumption (E T ). But the value of tradeables consumption is equal
to (1 − θ) times total GDP, so total GDP must also have increased. Finally, since
the value of services consumption E S is equal to θ times GDP, the value of services
consumption and therefore services-sector GDP has also increased.
Now we can see that although the wage has fallen in terms of tradeables, it
has increased in terms of services. To see this, note ﬁrst that from (12) the price
of each service has fallen exactly in proportion with the drop in the wage. Next,
note that from (14) the number n of services available has increased, both because
the expenditure on services (the numerator) has gone up and because the wage (in
7

Formally, if RT is the total value of tradables output and RS is the value of nontradable services
output, then local income is equal to RT +RS , which is also therefore the value of local consumption
spending. If we write E T for local consumer spending on tradables and E S for spending on nontradables, of course E S = RS and consumer budget constraints yield RT + RS = E T + E S . It
follows that E T = RT . Another way of putting this is to observe that trade must be balanced in
equilibrium.

15

the denominator) has fallen. Putting together these two eﬀects, it is clear that the
composite price of services (16) has fallen more than the wage.
To sum up, by shifting labor supply to the right, immigration has led to a fall in
the wage relative to tradeables (that is, a fall in w). We might call this the ‘labor
glut’ eﬀect. However, immigration has also led to a rise in the number and variety of
restaurants, shops, barbers, and the like, by expanding the customer base for those
industries, in the process shifting labor demand to the right, which we have referred
to as the ‘shot in the arm’ eﬀect. This results in a drop in P S that exceeds the drop
in w. Given our choice of units that makes tradables the numeraire, the real wage
can be written:
wREAL =

w
(P S )θ

.

(19)

This real wage could go up or down as a result of immigration. If θ is small or labor
and capital in tradables sectors are not very substitutable so that tradables labor
demand is inelastic, the ‘labor glut’ eﬀect will dominate and immigration will hurt
native workers on balance. If θ is suﬃciently close to 1 or capital and labor are
suﬃciently substitutable, so that tradables labor demand is elastic, then the ‘shot
in the arm to the local economy’ eﬀect will dominate and immigration will beneﬁt
native workers on balance. Indeed, from (18), if θ is close to 1, there will be no labor
glut to speak of because each immigrant will produce close to 1 job and there will be
almost no increase in net labor supply. These observations are formalized as follows:
Proposition 1. Immigration will raise the real wage (19) for native-born workers
if and only if:
θ>

(σ − 1)
,
ϕL,T ϵL,T + σ

16

(20)

where ϕL,T is the share of labor in costs in the tradables sector and ϵL,T is the absolute
value of the elasticity of labor demand in tradables.
All results are derived in the appendix. Clearly, condition (20) holds if and only
if θ is large enough, because that is what makes the ‘shot-in-the-arm’ eﬀect strong.
In addition, holding other parameters constant, (20) will hold if σ is small enough
(recalling that it is always greater than 1), since the smaller is σ the more important is
the diversity of local services. Holding other parameters constant, the condition will
hold if the tradables sector is suﬃciently labor-intensive and has suﬃciently elastic
labor demand, since these properties allow it to absorb additional labor easily. In
the limiting case of Ricardian technology, ϵL,T will be inﬁnite; in this case, there is
no change in the wage in terms of tradables at all, and only the beneﬁcial eﬀect on
local services diversity remains.
In this simple model with inelastic labor supply, the increase in total employment
must be exactly equal to △LI . We can summarize this observation by saying that
each immigrant generates one new job. (Of course, in practice not all immigrants
will be workers – some will be dependents, and so in practice with inelastic labor
supply each immigrant will generate less than one new job.)
Further, the eﬀect of immigration on employment is not uniform across sectors.
The shot-in-the-arm eﬀect increases the demand for labor in the non-tradables sector
but not in the tradables sector, and this skews increases in employment toward nontradables. We can summarize and formalize the point as follows:
Proposition 2. Immigration will increase the level of employment in both the
tradables and non-tradables sectors. An additional immigrant will result in more than
θ additional workers employed in non-tradables, and fewer than (1 − θ) additional
17

workers employed in tradeables. Precisely:




T

dL
= (1 − θ) 
dLT OT
ϵ

L,T

ϵL,T
+ (1 − θ)

(

LN T
LT

)  < (1 − θ).

(21)

The reason that the increase in employment in the non-tradeables sector is greater
than the non-tradables expenditure share θ is that additional immigrants increase the
demand for local services, while they have no eﬀect on the demand for tradeables.
Note that if the tradeables sector has inelastic labor demand (ϵL,T is small), the
increase in employment could be almost entirely concentrated in non-tradables. On
the other hand, in the limit with the Ricardian case, as ϵL,T → ∞, the increase in
employment is divided up between the two sectors just in the same proportions as
the expenditure shares.8

1.5

Adding a Housing Market.

One unrealistic feature of the basic model presented above is that there is no housing
market. This could be important in practice because new immigrants will need
somewhere to live, and there is some evidence that immigrants tend to push local
housing prices upward (Saiz (2007)), so it is worth incorporating these eﬀects into
8

In this case, there is no capital income, so GDP is equal to wLT OT , with w ﬁxed by the
Ricardian technology in the tradables sector together with world prices. A 10% increase in the
local labor force due to immigration will therefore raise GDP by 10%, which will raise spending on
both sectors by 10%, and therefore raise employment in both sectors by 10%.

18

the model. Augment the utility function as follows:
S θ T θ h1−θ −θ
U (S, T ) = 1 θ1 2 θ2
,
(θ ) (θ ) (1 − θ1 − θ2 )1−θ1 −θ2
1

2

1

2

(22)

where h denotes the consumption of housing services. Assume that there is a ﬁxed
stock of housing in the town, which can provide a total H units of housing services
to the local population. This stock of housing is homogeneous and perfectly divisible. The price of housing services is denoted pH . We assume that the owners of
the housing stock live in the town, and therefore spend their income from housing
assets on locally-produces services, as well as on tradables and housing. With this
speciﬁcation, the real wage takes the form:
w
1
(P S )θ

(pH )1−θ

1 −θ 2

.

(23)

We can write the condition for labor-market clearing as follows:
]
θ1 [ T OT
+ r(q, w, K) + pH H − r2 (q, w, K) = LT OT .
wL
w

(24)

The expression in the square brackets on the left hand side of (24) is the total GDP
in the town; multiplying by θ1 yields the spending on local services; dividing by
w yields the labor demand due to the local services sector. The following term is
labor demand in the tradables sector. These two labor demand sources must sum in
equilibrium to the total labor supply.

19

In addition, the housing market must be in equilibrium:
(

1 − θ1 − θ2

)[

]
wLT OT + r(q, w, K) + pH H = pH H.

(25)

Diﬀerentiating (24) and (25) with respect to LT OT yields the following result on the
response of wages and the housing price to immigration.
Proposition 3. In the model with housing, the response of the local wage to an
increase in immigration is given by:
dw
−θ2 w
=
<0
dLT OT
θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22

(26)

and the response of the housing price is given by:
(1 − θ1 − θ2 )r22 w2
dpH
=
> 0.
dLT OT
[θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ] H

(27)

When immigrants are added to the town labor force, the wage falls in terms of
tradables, as in the basic model, and with the rise in local GDP and the drop in the
wage, the number of varieties of local service rises, as in the basic model. However,
the increase in local income also creates an increased demand for housing, driving up
its price, which is a cost for local workers (but of course a beneﬁt for owners of the
local housing stock). In order to work out whether native-born workers beneﬁt from
the immigration or not, we need to trade oﬀ the drop in w and the rise in pH against
the drop in P S . It is clear that there are cases in which real wages would rise but
for the eﬀect of the housing price. For example, consider the limiting case in which

20

tradables technology is Ricardian (or in other words, let r22 , and thus the elasticity
of labor demand in tradables, become arbitrarily large). In that case, from (26) the
response of w to immigration becomes vanishingly small, but from (27), the response
of the price of housing does not. In this case, the portion of the real wage in (23)
that applied in the basic model rises (in other words, (19) rises), but if θ1 and θ2
are small enough the rise in the housing price will nonetheless lower the overall real
wage. Of course, that will not imply a reduction in welfare, because the increased
income to the owners of the housing stock must be accounted for, but it will mean
a reduction in the utility of native-born workers. These observations are formalized
as follows:
Proposition 4. In the model with a housing market, immigration will raise the
real wage for native-born workers if and only if:
(
1

θ >

σ−1
σ

)(

1 + (1 − θ2 )ϕL,T ϵD
L,T
D
1 + ϕL,T ϵL,T

)
.

(28)

Condition (28) shows that, as before, immigrants increase real wages if and only
if the weight on non-tradables is large enough. Further, it shows that the housing
market makes it more likely that immigrants will lower the real wage. To see this,
consider the case in which housing consumption has a zero weight in the utility
function, so that (1 − θ2 ) = θ1 ; in this case it can easily be checked that (28)
collapses to (20). Now, holding θ1 constant and raising the weight on housing above
zero reduces θ2 , which increases the right-hand side of (28). Clearly, this makes it
less likely that (28) will be satisﬁed.

21

1.6

Adding worker mobility.

We have assumed to this point that native-born workers cannot relocate from this
town, or new native-born workers from elsewhere in the country relocate to this town,
once immigrants have chosen to enter. However, such relocation is an important
part of the analysis of immigration. Borjas (2003) argues that because of mobility
of native workers the whole country should be thought of as a single labor market;
Saiz (2007) and Wozniak and Murray (2012), for example, examine various aspects
of this mobility.
A really convincing account of intra-national mobility would require a dynamic
model, such as for example Kennan and Walker (2011) or Artuç, Chaudhuri, and
McLaren (2010), but to capture the main idea here we accommodate intra-national
mobility of native-born workers in a very simple way. Suppose that there are L̄
native-born workers initially living in the town, and each one can move to another
part of the country, receiving a real wage w
b but paying a relocation disutility cost
equal to τ , so that the net wage from moving is w
e ≡ w
b − τ . These opportunity
wages and moving costs are idiosyncratic; a measure G(w)
e of local workers have an
outside net wage of less than or equal to w,
e with G(0) = 0 and limw→∞
= L̄. At the
e
same time, workers elsewhere in the country can come to the town if they wish; a
worker’s opportunity real wage in his or her home town is denoted w
b∗ , with a moving
cost of τ ∗ , so that the worker will move to the town we are focussing on if the real
wage wREAL thereby obtained satisﬁes wREAL − τ ∗ > w
b∗ , or wREAL > w
e∗ , where
w
e∗ ≡ w
b∗ + τ ∗ . Again, the opportunity wages and moving costs are idiosyncratic; a
measure G∗ (w
e∗ ) of non-local workers have an outside net wage of less than or equal
to w
e∗ , with G∗ (0) = 0.
22

Now, the total labor supply in the town is endogenous, and can be written as
the increasing and continuous function LT OT (wREAL ) ≡ G(wREAL ) + G∗ (wREAL ) +
LI , where LI is the number of immigrants. (We ignore here the possibility that
immigrants may themselves move to other towns after immigrating.) It should be
emphasized that the size of the local labor force responds to a decline in the local
real wage not only because a portion of local workers may choose to move elsewhere
but because a portion of workers elsewhere in the country who otherwise may have
chosen to move to this town instead choose to stay where they are.
All of the model up to now has been analyzed with an exogenous value of LT OT ,
and has returned an equilibrium value of wREAL . This relationship can be summarized in the curve DD in Figure 2. Panel (a) shows the case in which the ‘labor
glut’ eﬀect dominates the ‘shot in the arm’ eﬀect, so a rise in LT OT reduces the local
real wage (precisely, condition (20) in the basic model or (28) in the housing model
is not satisﬁed), and therefore the curve is downward-sloping. Panel (b) shows the
opposite case in which the ‘shot in the arm’ eﬀect dominates. Now, the possibility of
labor mobility creates a new relationship between wREAL and LT OT summarized in
the labor-supply function LT OT (wREAL ) derived just above. This is represented by
the curve SS in Figure 2, which must be upward-sloping. In each panel, the initial
equilibrium is marked as point a and the equilibrium following increased immigration is marked as point b. Note that in the case of panel (b) there could be multiple
equilibria; we will focus on the case of a stable equilibrium, which requires the SS
curve to be steeper than the DD curve.
Now a rise in immigration creates a rightward shift in the SS curve. In Panel (a),
this lowers the local real wage, which induces a net outﬂow of native-born workers

23

from the town. In Panel (b), the shift raises the real wage, which induces a net
inﬂow of native-born workers to the town. Therefore, the mobility of workers can
be a way of testing the direction of the overall change in the local real wage.
In addition, note that in panel (a) the increase in employment that results from
the immigration is less than △LI , while in panel (b) it is greater than △LI . It may
seem paradoxical that the arrival of 1, 000 immigrants will shift the local demand
for labor curve to the right by only (θ)(1, 000) < 1, 000 (as seen in Figure 1 and
(18) for the version with no housing sector, or (24) for the version with a housing
sector), and yet result in a new equilibrium with an increase in employment greater
than 1, 000. One way of understanding this outcome is that when the shot-in-thearm eﬀect is strong, immigrants create a virtuous circle: The immigrants induce
greater demand for local services, causing entry and creating a greater variety of
local services; this makes the town a more attractive place to live, causing workers
to move there from other locations; this in turn feeds local services demand again,
amplifying the eﬀect. We can summarize by saying that when the shot-in-the-arm
eﬀect is weak, each immigrant creates less than one new local job, but when it is
strong, each immigrant creates more than one new job. (Of course, as before, this
needs to be qualiﬁed by the fact that a portion of immigrants in practice will be
dependents and not workers.)
To summarize:
Proposition 5. In the model with worker mobility, if
dwREAL
< 0,
dLI

24

(29)

(precisely, if condition (20) in the basic model or (28) in the housing model is not satisﬁed), then immigration to a town will induce a net outﬂow of native-born workers
from the town, and the increase in local employment will be less than ∆LI . Otherwise, immigration will induce a net inﬂow, and the increase in local employment will
exceed ∆LI .
These ﬁndings can naturally be useful for empirical work. The real wage (23) is
not observable, because consumer price data will not normally include information on
how many local restaurants there are in a neighborhood, for example, and how much
they diﬀer in menu and style. Therefore, although the wage in terms of tradables
can be observed and correlated with movements in immigration, the theoretically
grounded real wage, which is needed for welfare evaluation, cannot (and of course, it
would need to be observed in each town, over time). But Proposition 5 tells us that
we can see in what direction the real wage is moving simply by observing movements
in aggregate employment or internal migration of workers.

1.7

Labor complementarities and other complications.

The stylized model presented above has been simpliﬁed to clarify the eﬀects of immigration on local labor demand. A number of features that have been emphasized
by other authors could be incorporated as well, which we may need to keep in mind
while analyzing the empirics.
(i) Labor Complementarity. We have assumed throughout that immigrant labor
is a perfect substitute for native-born labor. Some authors have emphasized the
possibility that immigrants tend to have diﬀerent skills than native-born workers
and are hired to do diﬀerent tasks (Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Peri and Sparber
25

(2009)). This can be accommodated in our model by assuming a production function
in (9) for tradable industry i, for example, that is a function of the two kinds of
labor separately as well as capital, with imperfect substitutability between the two.
Without working out the details, it is clear that such a speciﬁcation will dampen and
perhaps reverse negative eﬀects of immigration on w, and make the case of Panel (b)
of Figure 2, with an upward sloping SS curve, more likely. Similar eﬀects could result
from allowing for immigrants to substitute for oﬀshore workers as in Ottaviano, Peri,
and Wright (2012), or allowing for adoption of labor-saving technology to respond
endogenously to immigration as in Lewis (2011).
(ii) Local non-tradable inputs. Brezis and Krugman (1996) show that the presence
of local non-traded inputs (including local parts producers and local services used
by ﬁrms, such as repair, construction, couriers, catering, and the like) can aﬀect the
relationship between immigration and labor market outcomes dramatically. In that
model, an increase in immigration expands the local labor force, making entry into
the non-traded input sector proﬁtable, which increases productivity and encourages
capital inﬂows, ultimately raising local wages. This could be added to the model as
well, producing the same sorts of eﬀects as (i), but with a lag to allow for capital
inﬂows.
(iii) Industry-switching costs. We have assumed for simplicity that any worker in
a given town can move costlessly from one industry to another, so that in each town
all workers receive the same wage. Obviously, this is not realistic, and it would imply
that wage eﬀects from immigration are identical in all industries within a given town.
A full incorporation of industry-switching costs would add a great deal of complexity
(as in Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010)), so we will simply acknowledge that

26

a full model would have such costs and so a rise in demand for labor in one industry
relative to another would generally result in both a movement of workers and a rise
in that industry’s relative wage.9 This is important to acknowledge in examining the
empirical results.
With these theoretical points in hand, we now turn to empirics. We will be able
to check for clues as to the strength of the shot-in-the-arm eﬀect: (i) The eﬀect of
immigrants on overall local employment; (ii) the eﬀect of immigrants on employment
in non-tradable services relative to tradeables; (iii) the sign and magnitude of the
eﬀect on local wages; (iv) and movements of workers into or out of a location that
has received an inﬂux of immigrants.

2

Empirical approach.

To check on the strength the the ‘shot-in-the-arm’ eﬀect, we check on the overall
eﬀect of immigration on the size of local employment; on the number of jobs created
in the non-traded sector compared to the traded sector; and on wages.

2.1

The total employment eﬀect.

The most straightforward method to assess the total employment eﬀect would be to
estimate:

∆Em,t+1 = α0 + α1 Nm,t + ψm + λt + ϵm,t ,
9

(30)

It should be noted as well that, as Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010) show, part of the
shift in inter-industry wage diﬀerentials is permanent if the shift in labor demand is.

27

where ∆Em,t+1 is employment growth in location m between years t and t + 1,
Nm,t is the ﬂow of immigrants into location m over the same period; ψm and λt
are location and time ﬁxed eﬀects; and ϵm,t is an i.i.d error term. We will measure
Nm,t in two diﬀerent ways: The change in the number of immigrants residing in m
between years t and t + 1 (“change in immigrant population”), and the number of
immigrants living in m at date t + 1 who have entered the country between those
two dates (“new immigrant population”). A value of α1 in excess of unity would
indicate a strong shot-in-the-arm eﬀect. However, this approach is vulnerable to two
major econometric problems, scale eﬀects and the likely endogeneity of Nm,t , which
we discuss in turn.
(i) Scale eﬀects and heteroskedasticity. One reason equation (30) could provide
misleading results is the presence of scale eﬀects, a problem analyzed at length by
Peri and Sparber (2011). Even if there is no causal connection between immigration
and local employment, if each location’s employment grows at 1% per year and each
location receives immigrants equal to 1% of its initial population, large towns will
show large numbers of immigrants entering and large numbers of new jobs compared
to small towns, and α1 will be estimated to have a positive value. At the same time,
city size could be correlated with other factors relevant for employment growth, such
as import competition aﬄicting local industries, which has been a dramatic feature
of the experience of some of the largest US cities in recent years. For example, the
second-largest city in our sample, Los Angeles, with the second-largest immigrant
inﬂow, had negative employment growth over the 1990’s, due to the loss of 200, 000
manufacturing jobs clearly caused by the rise of manufactured exports from low-wage
economies and not by the expansion of the Los Angeles labor force. If we are unable

28

to control adequately for these other factors and they are correlated with city size,
speciﬁcation (30) can be biased.
In regressions with the size of the labor force as the dependent variable, Peri and
Sparber (2011) examine various solutions to this problem and ﬁnd, with simulated
data, that the most reliable solution is to normalize both the dependent variable
and immigrant inﬂows by initial population. This is also used in similar situations
by Card (2001) and Wright, Ellis, and Reibel (1997). Accordingly, our preferred
speciﬁcation for the total employment eﬀect is:

∆Em,t+1 /Pm,t = α0 + α1 Nm,t /Pm,t + ψm + λt + ϵm,t ,

(31)

where Pm,t is the population of location m in year t. Again, α1 is the main parameter
of interest, and in accordance with Proposition 5, our interest is in whether or not
it is greater than unity.
An additional reason for normalizing by initial population is heteroskedasticity
(indeed, more important, since with the location ﬁxed eﬀects, the scale-eﬀect problem
persists only to the extent that city sizes change signiﬁcantly over the data period).
As suggested by Wozniak and Murray (2012) in an analogous situation, we have
run regression (30) and then regressed the square residuals on initial city population
and its square. Both variables were highly signiﬁcant, suggesting that weighting the
regression by the reciprocal of city size would be desirable. Normalizing by initial
population is similar in its eﬀect.
(ii) Endogeneity of immigrant inﬂows. Immigrant ﬂows are likely to respond to
local labor-market conditions. It is natural to surmise that immigrants will be at-

29

tracted to locations with booming labor markets or avoid areas with falling labor
demand (a point conﬁrmed by Cadena and Kovak (2013)), in which case Nm,t will be
positively correlated with ϵm,t . On the other hand, Olney (2012) ﬁnds evidence that
in his data immigrants, surprisingly, are attracted to locations with high unemployment, perhaps because of the availability of low-cost housing, which could generate
the opposite correlation. Either way, an instrument for immigrant inﬂows is called
for.
A well-known instrument is the ‘supply-push’ instrument developed by Card
(2001), which is based on the initial distribution of immigrants of various nationalities across the country. In our case, the instrument takes the form:

CARD
N̂m,t



S

1 ∑ AGG 
 Ps,m,t 
=
N
 M
,
Pm,t s=1 s,t  ∑

Ps,m′ ,t

(32)

m′ =1

AGG
where Ns,t
is the aggregate inﬂow of new immigrants from source country s between

t and t + 1 and Ps,m,t is the size of initial immigrant population from country s in
location m. The term in parentheses is location m’s initial share of immigrants
from s, and the Card instrument is the predicted total inﬂow of new immigrants
to location m assuming that all new immigrants will be allocated nationwide in the
same proportions as their initial distribution (and normalized by location m’s initial
population).

30

2.2

Non-traded share of employment eﬀect.

While informative in assessing the mean eﬀect of immigration across all the industries, the above speciﬁcation does not account for the possibility of a diﬀerential
eﬀect on employment in the traded and non-traded sectors, as predicted by Proposition 2. To test this hypothesis, we need to develop an index of tradability to compare
across industries. We defer details to the next section, but in brief we conjecture that
employment in non-tradeable industries will be highly correlated with local income,
since local non-traded output must be equal to local demand, while traded industries
need show no such correlation. We therefore compute the correlation, corr, between
local GDP and local employment of each industry and use this as a proxy for nontradedness. Using this measure, we replace equation (31) with an equation in which
each observation is an industry-location combination:

∆Ej,m,t+1 /Pm,t = β0 + β1 Nm,t /Pm,t + β2 corrj Nm,t /Pm,t + ϕj + λt + ψm + ϵj,m,t , (33)

where j indexes industries and ϕj is an industry ﬁxed eﬀect. The employment change
in industry j caused by one more immigrant can be expressed as (β1 + β2 corrj ). If
we choose a cutoﬀ value of corrj , say, corr∗ , such that we will call an industry i
non-traded if and only if corrj ≥ corr∗ , then we can compute the eﬀect of a marginal
∑
immigrant on non-traded employment as ∆N T ≡
(β1 + β2 corrj ), and the
j∋corrj ≥corr∗ ∑
(β1 + β2 corrj ).
marginal eﬀect on traded-industry employment as ∆T ≡
j∋corrj <corr∗

To the extent that more immigrants lead to a larger increase in non-tradables employment than tradables employment because immigrants increase local consumer
demand for non-tradables – an outcome predicted by Proposition 2 provided that

31

θ ≥

1
2

– we will observe ∆N T > ∆T . The larger is β2 , the stronger is the implied

shot-in-the-arm eﬀect.

2.3

Wage eﬀects.

Finally, in order to measure the impacts of immigration on local wages, we move to
data on individual workers. In our data, each worker is observed at most once, so
for each worker i we can write that worker’s location, industry of employment and
date of observation as functions of i, m(i), j(i), and t(i) respectively. Consider the
following regression:

log(wi ) = γ0 + γ1 Xi + γ2 yr2000i + γ3 yr2000i corrj(i)

(34)

+γ4 yr2000i Nm(i),t(i)−1 /Pm(i),t(i)−1 + γ5 yr2000i corrj(i) Nm(i),t(i)−1 /Pm(i),t(i)−1
+ψm(i) + ϕj(i) + ϵi ,

where Xi is a vector of worker i’s demographic characteristics including age, age
squared, immigrant status, marital status, race and education; yr2000i is a dummy
variable equal to one if worker i is observed in year 2000. (More generally, we would
have dummies for each year, but, as we discuss in the next section, we will use wage
data from 1990 and 2000 so only a 2000 dummy is needed.) Therefore, the inclusion
of yr2000i and yr2000i corrj in the regression controls for the time trend over the
1990s and its interaction with industry tradability. Any unobserved, time-invariant
location- or industry-speciﬁc variables are controlled for by ψm and ϕj .
The dependent variable, wi is the nominal wage; dividing by the CPI would make
no diﬀerence because the trend in measured CPI will be common to all workers and
32

will be absorbed in γ2 . Since the true cost-of-living index depends on the price index
for services (4) which is not observed (since it depends on the number of varieties
of service available locally and on σ), the wage wi on the left-hand side of (34)
corresponds to the wage in terms of tradables in the theory model, rather than the
real wage of (19) or (23).
The parameters of interest are γ4 and γ5 , which would inform us of how immigration aﬀects the wage in traded and non-traded industries. In the simple theory
model presented earlier, we would have γ4 < 0 and γ5 = 0, because immigration
lowers the wage in terms of tradeables,10 and in that model labor is costlessly mobile
across sectors so the wage would move in the same way in both traded and nontraded industries. If we allowed for costs of switching sectors, then to the extent
that immigrants increase local services demand, we would expect γ5 to be positive.
If γ4 and γ5 are both close to zero, then immigration has only a small eﬀect on the
tradables wage (implying that ϕL,T or ϵL,T is large, from Proposition 1), and the
eﬀect of immigration on the real utility wage is likely to be positive.

3

Data.

Our main data set is extracted from the 5% samples from the 1980, 1990 and 2000
US Censuses provided by the IPUMS project at the Minnesota Population Center
of the University of Minnesota (Ruggles, Alexander, Genadek, Goeken, Schroeder,
and Sobek (2010)).11 The variables employed in the empirical analysis include year,
10

In a model such as presented by Brezis and Krugman (1996), it is possible to have γ4 > 0
because immigration improves productivity and induces capital inﬂows, which increase wages after
a lag. A similar point applies to Ottaviano and Peri (2012).
11
The Census data are publicly available at https://usa.ipums.org/usa/.

33

age, gender, marital status, race, place of birth, year of immigration, educational
attainment, employment status, industry, and income.
In order to investigate the local economic impacts of immigration, we need a
deﬁnition of location. Two main candidates are available in IPUMS, the “CONSPUMA” variable and the “METAREA” variable. CONSPUMA’s are a division of
the entire United States into 543 similarly-sized units, which are consistently deﬁned
from 1980 to 2000. METAREA’s are metropolitan areas with boundaries drawn in
such a way as to contain both employment and residence for a typical worker in the
city. By contrast, CONSPUMA’s in many cases divide a city, so that immigrants
to one CONSPUMA could cause employment eﬀects that spill over to an adjacent
CONSPUMA, and movement of residence of a worker from one neighborhood to
another would show up as an employment loss from one CONSPUMA and a gain
to the other even if the worker’s job does not change. Therefore, although it does
not cover the entire area of the U.S. and, therefore, it costs a signiﬁcant number of
observations, we prefer METAREA for our purpose.12 We limit our attention to the
metropolitan areas that are consistently deﬁned from 1980 to 2000 census, which
results in 219 METAREA’s.
Following the convention in the literature, we deﬁne an immigrant as a person who
is either a noncitizen or a naturalized U.S. citizen. Then an immigrant is considered
a ‘new’ arrival in the Census year t if his or her year of immigration is reported to
be between t − 9 and t.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the 9,861,622 individual workers who are
12

Approximately 31% of the sample observations in both Census years are missing “METAREA”
information.

34

included in the estimation.13 The average sample person is a 39-year-old, likely to
be married. The sample is 80% white and 54% male. A fraction of 14% of the
sample are identiﬁed as immigrants. About 53% of the sample are observed to have
college experience, while high-school dropouts account for 25% of the total. The two
main outcome variables we consider are employment status and salary income. The
employment status used in the regressions are based on the variable “EMPSTAT,”
which indicates whether the respondent was a part of the labor force and, if so,
whether the person was working or searching for employment. We count the number
of employed workers to compute the changes in employment level for each metarea in
the employment regressions. In our sample, after excluding armed forces, about 70%
of the sample are employed, while 25% report to be out of labor force. “INCWAGE”
reports the pre-tax nominal wage or salary income received during the previous
calendar year. We exclude observations with $400,000 or more and zero income in
the wage regressions.
One important requirement for studying the impacts of immigration on the local
economy is an operable measure of ‘tradability.’ In order to identify the existence
and magnitude of the shot-in-the-arm eﬀect of immigration, we must make a clear
distinction between non-traded industries, whose demand is likely boosted by immigration, and traded industries, whose demand is not. Despite the growing importance
of the non-tradable service sector in the U.S. economy,14 little scholarly attention has
been paid to it empirically, perhaps because of the lack of reliable measure of ‘nontradedness.’15 We develop a new measure of industry ‘tradability’ by looking at,
13

See Table 1 for details of the sample selection criteria.
See Buera and Kaboski (2012).
15
One notable exception is Gervais and Jensen (2012). Our approach to measuring non-tradedness
14

35

for each industry, the correlation between local demand and supply across diﬀerent
locations in the U.S. For a non-traded service, local demand must equal local supply,
while for a traded good supply can be located where production cost is minimized,
regardless of where consumers reside, so the geographic correlation between supply
and demand should be stronger for a non-traded than for a traded industry. To
implement this idea, we ﬁrst construct GDP for each location (computed as the sum
of incomes of all persons living there) as a proxy for local demand; and employment
for every industry/location cell as a proxy for local supply. Then, we simply compute
the correlation coeﬃcient between the two variables across regions for each industry
(of course, we are implicitly assuming that demand patterns for non-tradables do not
vary too much from place to place).16 Table 2 lists the top 10 most/least tradable
industries according to our measure, which seems to conform to our priors regarding
the degree of ‘non-tradedness.’ For example, retail bakeries or child day care services are widely perceived as non-traded service industry. On the other hand, mining
or tobacco manufacturers are well-known examples of geographically concentrated,
is inspired by their approach, but is much simpler and less ambitious. Considering a spatial mismatch between production and consumption as evidence of trade, they provide industry-level estimates of trade costs from a structural equilibrium model. However, because their estimates were
obtained from microdata on U.S. service establishments and do not cover other important industry
categories such as agricultural, mining, utilities and construction, they could not be directly applied
to this study. Our measure is also closely related to the measure of geographic concentration used
by Jensen and Kletzer (2006), but is simpler because we do not need the input-output patterns
that they employ.
16
Here, we use “CONSPUMA,” instead of “METAREA,” as the unit of geography, because production establishments for some industries are geographically concentrated outside of metropolitan
areas. For example, a tiny fraction of workers employed in coal mines are located within metropolitan areas, and those who do are not a representative sample of coal miners nationwide. The
correlation between local GDP and coal mining employment is 69% by METAREA, suggesting a
fairly non-traded industry, but the correlation is -0.2% by CONSPUMA, suggesting a traded industry. Of course, coal mining is a traded industry, with production concentrated outside of major
population centers and consumption concentrated within them.

36

tradeable industries.

4

Results

4.1

Employment regressions

Table 4 presents estimates of the local employment eﬀects of immigration. The ﬁrst
four columns report the results from measuring immigrant ﬂows as the change in
immigrant population, and the last four from measuring only newly arrived immigrants (as discussed in Section 2.1). The ﬁrst two columns within each group report
the results from the standard OLS regression of equation (31), ﬁrst the eﬀect on
employment in the full sample and then the eﬀect on employment of native (nonimmigrant) workers. The next two columns show the results using the Card IV. The
bottom two rows report the Angrist-Pischke ﬁrst-stage tests for identiﬁcation of the
endogenous variable, which passes in each case.
The results vary widely with the estimation method; instrumental variables reduce the size of coeﬃcients a great deal, as does using new immigrants as the ﬂow
measure instead of the change in immigrant population. However, the results consistently indicate a strong positive eﬀect of immigrants on employment. Focussing on
IV results for the full sample, an inﬂow of immigrants amounting to a one-percent
rise in the local population relative to the initial metropolitan area population is
predicted to provide an increase in total employment amounting to 3.5% or 1.2% of
the initial population and an increase in native employment amounting to 2.5% or
0.9% depending on the measure, providing initial evidence of the ‘shot-in-the-arm’
eﬀect of immigrant inﬂows. If we take the ‘new immigrant’ measure as the preferred
37

one, both because it is a more plausibly exogenous shock and because it passes the
Angrist-Pischke test much more strongly, then 1,000 new immigrants are associated
with an increase of 1,200 new local jobs, most of which go to native-born workers.
While informative in gauging the net impacts of immigration on regional employment change, this approach has its limitations because it masks substantial variation
across industries. Therefore, we re-estimate the model employing the measure of
‘non-tradedness,’ corr, as illustrated in equation (33) in order to account for the difference in industry tradability. Table 5 presents IV results from estimating equation
(33). The ﬁrst six columns show the eﬀect on full-sample employment, employment of native workers, and employment of immigrants, measured by the change-inimmigrant-population measure of immigrant ﬂow. The columns alternate between
results with and without industry ﬁxed eﬀects. The second six columns do the same
for the new-immigrant measure of the ﬂow.
The ﬁrst row contains estimates of β1 , the coeﬃcient in the immigrant inﬂow,
and the second row estimates of β2 , the coeﬃcient on the interaction with corrj .
For the full sample, with either measure of immigrant ﬂow we ﬁnd a positive and
signiﬁcant β1 and small and insigniﬁcant β2 with industry ﬁxed eﬀects; with industry
ﬁxed eﬀects omitted, we have β1 < 0 and β2 > 0, both signiﬁcant. On the other
hand, β2 is consistently positive and strongly signiﬁcant for immigrants themselves:
New immigrant jobs tend to be concentrated in non-traded services.
228
∑

As seen in the third row of results, the implied total employment eﬀect, ∆ ≡
(β1 + corri β2 ), is roughly in line with results from Table 4, but the breakdown

i=1

between traded and non-traded industries is of more interest to us. We can compute
the share of jobs created in non-traded industries as ∆N T /∆. Of course, we need to
38

choose a threshold value for corr∗ , below which we will call an industry ‘tradable’
and above which we will call it ‘non-tradable.’ There is necessarily some arbitrariness
in such a choice. We use a threshold value of corr equal to 0.6; the results change
little if the threshold is perturbed around this value.17 Focussing again on the results
from the ‘new-immigrants’ measure of immigrant ﬂows, and using the results with
industry ﬁxed eﬀects, we compute the non-traded share of jobs as 62% for the full
sample, 57% for native workers, and 75% for immigrants.
It is instructive to note the relationship between these results and Moretti (2010),
who studies the multiplier eﬀect of one new tradables job on local non-tradables
employment. Moretti ﬁnds that each tradables job generates 1.5 local non-tradables
jobs on average. According to our results, if the only variation in the data came
from immigration, then there would be 62 non-tradables jobs generated for each 38
tradables jobs, implying a Moretti multiplier of 62 ÷ 38 = 1.63, quite close to the
1.5 value. However, there is no reason to expect that immigration is the only (or
even the largest) source of local employment variation in the data; Moretti has in
mind, for example, terms-of-trade improvements that raise labor demand in a given
manufacturing industry; the Moretti multiplier from such a shock could presumably
be quite diﬀerent compared to that from an immigration shock.
Recall that Proposition 2 predicts that the non-tradeable sector’s share of the
employment increase exceeds θ, the share of non-tradeables in expenditure – or, in
17

We follow the following reasoning. (i) We expect most, but not all, services to be non-traded,
and most goods industries to be traded. (ii) If we classify each industry as a good or a service on the
basis of the Census description of the industry, any threshold choice results in some services below
the cutoﬀ and some goods industries above it; any increase in the cutoﬀ increases the former and
decreases the latter. (iii) At the value corr = 0.6, the the number of non-traded goods industries
and the number of traded service industries are equal at 22, out of a total of 228 industries. This
cutoﬀ yields 138 non-traded industries and 90 traded industries.

39

the extreme case of high tradables labor-demand elasticity or a small tradables sector,
it will be equal to θ. Now, in equilibrium, the share of non-tradables in expenditure
must equal their share in income, so we can estimate θ by adding up the income
of all individuals in our sample who work in the non-tradables industries; doing the
same for tradeable industries; and ﬁnding what fraction the former sum is of the
total. We do this both with labor income (the IPUMS variable INCWAGE) and
total income (the variable INCTOT), which presumably includes capital and rental
income as well, which may or may not derive from the same industry as the labor
income. Either way, the share of non-tradables in income, and therefore our estimate
of θ, is 0.83.18
The overall message of Table 4 is that on average, each immigrant generates
about 1.2 jobs in the city in which he or she locates, about 62% of which are in
the non-traded industries. From Proposition 4, this can be taken as evidence of a
strong shot-in-the-arm eﬀect. However, since 62% is less than our estimated θ of
83%, Proposition 2 fails, and we may ask which piece of the model is the cause.
Examining wage evidence in the next section will provide a suggestion that it may
be our assumption that workers face no costs in switching industries.
To explore the composition of labor-demand eﬀects further, in Table 6, we control
for the national trend and global shocks for the tradeable industries. For this, we
ﬁrst compute for the projected employment change in each industry-metarea cell
assuming that local industry employment growth will follow the national trend for
18

If we raise the cutoﬀ for tradability to corr = 0.65, non-tradables’ share of employment gains
becomes 53% and θ becomes 75%. If we lower it to corr = 0.55, non-tradables’ share of employment
gains becomes 68% and θ becomes 86%.

40

that industry:
P rojEj,m,t = trendj Ej,m,t ,

(35)

where trendj is the nation-wide employment growth rate between years t and t + 1
in industry j and Ej,m,t is initial employment in industry j in location m. In Table 6,
this is the variable ‘National employment growth trend,’ entered as a control in the
employment change regression, in place of an industry ﬁxed eﬀect. Then we interact
the variable with a dummy variable for ‘tradable’ industry to allow for the possibility
that traded goods follow national trends since they are hit by global shocks, but
non-traded industries are aﬀected only by local variables. This provides the control
variable called ‘National employment growth trend, traded industries’ in Table 6. In
either form, these controls for industry-speciﬁc national trends enter strongly in the
regression with a coeﬃcient close to unity. When the regression is run in this way,
the coeﬃcient on the interaction between corrj and the immigrant inﬂow is always
strongly positive and signiﬁcant, reinforcing the conclusion that non-traded labor
demand is disproportionately aﬀected by immigrants. The β1 and β2 from the last
two columns imply a share for non-traded industries in employment gains of 67%
and 89% respectively.

4.2

Wage regressions

Table 7 presents the results from equation (34). Looking at the full sample, using
either measure of immigration inﬂows (ﬁrst and third columns), we see that the eﬀect
of new immigrants on wages in traded industries is modestly negative (ﬁrst row; γ4 <
0), while the eﬀect on wages in non-tradable industries is positive (second row; γ5 > 0

41

and in fact γ4 + γ5 > 0). Focussing on the ‘new immigrants’ measure of immigrant
inﬂows, we see that the eﬀect is modest. The arrival of immigrants amounting to
10% of the local labor force would lead to a drop in local wages of approximately
1.7% in a completely traded industry (0.1 × 0.172), while the same event would raise
wages approximately 4% in a completely non-traded industry (0.1 × (0.576 − 0.172)).
Since this would be a huge immigration event, larger than the Mariel boatlift, these
are quite modest wage eﬀects. Note as well that the aggregate wage eﬀects are driven
entirely by immigrant wages; the eﬀects are positive but small and insigniﬁcant.
Note that the positive estimate of γ4 implies costs to switching industries. This is
consistent with abundant evidence (see Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010)), and
can help explain the ﬁnding in Section 4.1 that the non-traded share of employment
gains is less than θ.19 Proposition 2, which predicts that the non-traded share of the
increase in employment will exceed θ, was derived under the assumption of perfect
mobility across sectors. When the demand for labor in a sector rises, realistic labor
switching costs will lead to a smaller shift in employment share and also a rise in
that sector’s relative wage, as seen here.
The ﬁnding that some local wages are increased by immigration is at odds with
the simplest version of the theory model presented in Section 1, but it can easily
be rationalized by adding non-traded inputs or labor complementarity as discussed
in Section 1.7, together with some worker mobility costs to allow wages to diﬀer
across industries. More importantly, the result contrasts with most of the empirical
literature, which mostly ﬁnds wage eﬀects “small and clustered near zero” (Kerr and
19

It is important to underline that once industry-switching costs have been added to the model
in a realistic way, a permanent shock to labor demand in one industry tends to lead to a permanent
change in inter-industry wage diﬀerentials, as discussed at length in Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren
(2010).

42

Kerr (2011), p.12). Part of the reason may be our distinction between tradable and
non-tradable industries, which, as we have seen, diﬀer sharply in their response to
immigration. In addition, some other studies that have examined large-scale immigration events have looked at a much shorter time horizon than our 10-year horizon (Card (1990) and Friedberg (2001), for example). As emphasized in Giovanni,
Levchenko, and Ortega (2015), the mechanism of new ﬁrm formation may take time
to respond to new immigrants (although Olney (2012) ﬁnds surprisingly quick ﬁrm
entry in response to immigration), and both Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and Brezis
and Krugman (1996) emphasize that capital ﬂows may respond to immigration with
a lag.
Moreover, some studies that have found negative wage eﬀects, such as Borjas
(2003), Aydemir and Borjas (2011) and Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson (2010) are
actually asking a diﬀerent question: These studies divide up the labor force into, say,
32 skill-experience cells and ask what is the eﬀect of an increase in immigration within
cell i on wages for native workers within cell i. This approach is more focussed on
the eﬀect of the composition of immigration on the relative native wages, rather than
on the total number of immigrants on absolute wages. If a rise in total immigration
changes all wages in some direction, that will be absorbed in the year ﬁxed eﬀects;
holding the total number constant, a rise in immigrants within cell i then implies a
change in that cell’s share of the immigrant inﬂow, which can aﬀect its wages relative
to wages in other cells. Thus, the same data-generating process could generate both
our results and the results in those papers.20
20

Put diﬀerently, suppose that the actual data-generating process follows log(wct ) = α0 +
α1 log(Nt ) + α2 log( NNctt ), where wct is the wage in skill-experience cell c at date t, Nt is total
immigration at date t, and Nct is total immigration of workers in cell c at date t. There is nothing

43

Crucially, note that the rising wages associated with immigration inﬂows for nontraded industries indicated in Table 7 make it clear that the expansion of non-traded
employment documented in the previous two tables cannot simply be a result of the
supply-side forces that are the focus of Cortes (2008) and Olney (2012). The wages
move in the wrong way for that; only a rise in labor demand in non-traded industries
can rationalize a simultaneous rise in non-traded wages plus a rise in non-traded
employment.
To sum up, we ﬁnd that incoming immigrants tend to raise the wages of workers
in non-tradable services and push down the wages of workers in tradables, modestly
in both cases. This is consistent with a rise in the demand for labor in services that
accompanies the increase in local labor supply, although this wage eﬀect is small and
limited to immigrants themselves. However, given that the nominal price index does
not account for the change in the diversity of local services, the real wage could still
go up in response to an increase in the immigrant population provided that the real
price of services falls. Although no direct method is available to estimate the impacts
of immigration on the real wage, Proposition 5 provides an alternative approach to
check the direction of the change in real wage by focusing on the pattern of internal
migration.

4.3

Do immigrants crowd out native workers?

The immigration literature has provided mixed evidence regarding the impact of
immigration on the internal migration of the native workforce. While Butcher and
logically preventing α1 from being positive and at the same time α2 from being negative. The
Borjas (2003) regression and others of that type, with time ﬁxed eﬀects, would estimate α2 , while
the sort of regression we are running would be aimed at estimating α1 .

44

Card (1991) and Card (2001) ﬁnd that native out-migration and immigrant inﬂows
are largely unrelated, Borjas (2006) argues that immigration is associated with higher
out-migration rates; Peri and Sparber (2011) survey work on this question. The
simple empirical framework described above allows us to examine the diﬀerential
impacts of immigration on the movements of workers by employment status.
More speciﬁcally, we employ the metarea-level employment regression equation
in (31) but consider two additional dependent variables: change in the number of
unemployed and change in the size of not-in-labor-force (NILF), reporting the results
in Table 8. The top half of the table reports results using the ‘change in immigrant
population’ measure of immigrant inﬂows, and the bottom half reports the ‘new
immigrants’ measure. We will focus on the latter. Columns 1 through 6 present
regression results separately for natives and established immigrants who arrived more
than 10 years prior to the Census year. The results are striking. The point estimates
in the ﬁrst three columns imply that 1,000 new immigrants are predicted to increase
native employment by 865, native unemployment by 102, and native NILF by 359,
which amounts to a net increase of 1,326 in the native population of the town. At
the same time, the next three columns in the table show that 1, 000 newly arriving
immigrants are expected to increase the established immigrant population by 192
(that is, 0.169 + 0.0576 - 0.0348).21 However, care must be taken before concluding
that higher immigrant populations attract workers into the town, because population
increases could also be explained by decreases in outﬂows from aﬀected metropolitan
areas (Wozniak and Murray (2012)). In order to address this issue, we next limit
21

In unreported results, we ran the same regressions for other various sub-groups in US Census
and found that the same pattern holds for female, black, and Hispanic population. The results are
available upon request.

45

the sample to include only those native-born US workers who moved from a diﬀerent
metropolitan area during the 5 years prior to the Census year using the “MIGMET5”
variable available in IPUMS and run the regressions.22 The estimated coeﬃcients in
the last three columns of the table suggest that 1,000 new immigrants induce 360
workers (that is, 0.212 + 0.104 + 0.0438) to move into the town from elsewhere
in the United States during the ﬁve years leading up to the Census year. This
provides strong evidence against the native displacement hypothesis of immigration:
US workers are actually moving from elsewhere in the country into the city that
receives the immigrant inﬂow. Therefore, according to Proposition 5, we conclude
that immigration appears to be raising the real wage through increased product
diversity in the service industries.

5

Conclusions.

We have studied the eﬀect of immigration on local labor markets, emphasizing the
eﬀect of immigration on local labor demand as opposed to merely labor supply. We
have ﬁrst studied a stylized model of a local labor market that shows how the arrival
of immigrants increases local aggregate income and thus the labor demand by the
non-traded services sector. This eﬀect, which we have labelled the ‘shot-in-the-arm’
eﬀect, dampens the downward pressure the extra labor supply places on local wages,
and also increases the variety of non-traded services available, which confers a beneﬁt
on all local consumers, native-born and immigrant. Consequently, even in a model
22

“MIGMET5” reports the metropolitan area the respondent lived 5 years ago. Therefore, it
allows us to compute the number of in-migrants during the 5 years prior to the Census year in each
metro area.

46

in which immigration always lowers local wages in terms of tradeables, it raises real
wages in terms of non-tradables, and depending on how strong the shot-in-the-arm
eﬀect is, it may raise real wages in terms of the overall consumer price index, raising
utility for all local workers.
In that case, immigration into a town will tend to attract other native workers
from elsewhere in the country, who will then create an additional ‘shot in the arm’
of their own, resulting in a virtuous cycle in which employment in the town has
increased by more than the direct rise in the local labor force due to the immigrants.
In that case, we can say that each immigrant generates more than one job. On
the other hand, if the shot-in-the-arm eﬀect is weak, real wages will fall, and native
workers will ﬂow out of the town; each immigrant can then be said to generate less
than one job. Since real wages that take full account of diversity of services are
diﬃcult to measure, net ﬂows of workers in response to immigration can be a useful
indicator of the local net eﬀects of immigration on the welfare of local workers.
We examine these eﬀects empirically with a ﬁve-percent sample from the US
Decennial Census. We use a novel method to divide industries into non-traded and
traded, and ﬁnd that the non-traded portion of the economy generates 83% of total
income, which creates the potential for a large shot-in-the-arm eﬀect. We ﬁnd that
1, 000 new immigrants to a US Metropolitan Area generate approximately 1, 200 new
local jobs, about 62% of which are in the non-traded sector. Further, we ﬁnd that
new immigrants tend to raise local wages slightly even in terms of tradeables for jobs
in the non-traded sector while they push wages down slightly in the traded sector,
and that new immigrants seem to attract native workers into the metropolitan area.
Thus, the evidence appears to favor a strong shot-in-the-arm eﬀect, and support

47

the idea that workers in a given metropolitan area beneﬁt from the arrival of more
immigrants to that metropolitan area.

48

References
Altonji, J. G., and D. Card (1991): “The eﬀects of immigration on the labor market outcomes of less-skilled natives,” in Immigration, trade and the labor
market, pp. 201–234. University of Chicago Press. 7
Artuç, E., S. Chaudhuri, and J. McLaren (2010): “Trade Shocks and Labor
Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” The American Economic Review,
pp. 1008–1045. 22, 26, 27, 42
Aydemir, A., and G. J. Borjas (2011): “Attenuation Bias in Measuring the
Wage Impact of Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 29(1), 69–113. 2, 43
Borjas, G. J. (2003): “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining The Impact Of Immigration On The Labor Market,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 118(4), 1335–1374. 2, 22, 43, 44
(2006): “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources, 41(2), 221–258. 45
Borjas, G. J., J. Grogger, and G. H. Hanson (2010): “Immigration and the
Economic Status of African-American Men,” Economica, 77(306), 255–282. 43
Brezis, E. S., and P. R. Krugman (1996): “Immigration, investment, and real
wages,” Journal of Population Economics, 9(1), 83–93. 7, 9, 11, 26, 33, 43
Buera, F. J., and J. P. Kaboski (2012): “The Rise of the Service Economy,”
American Economic Review, 102(6), 2540–69. 35

49

Butcher, K. F., and D. Card (1991): “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from
the 1980’s,” American Economic Review, 81(2), 292–96. 44
Cadena, B. C., and B. K. Kovak (2013): “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor
Markets: Evidence from the Great Recession,” Discussion paper, National Bureau
of Economic Research. 30
Card, D. (1990): “The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43(2), 245–257. 2, 43
(2001): “Immigrant Inﬂows, Native Outﬂows, and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 22–64. 29,
30, 45
Chomsky, A. (2007): They take our jobs!: And 20 other myths about immigration.
Beacon Press. 5
Cortes, P. (2008): “The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3), 381–422. 6, 44
Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic competition and optimum
product diversity,” The American Economic Review, 67(3), 297–308. 8, 12
Friedberg, R. M. (2001): “The impact of mass migration on the Israeli labor
market,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1373–1408. 43
Friedberg, R. M., and J. Hunt (1995): “The impact of immigrants on host
country wages, employment and growth,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(2), 23–44. 2
50

Gervais, A., and J. B. Jensen (2012): “Are Services Tradable? Evidence from
U.S. Microdata,” Working paper, Georgetown University. 3, 35
Giovanni, J., A. A. Levchenko, and F. Ortega (2015): “A Global View Of
Cross-Border Migration,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 13(1),
168–202. 6, 43
Jensen, J. B., and L. G. Kletzer (2006): “Tradable services: Understanding
the scope and impact of services oﬀshoring,” in Brookings Trade Forum 2005, pp.
75–134. Brookings Institution. 3, 36
Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): “The eﬀect of expected income on individual migration decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251. 22
Kerr, S. P., and W. R. Kerr (2011): “Economic impacts of immigration: A
survey,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. 42
Kovak, B. K. (2013): “Regional eﬀects of trade reform: What is the correct measure
of liberalization?,” The American Economic Review, 103(5), 1960–1976. 7
Lewis, E. (2011): “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 1029–1069. 26
Mazzolari, F., and D. Neumark (2012): “Immigration and product diversity,”
Journal of Population Economics, 25(3), 1107–1137. 6, 7
Moretti, E. (2010): “Local multipliers,” The American Economic Review, pp.
373–377. 7, 39

51

Olney, W. W. (2012): “Immigration and Firm Expansion,” Journal of Regional
Science. 6, 11, 30, 43, 44
Ottaviano, G. I., and G. Peri (2012): “Rethinking the eﬀect of immigration on
wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1), 152–197. 2, 25, 33,
43
Ottaviano, G. I. P., G. Peri, and G. C. Wright (2012): “Immigration, Oﬀshoring and American Jobs,” CEP Discussion Papers dp1147, Centre for Economic
Performance, LSE. 26
Peri, G., and C. Sparber (2009): “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3), 135–169. 25
(2011): “Assessing inherent model bias: An application to native displacement in response to immigration,” Journal of Urban Economics, 69(1), 82–91. 8,
28, 29, 45
Ruggles, S., J. T. Alexander, K. Genadek, R. Goeken, M. B.
Schroeder, and M. Sobek (2010): “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
Minnesota Population Center [production and distributor],” . 33
Saiz, A. (2007): “Immigration and housing rents in American cities,” Journal of
Urban Economics, 61(2), 345–371. 18, 22
Wozniak, A., and T. J. Murray (2012): “Timing is everything: Short-run population impacts of immigration in US cities,” Journal of Urban Economics, 72(1),
60–78. 8, 22, 29, 45
52

Wright, R. A., M. Ellis, and M. Reibel (1997): “The Linkage between Immigration and Internal Migration in Large Metropolitan Areas in the United States,”
Economic Geography, 73(2), 234–254. 8, 29

53

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. From (10) and (18), labor market equilibrium can be
written as:
wLT OT = −wr2 (q, w, K) + θwL + θr (q, w, K) .

(36)

The left-hand side is total labor income and the right-hand side terms are, respectively, income to labor employed in tradables followed by two terms representing
labor income in non-tradables. Diﬀerentiating with respect to LT OT yields and solving for dw/dLT OT :
dw
−(1 − θ)w
=
< 0.
OT
T
dL
(1 − θ)(LT OT + r2 ) + wr22

(37)

Note that (LT OT + r2 ) is just the amount of labor employed in the non-traded sector,
and is therefore positive. Therefore the denominator of dw/dLT OT is positive. This
implies that the change in local income is:
]
dI
d [
w2 r22
N
I
=
w(L
+
L
)
+
r(q,
w,
K)
=
> 0. (38)
dLT OT
dLI
(1 − θ)(LT OT + r2 ) + wr22
From (14), the eﬀect on the equilibrium value of n is:
d log n
d log E S
d log w
d log I
d log w
=
−
=
−
.
T
T
T
T
OT
OT
OT
OT
dL
dL
dL
dL
dLT OT

54

(39)

Putting this together with (19) and (4), we can derive the eﬀect of immigration on
the local real wage:
d ln(wREAL )
d ln(w)
d ln(P S )
=
−θ
T OT
dLT OT
dLT OT
( dL )
d ln(w)
θ
d ln(w)
d ln(n)
=
−
− θ T OT
T
OT
T
OT
dL
1 − σ dL
dL
(
)
(
)
d ln(w)
θ
d log I
θ
d log w
d ln(w)
=
−
+
− θ T OT
T
OT
T
OT
T
OT
dL
1 − σ dL
1 − σ dL
dL
[ (
)
(
) 2 ]
1 − σ + θσ
1
θ
w r22
= −
.
(1 − θ) −
1−σ
1 − σ LT OT (1 − θ)(LT OT + r2 ) + wr22
Given that
w2 r22
=
I

(

w|r2 |
r

)( )(
)
r
wr22
= ϕL,T (1 − θ)ϵD
L,T ,
I
|r2 |

(40)

where ϕL,T is labor’s share of costs in the traded sector and ϵD
L,T is the elasticity of
labor demand in the traded sector, the stated condition follows mechanically. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 2. Since −r22 is the derivative of tradables labor demand
with respect to the wage, clearly
dLT
dw
= − T OT r22 .
OT
T
dL
dL

(41)

Using the expression for dw/dLT OT derived in the proof of Proposition 1, the result
follows immediately. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 3. The derivative of equilibrium condition (24) with
respect to immigrant labor is:
−[(1 − θ1 )(LT OT + r2 ) + wr22 ]

dpH
dw
1
+
θ
H
= (1 − θ1 )w
dLT OT
dLT OT
55

(42)

The derivative of equilibrium condition (25) with respect to immigrant labor is:
−(1 − θ1 − θ2 )(LT OT + r2 )

dw
dpH
1
2
+
(θ
+
θ
)H
= (1 − θ1 − θ2 )w
dLT OT
dLT OT

(43)

These two equations can be written in matrix form as:

A

dw
dLT OT
dpH
dLT OT





≡



−[(1 − θ1 )(LT OT + r2 ) + wr22 ]
−(1 − θ − θ )(L
1

2

T OT

2

+r )

θ1 H
1

2

(θ + θ )H



dw
dLT OT
dpH
dLT OT





=

The inverse of the matrix A is:


(θ + θ )H
−θ H
1 
,
D
1
2
T OT
1
T OT
(1 − θ − θ )(L
+ r2 ) −[(1 − θ )(L
+ r2 ) + wr22 ]
1

2

1

(45)

where D ≡ −[θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ]H < 0 is the determinant. The result
follows mechanically. Q.E.D.
Proof of Proposition 4. First, note that because (1 − θ1 − θ2 )I = pH H,
d log(I)
d log(pH )
=
T OT
dLT OT
(dL )
1
(1 − θ1 − θ2 )r22 w2
=
pH [θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ] H
r22 w2
=
[θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ] I
(
)(
)
w|r2 |
r22 w ( r )
1
=
2
T
OT
r
|r2 |
I [θ (L
+ r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ]
2
ϕL,T ϵD
L,T θ
=
.
[θ2 (LT OT + r2 ) + (θ1 + θ2 )wr22 ]

56

(1 − θ − θ )w
1

(44)



(1 − θ2 )w
2




Second, note that because of free entry in nontraded services,

d log(n)
dLT OT

=

d log(I)
− ddLlog(w)
T OT
dLT OT

as implied by (14). These yield:
S
H
d ln(wREAL )
d ln(w)
1 d ln(P )
1
2 d ln(p )
=
−θ
− (1 − θ − θ )
dLT OT
dLT OT
dLT OT
dLT OT
1
H
d ln(w)
θ d ln(n)
1 d ln(w)
1
2 d ln(p )
=
−
−
θ
−
(1
−
θ
−
θ
)
dLT OT
1 − σ dLT OT
dLT OT
dLT OT
H
d ln(w)
θ1 d ln(I)
θ1 d ln(w)
1 d ln(w)
1
2 d ln(p )
=
−
+
−
θ
−
(1
−
θ
−
θ
)
T OT
dLT OT
1 − σ dL
1 −(
σ dLT OT
dLT OT )
dLT OT
(
)
1
1
d log(w)
θ
θ
d log(I)
− θ1
+ 1 − θ1 − θ2
=
1+
−
T
OT
1−σ
dL
1−σ
dLT OT

This can be combined with Proposition 3 to derive the eﬀect of immigration on the
real wage as follows:
d ln(wREAL )
> 0 ⇐⇒ −(1 − σ + θ1 σ) − (1 − θ2 − σ(1 − θ1 − θ2 ))ϕL,T ϵD
L,T < 0.
OT
T
dL
Rearranging gives the desired result. Q.E.D.

57

Tables.
Table 1: Sample Selection Criteria
Selection Criterion
Number Rejected
0
Keep if in the 1980, 1990, or 2000 U.S. Censuses.
Keep if INCWAGE< 400, 000.
8,761,439
Drop if age< 20 or age> 65.
7,038,233
Keep if in a consistently deﬁned metarea.
7,489,516
Keep if IND1990< 900.
772,486
Keep if employed.
4,002,336

58

Number Remaining
37,925,632
29,164,193
22,125,960
14,636,444
13,863,958
9,861,622

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Mean Std. Dev.
Individual-level
Year
Age
Male
Married
High school dropouts
High school graduates
Some college
College graduates
Immigrant
Salary income
Metropolitan area-level
Metarea
Employment growth in the 1980s
Employment growth in the 1990s
New immigrants in the 1980s
New immigrants in the 1990s
Change in the immigrant
population in the 1980s
Change in the immigrant
population in the 1990s

Min

Max

N

1990.9
38.79
0.542
0.620
0.247
0.187
0.294
0.236
0.139
25119.9

8.132
11.77
0.498
0.485
0.431
0.390
0.456
0.425
0.345
31833.7

1980
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2000
65
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
354000

9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622
9,861,622

459.6
1887.7
2417.8
2708.5
1590.9

276.9
5546.0
3916.9
11602.2
5359.1

4
-8838
-5993
12
8

932
46347
28706
126154
56491

219
219
219
219
219

889.1

3814.6

-578

45650

219

974.0

2481.4

-314

25769

219

59

Table 3: 10 Most and Least Tradable Industries
IND1990 Industry description
772
Beauty shops
412
U.S. Postal Service
610
Retail bakeries
731
Personnel supply services
862
Child day care services
623
Apparel and accessory stores, except shoe
812
Oﬃces and clinics of physicians
890
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services
471
Sanitary services
510
Professional and commercial equipment and supplies
312
Construction and material handling machines
42
Oil and gas extraction
31
Forestry
220
Leather tanning and ﬁnishing
132
Knitting mills
311
Farm machinery and equipment
130
Tobacco manufactures
40
Metal mining
380
Photographic equipment and supplies
41
Coal mining

60

Corr.
0.855
0.851
0.846
0.838
0.837
0.836
0.835
0.834
0.827
0.826
0.180
0.153
0.145
0.115
0.098
0.090
0.054
0.039
0.025
-0.002

Yes
Yes
438

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

3.456***
(0.646)

(IV)

Full sample

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

2.456***
(0.646)

(IV)

Natives

Yes
Yes
438

2.143***
(0.333)

(OLS)

Full sample

Yes
Yes
438

1.704***
(0.305)

(OLS)

Natives

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

1.218***
(0.431)

(IV)

Full sample

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

0.865***
(0.329)

(IV)

Natives

New immigrant population as immigrant flow

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by metarea; *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively; The
Angrist-Pischke χ2 and F statistics report the ﬁrst-stage test statistics of underidentiﬁcation and weak identiﬁcation, respectively, of the endogenous regressor.

Yes
Yes
438

Metarea FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics

4.109***
(0.561)

(OLS)

(OLS)
5.109***
(0.561)

Natives

Full sample

Changes in immigrant population as immigrant flow

Normalized immigrant ﬂow

Dependent Variable:
Normalized employment change

Table 4: Metarea–level Employment Regression Results

Yes
Yes
Yes
80,199
8.02/45.58
7.94/45.12

Metarea FE
Industry FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics
Yes
No
Yes
80,199
7.60/89.37
7.54/88.71

-0.015***
(0.003)
0.053***
(0.005)
3.751

Full sample

Yes
Yes
Yes
79,474
8.54/46.43
8.45/45.96

0.018***
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.005)
3.157

Natives

Yes
No
Yes
79,474
7.94/91.36
7.88/90.69

-0.013***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.005)
2.854

Natives

Yes
Yes
Yes
28,094
10.66/25.05
10.44/24.54

-0.004***
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.576

Immigrants

Yes
No
Yes
28,094
9.74/70.54
9.62/69.67

-0.002**
(0.000)
0.008***
(0.001)
0.626

Immigrants

Yes
Yes
Yes
80,199
48.14/94.00
47.66/93.04

0.005***
(0.002)
0.001
(0.001)
1.275

Full sample

Yes
No
Yes
80,199
48.27/159.25
47.91/158.09

-0.007***
(0.002)
0.021***
(0.002)
1.245

Full sample

Yes
Yes
Yes
79,474
48.64/99.20
48.15/98.19

0.006***
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.001)
1.097

Natives

Yes
No
Yes
79,474
48.67/167.92
48.31/166.69

-0.006***
(0.002)
0.017***
(0.002)
0.932

Natives

Yes
Yes
Yes
28,094
33.41/59.30
32.73/58.09

-0.000
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.406

Immigrants

New immigrant population as immigrant flow

Yes
No
Yes
28,094
32.62/118.62
32.22/117.15

-0.000
(0.000)
0.003***
(0.000)
0.406

Immigrants

i=1

F statistics report the ﬁrst-stage test statistics of underidentiﬁcation and weak identiﬁcation, respectively, of the two endogenous regressors.

Total employment eﬀect of one additional immigrant is computed as ∆ ≡

Notes: The full sample was used for all regressions; Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by metarea; *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively;
228
∑
(β1 + corri β2 ), where β1 is the intercept and β2 is the coeﬃcient on the interaction; The Angrist-Pischke χ2 and

Total employment eﬀect (∆)

Normalized immigrant ﬂow×Corr

Full sample

Changes in immigrant population as immigrant flow

Table 5: Metarea-industry-level Employment Regression Results (IV)

0.015***
(0.003)
0.004
(0.004)
3.961

Normalized immigrant ﬂow

Dependent Variable:
Normalized employment change

3.042

(0.119)
-1.87e-06
(7.19e-05)
0.001***
(0.000)
3.310

(0.118)

3.488

1.043***

-0.011***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.004)

1.042***
0.000
(7.61e-05)
0.000*
(0.000)
3.042

(0.059)

(0.058)

0.008**
(0.003)
0.009***
(0.003)
0.967***

-0.012***
(0.003)
0.046***
(0.004)

0.969***

0.008**
(0.003)
0.009***
(0.003)

1.473

-0.006***
(0.002)
0.021***
(0.002)

0.862

(0.058)

0.969***

0.002
(0.002)
0.003***
(0.001)

1.295

(0.119)

1.037***

-0.005**
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.002)

0.000*
(8.71e-05)
0.000**
(0.000)
0.862

(0.058)

0.967***

0.002
(0.002)
0.003***
(0.001)

(0.119)
3.07e-05
(8.38e-05)
0.001***
(0.000)
1.160

1.039***

-0.005**
(0.002)
0.017***
(0.002)

New immigrant population as immigrant ﬂow

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
79,054
7.64/89.78 7.66/87.69 7.65/89.58 7.68/86.48 7.67/88.20 47.99/158.43 48.18/154.81 48.06/157.94 48.42/152.77 48.31/155.65
7.59/89.12 7.61/87.04 7.59/88.52 7.62/86.48 7.62/87.55 47.64/157.27 47.82/153.67 47.71/156.78 48.06/151.65 47.96/154.50

3.751

-0.015***
(0.003)
0.053***
(0.005)

Changes in immigrant population as immigrant ﬂow

The Angrist-Pischke χ2 and F statistics report the ﬁrst-stage test statistics of underidentiﬁcation and weak identiﬁcation, respectively, of the two endogenous regressors.

i=1

Notes: The full sample was used for all regressions; Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by metarea; *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
228
∑
levels, respectively; Total employment eﬀect of one additional immigrant is computed as ∆ ≡
(β1 + corri β2 ), where β1 is the intercept and β2 is the coeﬃcient on the interaction;

Metarea FE
Industry FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics

Total employment eﬀect (∆)

College graduates, per cent

High school dropouts, per cent

National industry employment
growth trend, traded industries

National industry employment
growth trend

Normalized immigrant ﬂow×corr

Normalized immigrant ﬂow

Dependent variable:
Normalized employment change

Table 6: Metarea-industry-level Employment Regression with Additional Industry Controls (IV)

Table 7: Wage Regression Results (IV)
Dependent variable: Log Wage
Normalized immigrant ﬂow
Normalized immigrant ﬂow×Corr

Metarea FE
Industry FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics

Changes in immigrant population
Full sample
Natives

New immigrant population
Full sample
Natives

-0.803***
(0.187)
1.892***
(0.288)

0.262
(0.207)
0.206
(0.256)

-0.172***
(0.0621)
0.576***
(0.0776)

0.126
(0.0786)
0.0639
(0.0772)

Yes
Yes
Yes
6,467,192
33.13/133.66
32.97/113.13

Yes
Yes
Yes
5,466,920
22.96/125.74
22.85/125.16

Yes
Yes
Yes
6,467,192
127.15/494.70
126.56/492.40

Yes
Yes
Yes
5,466,920
112.72/659.94
112.20/656.88

Notes: The regressions include other control variables such as age, age squared, immigrant status, marital status, race and education;
Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by metarea, industry and year ; *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 10%,
5% and 1% levels, respectively; The Angrist-Pischke χ2 and F statistics report the ﬁrst-stage test statistics of underidentiﬁcation
and weak identiﬁcation, respectively, of the two endogenous regressors.

Emp.

Unemp.

NILF.

Emp.

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

Yes
Yes
382
51.90
25.65

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

0.0576** -0.0348
(0.0253) (0.0976)

Yes
Yes
382
6.17
3.05

-0.0986
(0.307)

NILF.

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

0.212***
(0.0773)

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

0.603**
(0.281)

Emp.

NILF.

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

0.0104
(0.0063)

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

0.0438*
(0.0243)

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

0.0296** 0.124**
(0.0131) (0.0586)

Unemp.

Moved from other metareas
(prev. 5 yrs)

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by metarea; *, **, and *** indicate signiﬁcance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively; The
Angrist-Pischke χ2 and F statistics report the ﬁrst-stage test statistics of underidentiﬁcation and weak identiﬁcation, respectively, of the endogenous regressor.

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

Yes
Yes
438
51.90
25.65

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

Metarea FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

0.169*
(0.101)

Yes
Yes
438
6.17
3.05

Panel B: New immigrant population as immigrant ﬂow
Normalized immigrant ﬂow
0.865*** 0.102*** 0.359**
(0.329) (0.0361) (0.149)

Metarea FE
Year FE
Observations
Angrist-Pischke χ2 -statistics
Angrist-Pischke F-statistics

0.158***
(0.0552)

Unemp.

Pre-existing immigrants

Panel A: Changes in immigrant population as immigrant ﬂow
Normalized immigrant ﬂow
2.456*** 0.289*** 1.017***
0.481***
(0.646) (0.0957) (0.259)
(0.142)

Dependent variable:
Normalized employment change

Natives

Table 8: Population Change Regression Results (IV)

Wage in terms
of tradeables, w.

LTOT = LN + LI
ΔLI
θΔLI

LD = LT + LS

w0
w2
w1

.

a

.

b

Number of workers.
Figure 1: The effect of immigration
with inelastic and immobile labor supply.

Real wage, wREAL.
S

D

ΔLI

. .
a

w0
w1
S

ΔLI
b

Increase in
employment.

D
Number of workers.

Figure 2(a): The effect of immigration
when the ‘shot-in-the-arm’ effect is weak.

Real wage, wREAL.
S
ΔLI

.

w1
w0

.

b

a

ΔLI

S
D

Increase in
employment.

Number of workers.
Figure 2(b): The effect of immigration
when the ‘shot-in-the-arm’ effect is strong.

D

