NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDISTRIBUTION AND GROUP PARTICIPATION:
COMPARATIVE EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM AFRICA AND THE UK
Marcel Fafchamps
Ruth Vargas Hill
Working Paper 21127
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21127

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We have benefitted from comments from participants to the CSAE conference in March 2014, and
from seminar audiences at CESS (Nuffield College, Oxford), Dartmouth College, the University of
San Francisco, DIW (Berlin), UC Irvine, and CERDI (University of Auvergne, France). We thank
Hee Youn Kwon for her assistance implementing the 2012 experiment in Oxford, John Jensenius for
his invaluable help in running the 2014 Oxford sessions, and Nouhoum Traore for his assistance in
implementing the experiment in Uganda and Kenya. We˛are grateful to the CESS lab in Oxford and
to the lab at the Busara Center for Behavioural Economics, IPA, Nairobi for their assistance with the
experiment. Part of this work was undertaken whilst Ruth Hill was at the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI) in the CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets
(PIM) led by IFPRI. Funding support for this study was provided by the CGIAR Research Program
on Policies, Institutions, and Markets. Supplemental funding for the second batch of UK sessions was
provided by Stanford University. The opinions expressed here belong to the authors, and do not necessarily
reflect those of PIM, IFPRI, CGIAR, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Marcel Fafchamps and Ruth Vargas Hill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Redistribution and Group Participation: Comparative Experimental Evidence from Africa
and the UK
Marcel Fafchamps and Ruth Vargas Hill
NBER Working Paper No. 21127
April 2015
JEL No. D03,O17
ABSTRACT
We design an original laboratory experiment to investigate whether redistributive actions hinder the
formation of Pareto-improving groups. We test, in an anonymous setting with no feedback, whether
people choose to destroy or steal the endowment of others and whether they choose to give to others,
when granted the option. We then test whether subjects join a group that increases their endowment
but exposes them to redistribution. We conduct the experiment in three very different settings with
a priori different norms of pro-social behavior: a university town in the UK, the largest urban slum
in Kenya, and rural Uganda. We find a lot of commonality but also large differences between sites.
UK subjects behave in a more selfish and strategic way -- giving less, stealing more. Kenyan and Ugandan
subjects behave in a more altruistic and less strategic manner. However, pro-social norms are not always
predictive of joining behavior. African subjects are less likely to join a group when destruction or stealing
is permitted. It is as if they are less trusting even though they are more trustworthy. These findings
contradict the view that African current underdevelopment is due to a failure of generalized morality.

Marcel Fafchamps
Freeman Spogli Institute
Stanford University
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fafchamp@stanford.edu
Ruth Vargas Hill
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
rhill@worldbank.org

behave in a more altruistic and less strategic manner. However, pro-social norms are not
always predictive of joining behavior. African subjects are less likely to join a group when
destruction or stealing is permitted. It is as if they are less trusting even though they are
more trustworthy. These …ndings contradict the view that African current underdevelopment
is due to a failure of generalized morality.

1. Introduction
Economic e¢ ciency often cannot be achieved without team work. The provision of local public
goods, for instance, typically requires voluntary participation in a group –be it a parent-teacher
association (e.g., Coleman 1988, Pradhan et al. 2014), a community-based organization (e.g.,
Bernard et al. 2010), or a farmers’marketing cooperative (e.g., Cook 1995, Fafchamps and Hill
2005).
Building on the work of Olson (1971) and Ostrom (1990), a large literature has emerged that
seeks to understand the root causes of the underprovision of bene…cial local public goods. In
this literature much attention has been devoted to certain possible causes, such as free-riding
(e.g., Baland and Platteau 1995) and imperfect monitoring (e.g., Barr, Lindelow and Serneels
2009). The literature has also argued that equity considerations and redistribution pressures
a¤ect collective action in heterogeneous groups (e.g., Baland and Platteau 1995, Banerjee et al.
2005, Barr, Dekker and Fafchamps 2013). This is the mechanism we focus on, drawing on the
experimental literature on other-regarding preferences (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Charness
and Rabin 2002). In particular we test whether people choose to eschew the returns to joining
a group because of the ad hoc redistributive opportunities that arise once in the group.
We design an original laboratory experiment to investigate whether redistributive actions
hinder the formation of Pareto-improving groups. The experiment is designed such that there
is no room for free-riding and imperfect monitoring is not an issue. Subjects derive a purely
2

individual bene…t from joining a group, but expose themselves to ad hoc redistribution when
they join. Redistributive behavior is captured in three di¤erent, stylized ways described as ‘con…scating’, ‘taking’and ‘giving’to subjects and as ‘burning’, ‘stealing’, and ‘giving’(respectively)
in the related literature.
In ‘burning’treatments, subjects who join the group are given an opportunity to destroy all
or part of the endowment of others who join (e.g., Zizzo 2003a, Zizzo and Oswald 2001, Kebede
and Zizzo 2011). In ‘stealing’treatments, subjects who join can appropriate all or part of the
endowment of others who join (e.g., Zizzo 2003b). In ‘giving’treatments, group members can
give all or part of their endowment to other group members (e.g., Null 2011). Subjects must
pay a price to destroy or appropriate someone else’s endowment, or to transfer part of their
endowment to others. This price varies across treatments. To eliminate reputational concerns
and strategic considerations, play is anonymous throughout the experiment and subjects are not
provided any feedback about others’ play during or after the experiment. The purpose of the
experiment is to elicit behavior towards anonymous members of the same subject pool.
The experiment is implemented with three di¤erent populations: students in Oxford, England; slum dwellers in Nairobi, Kenya; and farmers in Uganda. The purpose of using such a
diverse subject pool is twofold. First, we are interested in obtaining generalizable results that
are not limited to speci…c subject populations, e.g., students in top universities. Second, we wish
to investigate whether human populations di¤er in their willingness to join e¢ ciency-enhancing
groups. The Oxford subject pool is chosen to facilitate comparison with other laboratory experiments, the majority of which involve university students in developed economies. To ensure the
robustness of our results, we run two sets of laboratory sessions on this population, two years
apart. The two African subject pools are chosen based on the commonly held perception that
developing economies –and especially those of Africa –have a social capital de…cit. Because of

3

this de…cit, opportunistic behavior is believed to weaken governance and undermine the provision of local public goods. To the extent that social capital is facilitated by common values and
ancestry, we expect the social capital de…cit to be strongest among city dwellers in an urban
slum. This is why we have chosen two sites in Africa, one rural, and the other urban.
We …nd many commonalities across the three subject pools: in all three, a few subjects
give away part of their endowment; some subjects destroy the payo¤ of others; and many more
appropriate (part of) others’endowment. There are also important di¤erences: stealing is more
prevalent in the UK subject pool; giving is more common in the two African populations; and
burning is least common among Nairobi slum dwellers. Although the three subject pools are
not directly comparable, this nevertheless contradicts the commonly held view that Africans are
more opportunistic in their relations with strangers.
We also investigate how burning, stealing and giving a¤ect the formation of Pareto-improving
groups. We …nd that subjects are less likely to join groups when such redistribution is possible,
but we do not …nd that joining a group is uniformly less common in subject populations that
redistribute more. In the burning and stealing treatments, joining a group is less common in
Kenya and Uganda even though subjects in these countries burn and steal less. In the giving
treatment, there is no di¤erence in the propensity to join a group between sites even though
giving is observed much more often in the two African experiments.
Although burning is uncommon in all three populations, a large proportion of African subjects refuse to join a group in the burning treatment, that is, when joining a group makes them
vulnerable to the destruction of their endowment. This feature is less robust in the UK study
population. In contrast, many UK subjects refrain from joining a group when joining enables
them give some of their endowment away. This is true even though UK subjects are also the
least likely to give among the three subject populations.

4

To investigate these …ndings further, we compare subjects’behavior to archetypes of sel…sh
and other-regarding preferences discussed in the literature – i.e., altruistic and invidious preferences, inequality aversion, and warm glow. The choices of most subjects do no satisfy any of
these archetypes. One in ten UK participants behaves consistently in a sel…sh manner, fewer in
Uganda and Kenya. One in seven African participants behaves in a way consistent with altruist
or warm glow preferences, compared to only one percent in the UK population. This con…rms
that there is more fairness towards strangers in the two African sites.
At the end of the experiment but before revealing payo¤s, participants were asked to estimate
other players’propensity to burn, steal, and give. We …nd that subjects massively overestimate
burning and giving by other participants. They also overestimate the frequency of stealing, but
to a lesser extent. Many subjects join a group in the stealing treatment, but are less likely to do
so when they expect others to steal more. We also …nd that subjects who give more are more
likely to join a group in the giving treatment, and subjects who steal more are more likely to
join a group in the stealing treatment, suggesting that some subjects join a group in order to
give or to steal.
Our results suggest that group formation can be hindered by the fear of endowment destruction by other group members, even if such destruction is uncommon. This may be because
people …nd such destruction emotionally painful and seek to avoid it even if the …nancial cost
of doing so is large. We also …nd that some people refrain from joining a group that makes
it possible to give to others. More research is needed on this issue, for which African and UK
participants di¤er.
These …ndings complement the existing literature in several ways. Jakiela and Ozier (2013)
use an experiment to show that social pressure to share income causes individuals to forgo
investment returns. This is consistent with our …nding that individuals are more likely to

5

forgo the return to joining a group when they perceive forced redistribution to be more likely.
Goldberg et al (2013) …nds that the impact of a commitment savings product on saving behavior
is consistent with the need to resist demands to give to others. This is consistent with our …nding
that some people avoid situations (e.g., joining a group) that generate opportunities to give to
others. This paper adds further insight to this …nding, by showing that people also avoid
situations even when giving is unsolicited and anonymous. One possible explanation is that
individuals face an internal pressure to give, and are willing to incur a reduction in payo¤ to
avoid this internal pressure and, presumably, the associated guilt (e.g., Battigali and Dufwenberg
2009). This avoidance is stronger among non-African subjects.
The …ndings also have signi…cant relevance for public policy, particularly in Kenya and
Uganda where formalized social insurance systems are weak and where various forms of ad hoc
redistribution are relied upon to help those in need. The widespread presence of informal redistributive mechanisms is a common justi…cation given by Ugandan policy makers for not investing
in formal, public insurance. The results of this work suggest that redistributive behavior may
nonetheless discourage the formation of groups that bring about pareto-improving returns.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the experimental design in detail.
A conceptual framework is introduced in Section 3 and is used to generate testable predictions
about preference archetypes often used in economics. Experimental choices and joining decisions
are analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.

2. Experimental Design
The ultimate objective of the experiment is to identify the motivations individuals have when
they consider joining a group that raises individual payo¤s but allows di¤erent types of redistribution among subjects. This is an extremely common situation that arises whenever people

6

pool resources for the generation of a common good or service. Examples include ride sharing,
co-authorship among researchers, and farmers’ marketing cooperatives. Market transactions
also fall in this general category.1 To keep the focus on individual motivations, we deliberately
omit externalities, strategic interactions, reputation, and feedback. We also do our best to avoid
contextualizing the choices people make so as to avoid framing e¤ects.
The experiment is divided into three parts.2 Each part is divided into multiple rounds
played among sets of three players. The identity of all players is kept anonymous throughout
the experiment and sets are reshu- ed each round so that, within each part, subjects never play
against the same subject twice. At the beginning of each round t each subject i receives an
endowment eit for that round. Endowments vary across subjects within each round, with no
carry-over across rounds.
In the …rst part subjects are automatically assigned to a group of three subjects. Each
subject is then given the choice to destroy, appropriate, or transfer endowments within the
group in a precise way we describe below. The …rst three rounds of part 1 are practice rounds
that do not a¤ect …nal payo¤s. In the second part subjects can elect to join a group, in which
case their endowment eit is multiplied by pt

1. The third part combines parts 1 and 2, that

is, subjects …rst choose whether to join a group, in which case their endowment is multiplied by
pt . They then choose how much to destroy, appropriate, or transfer within the group. Subjects
who do not join the group keep their initial endowment eit . Subjects are never told the burning,
stealing, or giving choices of other participants. They are only told their …nal aggregate payo¤
at the end of the experiment.
The three treatments, dubbed here ‘burning’, ‘stealing’ and ‘giving’, all follow the same
1

A market transaction can be seen as the formation of a group of two individuals pooling resources (e.g., money
and a good or service) to achieve mutually bene…cial gains. Scope for redistribution arises in several ways, such
as price bargaining, hold-up and renegotiation, or poor contractual performance.
2
The Oxford experiment includes a fourth part that is not used in the analysis and is ignored from this paper.

7

general design. Each subject is told the endowment pt ejt of each other subject j in their group
in that round. They can then choose to a¤ect pt ejt as follows. In a given round t each subject
in a set of three subjects faces the same treatment. This is common knowledge.
In the burning treatment, the subject chooses

ijt ,

with 0

1 for each j, such that

ijt

payo¤s of subjects are determined as:

it

= pt eit

X

bt

pt ejt

j2Nit ijt
jt

= pt ejt (1

ijt )

where Nit is the set of players in i’s group in round t.3 Parameter pt captures the e¢ ciency
gain from joining a group. Parameter
of j. Parameters pt and

bt

bt

captures the cost to i of destroying the endowment

are common to all subjects in a set of three, and this is common

knowledge.
To illustrate, let Nit = f2; 3g, eit = 4, e2t = 6, e3t = 2; pt = 1:5,
and

i3t

bt

= 0:1, and

i2t

= 50%

= 0%. Payo¤s are:

it

= 6

0:1

(0:5

9+0

2t

= 9(1

0:5) = 4:50

3t

= 3(1

0) = 3:00

3) = 5:55

In this example subject i has destroyed part of subject 2’s endowment, ensuring that j now
receives a payo¤ lower than his own. Burning is obviously wasteful since it reduces aggregate
payo¤s by (1 +

bt )

P

j2Nit

ijt pt ejt .

In the above examples, the e¢ ciency waste is 4:95 –what

3
In the z-tree code we impose the restriction that it
0 – a subject cannot spend more than his/her
endowment pt eit to destroy the payo¤ of other subjects. In practice, this restriction is never binding.

8

subject 2 loses plus what i pays to destroy subject 2’s endowment. Player 2 is also asked to
independently make choices about

2it

and

23t ,

and similarly for player 3.

In the stealing treatment, payo¤s are given by:

it

= pt eit + (1

st )

X

ijt pt ejt

j2Nit
jt

with 0 <

st

= pt ejt (1

ijt )

< 1 the parameter capturing the (e¢ ciency) cost of stealing from others.

In the giving treatment, payo¤s follow:

it

= pt eit (1

gt

X

ijt )

j2Nit
jt

Here parameter

gt

= pt ejt +

ijt pt eit

captures the e¢ ciency loss or gain from giving to others: if

e¢ ciency enhancing –it costs less than

ijt

gt

< 1 giving is

to i to transfer kijt to j –and vice versa if

gt

> 1.4

At the end of the experiment, three rounds are selected at random and payo¤s are determined
based on play during these three rounds only. Within each of the selected round, one of the
subjects in a group is then randomly selected. His or her choices in that round determine the
payo¤s of all three players in the set. This rules out any strategic interaction between players
in burning, stealing and giving decisions, and is akin to a dictator game setup. Players who,
in parts 2 and 3, elect not to join a group receive a payo¤

it

= eit . All these features are

explained to all subjects at the beginning of the experiment. Subjects are never told the choices
kjit of other participants and, since they are only told their aggregate payo¤ at the end of the
4

In the z-tree code, we impose the restriction that i cannot give more than he/she has. In practice this
restriction is not binding.

9

experiment, it is impossible for them to work them out from their …nal payo¤. Before being
told their …nal payo¤, subjects answer a short questionnaire about their expectations regarding
burning, stealing and giving by other participants.
The experiment was implemented in z-tree (Fischbacher 1999). In the United Kingdom
we ran two batches of sessions. The …rst batch was run in September 2012 at the Centre
for Experimental Social Sciences at Nu¢ eld College, Oxford. The second batch was run in
September 2014 using the same laboratory and subject pool. In Kenya the sessions were run in
March 2013 at the Busara laboratory in Nairobi. In Uganda, the experiment was run in Masaka
in April 2013 with co¤ee growers from Masaka district. The code used in Nairobi and Masaka
was designed for use with touchscreen tablets, so that people who were not familiar with using
computers could easily be instructed how to play. The screens were made as visual as possible
to facilitate play by those with limited levels of formal education.
There are small di¤erences in z-tree code between the …rst batch of Oxford sessions and the
other three batches of sessions. In the 2012 Oxford sessions, there were 7 rounds in part 1 and
3 of the game and 2 rounds in part 2 of the game. In all subsequent sessions there were fewer
rounds to minimize participant fatigue (5, 1 and 5 rounds in parts 1, 2 and 3 respectively). In
Oxford each 2012 session contained 24 participants. In Nairobi, Masaka, and the 2014 Oxford
sessions, the number of participants in each session was 18. We conducted 11 and 9 sessions in
Nairobi and Masaka, respectively. In Oxford 8 sessions were conducted in 2012 and 4 sessions in
2014. In the two African sites the instructions were read out to maximize the chance that they
were properly understood. The set of parameter vectors used in the experiments is the same for
all sessions except the 2012 sessions, which sometimes use di¤erent parameter values. There are
some other small di¤erences between the 2012 Oxford sessions and all the others.5
5

Compared to the 2012 Oxford sessions, all the other sessions use larger fonts and occasional color in the
z-tree visual display. The 2012 Oxford sessions include an additional part administered at the end. This part was

10

3. Conceptual framework
Our experimental design is closely related to the well-known Dictator Game. In the Dictator
Game a player is anonymously matched with another player in a one-shot interaction (as in our
experiment, given all players in our experiment were matched with each other player only once
in each part of the experiment) and is provided with a sum of money. The player must decide
how to divide this sum of money between himself or herself and the partner with whom he or
she is matched. This is very similar to the ‘giving’version of our game in which a player decides
how much of an allotted sum of money to divide with the other player. The ‘stealing’game of
our experiment is also similar, although it is the partner that decides what the share should be.
The di¤erence in our context is that the cost of giving (stealing) is varied across rounds. As such
our giving experiment is identical to the modi…ed Dictator Game used in Andreoni and Miller
(2002) and Andreoni and Vesterlund (2001) in which the cost of giving is also varied. They
…nd, as we do, that the amount of money given falls as the cost of giving increases. Andreoni
and Vesterlund (2001) also …nd that, when giving is cheap, men are more altruistic. But they
are more responsive to the price of giving so that, when giving is expensive, women are more
altruistic.

3.1. Predicted play and preferences over outcomes
The …rst part of the experiment reveals information about individual preferences over outcomes.
The experiment was designed to distinguish among six preference archetypes commonly used in
economics. To simplify the presentation, we drop the time index from the notation.
The …rst archetype, which we refer to as ‘sel…sh’, equates the utility of subject i with his or
subsequently dropped and is not discussed here. The 2012 Oxford sessions make more of an e¤ort to use neutral
language throughout – e.g., ‘to eliminate’ rather than ‘to con…scate’, ‘to appropriate’ rather than ‘to take’; and
‘to transfer’rather than ‘to give’. These words were often beyond the English language comprehension of African
subjects, which is why we use a more direct language all other sessions.

11

her payo¤

i,

i.e.:
UiS =

i

The second archetype captures altruism a la Becker, represented as:

UiA =

i

+

ni

X

j

j2Ni

where ni = f0; 1; 2g is the number of subjects in group Ni . Parameter

represents the strength

of altruism. Concern for aggregate e¢ ciency (e.g., Charness and Rabin 2002) can be represented
as:
UiE =

i

+

X

j

j2Ni

It is equivalent to setting

= ni in the altruism model.

Invidious (or rival or spiteful) preferences can be represented as:

UiR =

i

ni

X

j

j2Ni

Here individuals derive dissatisfaction from others doing well.6 Following Okada and Reidl
(2005), altruistic and invidious preferences can be combined into a single utility function characterized by inequality aversion (Fehr and Schmidt 1999):

UiI =

with

0 and

i

ni

X

mj >mi

j

ij

j

ni

X

mj <mi

j

i

jj

0. These preferences nest altruistic and invidious preferences as follows.

6

Unlike Blanch‡ower and Oswald (20XX), we write utility in levels, not in logs, but as long as the magnitude
of payo¤s is relatively similar across games, this should not matter in terms of inference. Using levels facilitates
comparison with other utility functions.

12

Let

=

. We have:

UiI

=
=

i

ni

i (1

X

(

+ )

from which we see that preferences are altruistic if

i)

j

j2Ni

ni

X

j

j2Ni

< 0 and invidious if

> 0.

We also consider the possibility of warm glow preferences de…ned as:
0

Ui = @

i

X

j2Ni

1

gij A + !(1

G)

X

gij

j2Ni

where ! is the warm glow parameter, gij is a transfer from i to j, and G is the Gini coe¢ cient
of the gij ’s calculated over the neighborhood of i, Ni . It is clear that 1

G is maximized when

G = 0 and thus when all gij ’s are equal. This last feature is inspired by Null (2011) …ndings
regarding giving to charities.
Through straightforward though tedious algebra, it is possible to derive predictions for burning, stealing and giving as follows. To simplify the presentation, let us de…ne an absolute transfer
from j to i as kij

ij pej

for burning and stealing, and kij =

ij pei

for giving. Predicted choices

of kij are summarized in Table 1 for di¤erent preference archetypes.

13

B u rn in g

S te a lin g

0

S e l…sh

p

k ij = p

s > ni =>

0

E ¢ c ie nt

0

j

s < ni =>

0

A ltru ist

G iv in g

g<

j

k ij = 0

ni

=>

g>
g<

0

ni

b < ni =>

k ij = p

j

R iva l

b > ni =>
In e q . ave rsio n

p

j>

p

i

b < +ni =>

k ij = p

b > +ni =>

j

1

p

Wa rm g low

j

kij = p

1 => k ij = 0

p

j

0

p

j

0

k ij = 0

i

0

P

i
b

0
j<

kij = p

k ij = 0

In e q . ave rsio n

p

j

s<

s < ni

=> k ij > 0

g<

ni

=> k ij > 0

s > ni

=> k ij = 0

g>

ni

=> k ij = 0

! => k ij > 0;
s>

p

! => k ij = 0

ij

! > 1 => k ij = pnii
! < 1 => k ij = 0

Table 1. Behavioral predictions from preference archetypes

Sel…sh players are predicted to give and burn nothing, and to steal everything. Altruistic
players are predicted to burn nothing, to steal only when altruism is low and the price of stealing
is high, and to give only when altruism is high and the price of giving is low. E¢ cient players
burn and steal nothing, since doing so reduces aggregate e¢ ciency. They give only when what
they give is topped up by a matching grant. Invidious players steal everything and give nothing.
They burn everything if they are su¢ ciently invidious and the price of burning is low. The
predicted behavior of inequality averse players depends on whether their endowment is higher
14

i

=> k ij = 0

1 =>

g>

P

i

or lower than the other player. If it is lower, they behave in a way similar to invidious players;
if it is higher they behave like altruistic players. Warm glow players give if the cost of giving is
lower than the warm glow e¤ect; they steal if the cost of stealing is lower than the warm glow
e¤ect.
Building on these predictions, we select parameters p and

b;

s

and

g

in such a way that

if a player consistently follows one of the above archetypes, the combination of choices made
during the experiment reveals their type. Selected parameters are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Selected parameters
Parameter

Range of values

Return to joining the group p

1.05 to 2.5

Cost of burning

b

0.05 to 1

Cost of stealing

s

0.1 to 1.2

Cost of giving

0.1 to 2

g

Ratio of high to medium endowment

1.5

Ratio of low to medium endowment

0.5

3.2. The decision to join
The decision to join depends on the action that subjects plan to take, and on what they expect
other subjects to do. In the giving treatment, players should join if they have any of the six
preference archetypes discussed so far. Those who, according to Table 1, give nothing should
join because doing so multiplies their payo¤ by p > 1, even if they expect to receive nothing.
Those who, in Table 1, wish to give should join because doing so increases their material payo¤
as above while at the same time increasing their utility through giving and, possibly, receiving.
In the burning treatment, only invidious players – and inequality averse players with a low
endowment –derive utility from burning. Other players join if the material gain from joining is
15

larger than the expected loss from burning by other players. It follows that all players should
be more likely to join if p is large and if they expect less burning by others.
In the stealing treatment things are more complicated. Players who plan to steal – which,
according to Table 1, is most of them – derive a expected utility gain from joining if their
allocation is selected to determine …nal payo¤s. But they also expect a utility loss if other
players steal from them and their allocation is not selected. It follows that the decision to join
should increase in p and decrease in the expectation of stealing by other players. It should
also decrease with the player’s initial endowment in the round because someone with a low
endowment has more to gain, and less to lose, from stealing.

3.3. Preferences over process
So far we have assumed that subjects make choices purely based on …nal material outcomes, and
do not take into account how these material outcomes are achieved. This ignores the possibility
that subjects …nd certain choices more morally acceptable than others. Given our experimental
design, three considerations are potentially relevant.
First, subjects may feel guilt from taking actions that they consider morally reprehensible,
such as burning or stealing. This is true even though, in the presentation of the experiment,
we use slightly more neutral language such as ‘con…scate’and ‘take’rather than burn and steal.
People from developing countries are often thought to be more morally corrupt (e.g., Fisman
and Miguel 2007, Barr and Serra 2010). Based on this, we expect more burning and stealing in
the African study populations than in the UK.
Second, subjects may anticipate feeling angry at discovering their endowment has been
burned or stolen. Even if they cannot infer the actions of other players, they nevertheless
realize that joining a group enables others to burn or steal their endowment. If they resent this

16

possibility enough, they may elect not to join a group even if the expected material gain from
joining is positive. Put di¤erently, people may attach such a negative subjective utility to being
burned or robbed that even a small probability of such occurrence steers them away from joining
a group.7 If burning and stealing are more prevalent in Africa, people may have adjusted to it.
If so, we expect the subjective cost of having endowment destroyed or stolen is less pronounced
there.
Third, subjects may feel less inhibited to steal or burn other subjects’ endowment if they
could have chosen not to join the group. Their reasoning may be something like ‘They joined
to burn or steal my endowment, so why should I refrain from doing the same to them’. This
line of reasoning is somewhat similar to the idea of reciprocity proposed by Charness and Rabin
(2002) to describe preferences over process: ‘I do to you what I believe you are doing to me’.
Alternatively, they may reason that ‘They could have avoided my burning or stealing by not
joining the group. Having joined, they asked for it and they are fair game’. This second line of
reasoning is distantly related to the literature on trolley experiments which argues that people
feel less guilt when their actions a¤ect outcomes via external devices or other people’s choices
(e.g., Greene 2012, Mikhael 2011).

4. Summary of experimental results
4.1. Descriptive tables
Table 3 summarizes average play in the four batches of experimental sessions. Table 4 summarizes answers to questions about expectations relative to other subjects’behavior.8 There is a
lot of similarity in Tables 3 and 4 across the two batches of Oxford sessions, suggesting that the
7

Another illustration of the same idea is when people pay more to protect their assets than the anticipated
loss from theft.
8
Some expectation questions were not asked to Kenyan participants in the …rst two sessions because of a
technical glitch, hence the smaller number of observations.

17

slight di¤erences in experimental setting did not overly a¤ect behavior.
When subjects are automatically assigned to a group (Part 1), we observe slightly more
burning and giving in the practice rounds, possibly because subjects are experimenting with the
range of actions they can take. There are strong di¤erences between the three study populations
in Part 1: in both 2012 and 2014 sessions UK participants steal more and give less than their
African counterparts; Kenyan participants burn less and give less than Ugandans, but have
a similar propensity to steal. These results contradict the view that Africans behave more
opportunistically in an anonymous setting: if anything, our African subjects behave in less
morally reprehensible way.
In the second part of the game, joining is a dominant strategy for all preference archetypes,
since joining increases the subject’s payo¤. This is indeed what we observe: most participants
join, although a signi…cant proportion of Ugandan subjects do not. This could indicate that
they understand the game less well (or trust the experiment less) than more experienced subjects
from the UK and Kenya.
In part 3, group participation drops in all three treatments across the three study populations.
In the two African study sites, joining falls the most in the burning treatment. The fall is
particularly pronounced in the Uganda population, with three …fth of the participants refraining
from joining a group in spite of the large material gain associated with it. This fall in group
participation could be either because participants expect more burning, or because they associate
it with a larger subjective utility loss – or both. From Table 4 we see that African subjects,
and particularly Ugandan subjects, expect a lot more burning than UK subjects. As shown
in Table 3, however, expectations about burning are pessimistic: there is much less burning
by African subjects than they themselves anticipate. In fact, burning is least prevalent in
the Kenyan sample. One possible interpretation is that African subjects do not behave more

18

opportunistically than UK subjects –in fact, as shown in Table 3, they often behave more fairly.
But they are more pessimistic, i.e., they are less likely to trust others to behave pro-socially in an
anonymous setting, and this is what undermines the formation of e¢ ciency-enhancing groups.
In the two African subject pools there is more group participation in the stealing than in
the burning treatment. In contrast, among UK subjects and across both batches of sessions,
participation is higher in the burning treatment. There are several possible explanations for
this: (a) African subjects expect less stealing than UK subjects; (b) they hope to steal more;
or (c) they strongly dislike the prospect of their endowment being destroyed by someone else.
From Table 4 we see that African subjects expect much less stealing than UK subjects, which
suggests that reason (a) may explain the divergence. From Table 3 we note that African subjects
steal less than UK subjects. This pretty much rules out explanation (b). It could also be the
case that African subjects, who expect more burning, have a strong dislike for such destruction
(reason c), and this dislike is stronger than the dislike they have for having their endowment
appropriated (but not destroyed) by others.
In the 2012 sessions, nearly one third of UK subjects do not join a group in the giving
treatment. This is surprising since very few UK participants give anything. It is true that few of
them expect to receive anything from other subjects (Table 4), so this cannot serve as a motive
to join. But by failing to join a group, they forfeit a sizeable increase in payo¤.9 The same
pattern is not repeated in the 2014 sessions when joining is more frequent. In these sessions UK
subjects hardly give anything at all.
9
What could account for this behavior? One possibility is that, by not joining, they are trying to avoid the guilt
they would perceive for not giving. But if this guilt is larger than the payo¤ increase from group participation,
why not give part of it to others and avoid the guilt from not giving altogether? Another possibility is that, by
not joining, UK subjects avoid the akwardness that arises if they give and others do not, or if they do not give
and others do. Since the experimental design precludes coordination, such outcomes cannot be avoided. If UK
participants have a strong dislike for either of these discordant outcomes, they may prefer to forfeit the payo¤
gain from joining. This interpretation could be seen as an extension of Charness and Rabin’s (2002) reciprocity
idea.

19

In contrast, a sizeable proportion of Kenyan and Ugandan subjects give to others. They
are also highly likely to join a group in the giving treatment (Table 3). In fact, for Ugandan
subjects, joining is almost twice as common under this treatment than in the burning treatment.
Kenyan and Ugandan participants also expect to receive more than those in the UK (Table 4),
and those in Uganda expect to receive the most. It remains that the proportion of subjects who
give is much smaller than the proportion of subjects who expect to receive –or who state that
others expect them to give (see Table 4). This means that there is a signi…cant proportion of
subjects who (often erroneously) expect to receive but do not give. This may explain why they
join a group.

4.2. Regression analysis of burning, stealing and giving
To verify the statistical signi…cance and robustness of our results to clustering, we replicate
the various panels of Table 3 in a regression format. Robust standard errors are reported
throughout, clustered at the session level. We begin with burning, stealing, and giving choices.
The dependent variable is

it ,

that is, the proportion of the endowment of the other players that

is burned or stolen by i or the proportion of i’s endowment that is given by i to the other players.
We pool decisions taken under part 1 –when joining is automatic –and part 3 –when joining
is free. But we interact regressors with the free joining dummy, which is equivalent to having
di¤erent average decisions for parts 1 and 3. The 2014 Oxford batch dummy is the omitted
category.
Regression results, which are reported in Table 5, con…rm that on average there is signi…cantly less stealing and more giving by African subjects. There is also signi…cantly more stealing
when joining is free (part 3), a …nding consistent with the idea that subjects feel less inhibited
to steal from individuals who could have protected their endowment by opting out of the group.

20

This …nding is common to all three subject populations, but is strongest for the 2014 Oxford
sessions. We also …nd signi…cantly more giving in Kenya when joining is free, which suggests
that subjects who join are those who wish to give.
In Table 6 we repeat the same analysis but using as observations all individual choices
ijt

made by experimental subjects.10 We also introduce dyad-speci…c choice parameters as

additional regressors. These parameters are organized into four groups: the price of burning,
stealing or giving (
the group eit (pt

bt ;

st

or

gt );

the initial endowment of the player eit ; the gain from joining

1); and the endowment of the other player pt ejt . To correct for di¤erences

in average endowments across the four sets of sessions, we normalize (i.e., divide) the initial
endowment, gain from joining, and endowment of the other players by the average endowment
eit in the session batch. Since all choice parameters are orthogonal to each other by construction,
similar results are obtained if we limit the regressors to one set of choice parameters at a time.
All choice parameters are interacted with batch dummies, except for the

parameters which

show too little variation for interaction coe¢ cients to be identi…ed. We also include a dummy for
the order in which choices are made –by design, subjects are always …rst asked about the other
player with the largest initial endowment. We estimate a separate regression for each treatment
and we cluster standard errors by experimental session.
To facilitate comparison with Table 5, columns (1), (3) and (5) present results without choice
parameters. Results are quite similar to those reported in Table 5: less stealing and more giving
among African subjects; more stealing when joining is free, mostly in the Oxford 2014 sessions;
and more giving in Kenya when joining is free. We also note less burning and less stealing from
the second other player, the one with the lower endowment pt ejt of the two.
Some results change once we control for choice parameters in columns (2), (4) and (6). We
10

In groups of 3, each subject makes two decisions, one for each of the other group members.

21

…rst observe that there is signi…cantly less burning and stealing when the price

of burning or

stealing is high. If we refer to Table 1, we note that this …nding is not consistent with purely
sel…sh preferences, since in this case burning and stealing is always 0 and thus does not depend
on . Sensitivity of burning to
and sensitivity of stealing to

b
s

is consistent with invidious preferences or inequality aversion;
is consistent with altruist preferences, inequality aversion, or

warm glow. On this basis, it appears that the average experimental subject combines elements
of invidious preferences and altruism, as in inequality aversion.
In contradiction with theoretical Table 1, we …nd no systematic variation in burning, stealing
or giving as a function of one’s own endowment. This is di¢ cult to reconcile with inequality
aversion, that is, with the idea that subject seek to correct a di¤erence between their endowment
and that of the other player. We …nd less stealing when the gain from joining the group is larger.
This …nding is common to all four batches of sessions. We …nd more stealing from players who
received a larger endowment in all batches except Kenya where the e¤ect is, if anything, reversed.
This e¤ect is particularly strong in the 2012 Oxford sessions, and is consistent with invidious
preferences or inequality aversion. Finally, we …nd less giving to players with a large endowment,
which is consistent with altruism and inequality aversion.
All these results are robust to alternative speci…cations such as adding round dummies.
There seems to be no learning across rounds, which is to be expected given that no information
was fed back to participants during the experiment.

4.3. Preference archetypes
The experiment was designed to enable us to assign subjects to one of six preference archetypes
based on their burning, stealing and giving decisions, assuming that a single archetype would
guide all their choices. We report in Table 7 the result of such an e¤ort. We proceed as follows.

22

Based on model predictions summarized in Table 1 and discussed in Section 3, we identify a
series of choices that contradict a particular archetype. For instance, if a subject destroys (part
of) the endowment of another subject, this person cannot be sel…sh, altruist, e¢ cient, or warm
glow – the subject can only be invidious or inequality averse. Similarly, anyone who does not
burn always is not invidious, etc. Based on this we can rule out that a subject has preferences
corresponding to a given archetype if this person makes choices that sometimes contradict this
archetype.
In the …rst panel of Table 7 we report the proportion of subjects whose choices violate 3,
4, 5 or all the 6 archetypes at least once. We …nd that, in all three subject populations, most
subjects violate all six archetypes, i.e., make choices that are not consistent with consistently
following one of our six archetypes. In other words, these archetypes are unable to account for
the choices made by the overwhelming majority of subjects.
In the second panel of Table 7, we report the proportion of subjects who never violate a
given archetype over the experiment. None of the six archetypes we investigate can account
for a majority of the choices made by experimental subjects. In the UK sample, the archetype
that ‘…ts’ the largest proportion of subjects is the sel…sh archetype, followed by 9-11% of the
subjects. This proportion falls to 4% in Kenya and Uganda. In these two populations, the
altruist and warm glow archetypes …t the largest proportion of subjects. These results con…rm
earlier …ndings: a sizeable though small proportion of African subjects behave in a manner that
is consistent with altruistic or, at least, warm glow preferences. This proportion among UK
participants is negligible.
In Table 8 we take a similar approach but focus on individual choices, not individual subjects.
We report, for each country, the proportion of choices made that violate a particular archetype
in each of the three treatments. Some treatments are not designed to rule out a given archetype,

23

in which case the percent of choices that violate it is zero. Moreover, some of the choices have
parameter values that cannot rule out certain archetypes.
With these caveats in mind, we note that the choices made by UK subjects are less likely to
violate the sel…sh archetype than choices made in Kenya and Uganda. In contrast, choices made
by African subjects are less likely to violate the warm glow archetype than UK subjects. The
biggest di¤erence between UK and African subjects is apparent in the giving treatment where
only 8-16% of UK subjects violate the sel…sh archetype –i.e., give something; the proportion is
much larger in the two African countries. At the same time, the warm glow archetype is violated
by 94-99% of UK subjects’choices, but only by 79% and 74% of the choices made by Kenyan
and Ugandan subjects.

4.4. Regression analysis of joining
Next we turn to regression analysis to examine the extent to which joining a group varies with
choice parameters and across the three study populations. We include the information known
to the subject at the time the decision to join is made: the initial endowment of the subject
eit ; the gain from joining, de…ned as before as eit (pt
giving (

bt ;

st

or

gt ),

1); and the price of burning, stealing or

depending on the treatment.

Results are presented in Table 9 separately for each of the three treatments, using a linear
probability model with robust standard errors clustered by experimental session. We …nd that,
for the stealing treatment, subjects for all three populations are more likely to join if the payo¤
increase from joining eit (pt

1) is higher. This is consistent with theoretical predictions. For

the giving and burning treatments, the payo¤ increase eit (pt

1) increases the probability of

joining among UK subjects, albeit with some di¤erences across the two batches of sessions. But
this increase has little or no e¤ect on the probability of joining among African subjects: the

24

coe¢ cient on gain from joining is positive for the omitted category (UK 2014) but this positive
e¤ect is more or less cancelled for the Kenya and Uganda subject pools. While the contrast is
striking, for the giving treatment this behavior is consistent with theoretical predictions based
on preferences de…ned over outcomes: everybody should join in the giving treatment, as long as
the gain from joining is positive. UK subjects, however, are more likely to join when eit (pt

1)

is higher which, combined with the fact that fewer UK subjects join in the giving treatment,
suggest that there is some subjective cost to joining that can only be overcome by the promise
of a larger material gain. This e¤ect is particularly strong in the 2012 UK sessions.
Next we observe that UK subjects are less likely to join a group in the burning and stealing
treatments when their initial endowment eit is large. Since joining increases their endowment
proportionally by a factor pt , this …nding seems to suggest that subjects expect to lose proportionally more when they have a large endowment. In other words, they expect proportionally
more burning and stealing when their endowment is larger than that of other players – which
is not what we observe. For the two African populations, the e¤ect of eit on joining is either
small or not present: the negative coe¢ cient on own endowment is more or less cancelled out
by interaction terms with the Kenya and Uganda dummies. This …nding is consistent with the
observation from Table 6 that stealing and burning do not signi…cantly increase as a proportion
of endowment.
For giving we …nd a similar pattern: less joining among UK subjects with a large endowment,
but a smaller or non-signi…cant e¤ect among the two African populations. Since UK subjects
give very rarely, this suggests that UK subjects with a large endowment incur a larger subjective
disutility from joining, perhaps because they believe they should give more if they join. This
again is consistent with the idea that UK subjects do not join to avoid the painful dilemma of
deciding whether to give or not.

25

From Table 9 we also see that participants are less likely to join a group in the stealing
treatment if the price of stealing

s

is high. If subjects thought that a high

s

would deter

stealing by others, they should be more likely to join. Since we observe the opposite, this
suggests that some subjects join in the hope of stealing from others – and steal more when
s

is low, as we have seen in Table 6. We also …nd that subjects are less likely to join in the

giving treatment if the price of giving

g

is high. What does this reveal about their motivation?

We know that few people give, so that for most people the main bene…t from joining is the
increase in material payo¤ eit (pt

1). Since we control for eit (pt

1) independently,

g

should

have little or no e¤ect of the probability of joining. From Table 4, however, we also know that
many people expect to receive something from others. Perhaps they expect to receive less when
g

large. Since joining is materially bene…cial for most players in the giving treatment, one

way to explain this …nding is that joining generates a negative subjective cost that must be
compensated somehow by the expectation of a larger material gain for subjects to join.

4.5. Introducing expectations
As discussed in Section 3, the decision to join should depend on how subjects expect other
participants to behave. If they expect others to burn or steal their endowment, they should be
more reluctant to join the group in these two treatments. In contrast, if they expect to receive
a lot from others, they should be more willing to join in the giving treatment. To investigate
this idea, we reestimate Table 9 with additional regressors for the subject’s expectation of play
by other participants, on its own and interacted with country dummies.
For this regression to be fully convincing, we must control for the subject’s intended play.
To illustrate the issue, remember that people who intend to steal a lot have an incentive to
join. Now imagine that subjects who expect others to steal a lot also steal a lot themselves.

26

If we control for expectations but not own play, we may falsely assign to a high expectation
of stealing by others a behavior that is in fact driven by an intention to steal from others. To
correct for this, we construct a variable that summarizes each participant’s burning, stealing, and
giving decisions made in part 1 (excluding practice rounds). Since subjects receive absolutely
no feedback about others’play during the experiment, play in part 1 should be a good predictor
of intended play in part 3.
Regression results are summarized in Table 10. We …nd no pattern regarding the stealing
treatment. African subjects are slightly more likely to join in the giving treatment when they
expect to receive more, but the e¤ect is only signi…cant for Kenya. Results are stronger in the
burning treatment: joining is less likely for UK 2014 subjects who expect more burning, but
the e¤ect is absent or reversed for the other three batches of sessions. We also …nd that UK
2014 subjects are less likely to join if they burned a lot in Part 1, but the e¤ect is reversed for
all three other batches of sessions: in those sessions, subjects who burned more in Part 1 are
more likely to join a group in the burning treatment, suggesting that their desire to burn partly
motivates their decision to join. Since we observe some contrasting patterns between the two
sets of UK sessions, we should probably regard these …ndings as insu¢ ciently robust to be fully
conclusive.
In Table 11 we examine whether expectations of others’play help predict own play in Part
1 and Part 3 of the experiment. We …nd in the UK study population a strong association
between own play and expectations of others’play. This is true in all treatments, in both parts
of the experiment, and the two batches of UK sessions. In the two African countries, however,
this association tends to be weaker. This particularly noticeable in the stealing treatment,
for which both Kenya and Uganda have signi…cantly negative coe¢ cients on the interaction
between expectations and the country dummy. Point estimates are also mostly negative in

27

burning, although signi…cantly so in one case only. Why this is the case is unclear.

5. Conclusion and discussion
In this paper we have reported the results from a laboratory experiment conducted in the United
Kingdom, Kenya, and Uganda, with three di¤erent subject pools. We test whether people in a
group choose to destroy or steal the endowment of others, if given the option, and whether they
choose to give some of their endowment to others. We also test whether subjects are less likely
to join a group when doing so increases their endowment but exposes them to redistribution.
The experimental setting precludes any feedback between subjects during and at the end of the
experiment. Play is anonymous and subjects never play twice with the same subject within the
same part of the experiment.
We …nd a lot of commonality across the three subject populations –little giving and burning,
much more stealing. We also …nd large di¤erences between African and UK subjects. If anything
UK subjects behave in a more sel…sh and strategic way –giving less, stealing more. They also
are less likely to join a group when doing so enables them to receive from others, and to transfer
part of their endowment to others. Why this is the case is not entirely clear, but it could be
because UK subjects prefer not to incur the moral cost of receiving something without giving
in return.
In contrast, African subjects are more likely to behave in an altruistic manner. From Table
11, they also appear to play in a less strategic manner – in the sense that their actions are
less dictated by what they expect others to do than UK subjects. Combined with the fact
that African subjects give more and steal less in general, this suggests that the actions of the
African subjects are more determined by general rules of behavior – e.g., morality – rather
than by strategic considerations. In contrast, UK subjects play in a more individualistic and

28

strategic manner – more in line with assumptions behind ‘homo economicus’. Finally, we …nd
that African subjects are less likely to join a group in the burning treatment and more likely
to expect destruction by others than actually takes place. It is as if the African subjects, who
behave in a more ‘moralistic’ manner than UK subjects, do not trust others to do the same.
Put di¤erently, they appear to be less trusting even though they are more trustworthy.
Why do these …ndings say about development? There is a literature that depicts less developed societies as characterized by interpersonal morality, with little respect for contracts and
property rights in anonymous interactions (Fukuyama 2011). It has often been argued (e.g.,
Polanyi 1944, North 1990, Platteau 1994, Bowles 1998) that strong norms of impersonal fairness
are needed for trust to allow markets to blossom and development to take place. Putnam et
al. (1993), for instance, argue that the di¤erence in development levels between Northern and
Southern Italy is due to historically determined di¤erences in trust and social capital. Based on
this, we would have expected less stealing by UK subjects, which is not what we …nd.
Those who have compared fairness across societies have uncovered a strong positive correlation between norms of fairness and the level of market integration in a society. If this view is
correct, we would have again expected to …nd more pro-social behavior towards strangers among
UK subjects than among Ugandan farmers who live in societies that have only recently emerged
from a pre-market, subsistence economy. Kenyan slum dwellers occupy a intermediate position
between the two, with a level of market integration that is high but historically quite recent. We
do not …nd such pattern in our data. Our …ndings thus ‡y in the face of arguments according to
which underdevelopment in Africa is due to a failure of generalized morality which undermines
the functioning of organizations and markets. If anything, we …nd UK subjects to behave in a
more opportunistic manner. What African subjects seem to be lacking is not morality but trust
in each other.

29

There is nonetheless one characteristics of the two African study sites that could make them
less opportunistic: strong adherence to a world religion.11 Heinrich et al (2010) and House et al
(2013) have documented a strong correlation between fairness towards strangers and adherence
to a world religion, and Fukuyama (1991) argues that world religions historically paved the
way for impersonal morality. While the UK has a long history of adherence to the Christian
faith, religiosity has decreased in recent times. Can this explain our …ndings? We do not have
enough degrees of freedom to reach such a strong conclusion –but some of the patterns observed
in our data go in that direction. In particular, stealing among UK subjects is more sensitive
to expectation of others’ stealing than among African subjects. The behavior of our African
subjects is more consistent with the view that expecting others to steal does not justify my own
stealing: moral imperatives are absolute, not conditional.
The results presented here rely on an experiment that does not allow for feedback between
subjects. The purpose of this design is to document how individuals approach redistribution
within groups in the absence of any monitoring and punishment mechanism. Introducing feedback and sequential play may profoundly a¤ect group cohesion. For instance, a good leader may
manage to reduce people’s fear of expropriation, thereby facilitating group formation. Alternatively, groups formed by individuals hoping to steal from each other are unlikely to survive long.
Individuals who base their actions on general moral principles may get outraged at the opportunistic and destructive behavior of others. This in turn could unravel group cohesion, making
teamwork harder to sustain in a variety of market situations, be it within organizations (e.g.,
workers discipline) or in market exchange (e.g., breach of contract). More research is needed on
these issues.
11
World religions have been making dramatic headway in Africa and Latin America over the last few decades.
This is re‡ected in our study population: our two African sites have higher levels of religiosity than our UK site.
The slums of Nairobi from which our sample is drawn are overwhelmingly Christian and Muslim (estimated at
98% by the Population Council) whilst a third of residents in our UK site have no religion (UK census, 2011).
Our site in Uganda is also characterized by higher levels of religiosity than our UK site.

30

6. References
Andreoni, J. and L. Versterlund (2001). "Which is the fair sex? Gender di¤erences in altruism",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 293-312
Andreoni, J. and J. Miller (2002). "Giving According to GARP: An Experimental Test of
the Consistency of Preferences for Altruism", Econometrica, 70(2): 737-753.
Baland, Jean-Marie and Jean-Philippe Platteau (1995), Halting Degradation of Natural Resources: Is There a Role for Rural Communities?, Food and Agriculture Organization; Clarendon Press, Oxford, England
Banerjee, Abhijit, Lakshmi Iyer and Rohini Somanathan (2005), “History, Social Divisions
and Public Goods in Rural India”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3): 63947.
Barr, Abigail, Markus Lindelow,and Pieter Serneels (2009). "Corruption in public service
delivery: An experimental analysis," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Elsevier,
72(1): 225-39, October.
Barr, Abigail and Danila Serra (2010). "Corruption and culture: An experimental analysis,"
Journal of Public Economics, Elsevier, 94(11-12): 862-869, December
Barr, Abigail, Marleen Dekker and Marcel Fafchamps (2013), "The Formation of Community Based Organizations in sub-Saharan Africa: An Analysis of a Quasi-Experiment", World
Development, 66(C): 131-153, 2014
Battigalli, P. and Dufwenberg, M. (2009). "Dynamic psychological games", Journal of Economic Theory, 144(1): 1-35
Bernard, Tanguy, Alain de Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet (2010), “When Does Community
Conservatism Constrain Village Organizations?”, Economic Development and Cultural Change,
58(4): 609-41
31

Bowles, S. (1998). "Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and
Other Economic Institutions", Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1): 75-111.
Brune, Lasse, Jessica Goldberg, Xavier Gine, and Dean Yang. (2010) "Commitments to
Save: A Field Experiment in Rural Malawi", University of Michigan (mimeograph)
Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin (2002). "Understanding Social Preferences With Simple
Tests," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 817-69, August.
Coleman, James S. (1988), "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital", American
Journal of Sociology, 94(Supplement): S95-S120
Cook, Michael (1995). "The Future of US Agricultural Cooperatives: A Neo-Institutional
Approach", Americal Journal of Agricultural Economics, 77: 1153-9.
Fafchamps, Marcel and Ruth Vargas Hil (2005). "Selling at the Farmgate or Traveling to
Market," American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(3): 717-34.
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt (1999), "A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3): 817-68, August
Fischbacher, Urs (2007). "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments",
Experimental Economics, 10(2): 171-178.
Fisman, Raymond and Edward Miguel (2007). "Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement:
Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets", Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 1020-48
Fukuyama, Francis (2011). The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the
French Revolution, Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Greene, Joshua (2012). For The Greater Good: How the Moral Brain Works and How it
Can Work Better, Penguin Press, New York
Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander Bolyanatz, Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwins Gwako, Natalie Henrich, Car-

32

olyn Lesorogol, Frank Marlowe, David Tracer, John Ziker (2010). "Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and Punishment". Science, 327: 1480-4
Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, and Herbert Gintis (2004). Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence
from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., McElreath, R., Alvard,
M., Barr, A., Ensminger, J., Henrich, N. Smith, Hill, K. Gil-White,F., Gurven, M. , Marlowe,F.
W., Patton, J.Q., Tracer, D. (2005), "Economic man in cross-cultural perspective: Behavioral
experiments in 15 small-scale societies", Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(6): 795-815.
House, Bailey R., Joan B. Silk, Joseph Henrich, H. Clark Barrett, Brooke A. Scelza, Adam
H. Boyette, Barry S. Hewlett, Richard McElreath, Stephen Laurence. (2013) "Ontogeny of
prosocial behavior across diverse societies". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
August 19
Jakiela, P. and O. Ozier. (2012). "Does Africa need a rotten kid theorem? Experimental
Evidence from Village Economies". World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6085
Kebede, Bereket and Daniel John Zizzo (2011). ""Social Preferences and Agricultural Innovation: An Experimental Case Study from Ethiopia," World Development, 67(C): 267-280.
Mikhail, John (2011). Elements of Moral Cognition: Rawls’ Linguistic Analogy and the
Cognitive Science of Moral and Legal Judgment, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
North, Douglas C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Null, Clair (2011). "Warm glow, information, and ine¢ cient charitable giving", Journal of
Public Economics, 95(5-6): 455-65.
O¢ ce of National Statistics, United Kingdom. (2011). Table QS210EW, 2011 Census.

33

http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/census/2011/index.html
Okada, Akira and Riedl, Arno (2005). "Ine¢ ciency and social exclusion in a coalition formation game: experimental evidence," Games and Economic Behavior, 50(2): 278-311, February.
Olson, Mancur (1971), The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of
Groups (Revised edition), Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA
Ostrom, Elinor (1990), Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Platteau, Jean-Philippe (1994). "Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist: Part
II - The Role of Moral Norms", Journal of Development Studies, 30(4): 753-815. July
Polanyi, Karl (1944). The Great Transformation, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York
Pradhan, Menno, D. Suryadarma, A. Beatty, M. Wong, A. Gaduh, , A. Alishjabana, and
R.P. Artha (2014), "Improving educational quality through enhancing community participation :
results from a randomized …eld experiment in Indonesia", American Economic Journal, Applied
Economics (forthcoming)
Putnam, Robert D., Robert Leonardi, and Ra¤aella Y. Nanetti (1993). Making Democracy
Work: Civic Institutions in Modern Italy, Princeton University Press, Princeton
Zizzo, Daniel John and Andrew J. Oswald (2001). "Are People Willing to Pay to Reduce
Others’Incomes?," Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 63-64: 39-65.
Zizzo, Daniel John (2003a). "Money burning and rank egalitarianism with random dictators," Economics Letters, Elsevier, 81(2): 263-66, November
Zizzo, Daniel John (2003b). "Inequality and Procedural Fairness in a Money Burning and
Stealing Experiment," Economics Series WP 155, University of Oxford, Department of Economics

34

Table 3. Summary of play
Action
UK 2012
UK 2014
Mean N.obs.
Mean
N.obs.
Part 1a: Practice rounds [joining imposed]
burning
17.3%
185
14.1%
144
stealing
35.2%
185
34.8%
144
giving
5.6%
185
8.0%
144

4.4%
26.0%
11.5%

198
198
198

17.3%
30.2%
12.8%

162
162
162

Part 1b: Joining imposed
burning
9.4%
stealing
35.2%
giving
2.9%

370
555
370

7.8%
37.4%
0.7%

144
432
144

4.8%
23.4%
4.6%

198
594
198

10.7%
26.3%
8.4%

162
486
162

Part 2: Joining only
joining

370

95.8%

144

94.4%

198

82.1%

162

555
555
185

82.6%
64.6%
81.6%

144
288
288

59.6%
82.5%
75.7%

198
360
378

42.0%
74.8%
82.4%

162
306
324

435
416
127

5.9%
70.3%
0.8%

111
167
235

6.7%
41.0%
7.1%

97
284
286

17.6%
38.5%
8.2%

39
211
267

95.9%

Part 3: Joining + transfers
a. Joining in:
burning game
78.4%
stealing game
75.0%
giving game
68.6%
b. Transfers
burning
6.9%
stealing
51.9%
giving
1.7%

Kenya
Mean N.obs.

Uganda
Mean N.obs.

Table 4. Expectations of others' behavior
UK 2012
UK 2014
Kenya
Mean
N.obs.
Mean
N.obs.
Mean
N.obs.
Percentage of subjects responding 'yes' when asked whether other will…
Burn their endowment
27.8
185
29.6
144
42.4
198
Steal their endowment
75.7
185
76.9
144
53.6
126
Give to them
14.5
185
12.9
144
39.9
126
Percentage of subjects responding `yes' when asked whether others expect them to give.
Giving norm
not asked
17.9
144
47.0
126

Uganda
Mean
N.obs.
51.5
54.7
52.0

145
145
145

45.4

145

Note: differences between Oxford and the two African samples are all highly significant using
a t-test and joint significant tests in regressions of answers on country dummies, with session clustering

Table 5. Individual choices by treatment
(1)
Burning

(2)
Stealing

(3)
Giving

-0.0298
(-1.435)
0.0289
(0.962)
0.0158
(0.768)
-0.0101
(-0.767)
0.0293
(1.001)
0.0797
(0.771)
-0.0151
(-0.559)
0.0779***
(4.418)

-0.140***
(-3.130)
-0.111*
(-2.036)
-0.0217
(-0.578)
0.345***
(7.681)
-0.169***
(-3.273)
-0.222***
(-3.462)
-0.178***
(-3.278)
0.374***
(9.179)

0.0390***
(3.916)
0.0776***
(5.876)
0.0189***
(4.402)
0.00119
(0.366)
0.0238***
(3.035)
-0.00395
(-0.479)
-0.0104
(-1.655)
0.00681**
(2.433)

Observations
R-squared

1,556
0.012

3,145
0.090

1,789
0.058

F-test Africa = Oxford
Prob > F
F-test Africa x Free join
Prob > F
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

2.906
0.072
0.757
0.479

4.904
0.003
7.068
0.015

23.642
0.013
5.094
0.000

VARIABLES
Kenya
Uganda
Oxford 2012
Free joining dummy
Kenya x free joining dummy
Uganda x free joining dummy
Oxford 2012 x free joining dummy
Constant

Table 6. Average choices by treatment -- with choice parameters
VARIABLES
Kenya
Uganda
Oxford 2012
Free joining dummy
Kenya x free joining dummy
Uganda x free joining dummy
Oxford 2012 x free joining dummy
gamma
Initial endowment
Kenya x initial endowment
Uganda x initial endowment
Oxford 2012 x initial endowment
Gain from joining
Kenya x gain from joining
Uganda x gain from joining
Oxford 2012 x gain from joining
Endowment of other player
Kenya x endowment of other player
Uganda x endowment of other player
Oxford 2012 x endowment other player
Dummy for rank = 2
Constant

Observations
R-squared
F-test country
Prob > F
F-test country#freejoin
Prob > F
F-test country#initial
Prob > F
F-test country#gain
Prob > F
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(1)
Burning

(2)
Burning

(3)
Stealing

(4)
Stealing

(5)
Giving

-0.0298
(-1.436)
0.0289
(0.963)
0.0158
(0.769)
-0.0204
(-1.541)
0.0298
(1.076)
0.0882
(0.739)
-0.00934
(-0.329)

-0.0721 -0.140*** -0.0901 0.0390***
(-0.887) (-3.131) (-1.217)
(3.919)
-0.0892
-0.111*
-0.147* 0.0776***
(-0.974) (-2.037) (-1.737)
(5.880)
-0.0809
-0.0217
-0.0850 0.0189***
(-1.075) (-0.578) (-1.144)
(4.405)
-0.0718 0.321*** 0.183*** 0.000872
(-1.460)
(6.846)
(4.802)
(0.291)
0.0608 -0.154*** -0.112** 0.0276***
(1.048)
(-2.871) (-2.112)
(3.060)
0.0810 -0.204*** -0.166*** 0.00298
(1.138)
(-3.222) (-2.833)
(0.328)
0.0574 -0.160*** -0.0576* -0.0152***
(0.885)
(-3.061) (-1.926) (-4.382)
-0.199**
-0.327***
(-2.608)
(-8.957)
-0.131
0.102
(-1.365)
(0.906)
0.0615
-0.116
(0.623)
(-0.853)
-0.0895
-0.126
(-0.583)
(-0.909)
0.148
-0.174
(1.277)
(-1.377)
0.102
-0.342*
(0.734)
(-1.781)
-0.0427
0.313
(-0.287)
(1.271)
0.351
0.301
(1.463)
(1.152)
-0.0915
0.307
(-0.601)
(1.342)
0.00870
0.0643***
(0.469)
(4.977)
0.00164
-0.0838***
(0.0537)
(-4.489)
0.0282
0.0117
(0.661)
(0.490)
0.00366
0.0671***
(0.174)
(6.223)
-0.0273*** -0.0194* -0.0415*** -0.0139 -0.00154
(-5.135) (-2.026) (-5.479) (-1.258) (-0.468)
0.0916*** 0.171** 0.395*** 0.623*** 0.00758**
(5.047)
(2.411)
(9.532)
(8.867)
(2.469)
2,924
0.014
2.912
0.072
0.812
0.454

2,882
0.027
0.529
0.480
0.753
0.595
0.924
0.409
1.885
0.171

5,944
0.076
4.908
0.015
5.761
0.008

5,880
0.162
1.509
0.023
4.368
0.239
0.466
0.632
0.938
0.404

3,214
0.055
23.676
0.000
4.682
0.018

(6)
Giving
0.0482
(1.523)
0.0444
(1.286)
0.0265*
(1.764)
-0.000785
(-0.260)
0.0161
(1.512)
0.0109
(0.716)
-0.0134
(-1.669)
-0.0136
(-1.575)
0.00189
(0.466)
-0.0196
(-0.828)
0.0126
(0.358)
0.00169
(0.0868)
0.00257
(0.317)
-0.0239
(-0.969)
0.0115
(0.334)
-0.0106
(-0.335)
-0.0190*
(-1.985)
0.0231
(1.342)
0.0139
(0.846)
-0.00566
(-0.615)
-0.00516
(-1.425)
0.0330**
(2.128)
3,199
0.061
1.749
0.576
1.370
0.666
0.413
0.271
0.563
0.193

Table 7. Compatibility of choices with utility archetypes
% of subjects whose choices violate:
UK 2012
UK 2014
Kenya
3 archetypes
0.5%
0.7%
1.0%
4 archetypes
0.0%
5.6%
16.2%
5 archetypes
17.3%
11.8%
3.0%
6 archetypes
82.2%
81.9%
79.8%
N.subjects
185
144
198

Uganda
1.2%
14.2%
5.6%
79.0%
162

% of subject who do not violate the archetype even once in the experiment
UK 2012
UK 2014
Kenya Uganda
U.Selfish
11.4%
9.0%
4.0%
3.7%
U.Efficient
0.5%
0.7%
1.0%
1.2%
U.Altruist
1.1%
1.4%
15.2%
14.2%
U.Invidious
2.2%
9.0%
2.5%
1.9%
U.Warm glow
0.5%
1.4%
15.2%
14.2%
U.Inequal. Averse
3.2%
3.5%
0.5%
2.5%
N.subjects
185
144
198
162

Table 8. Proportion of choices that violate each archetype
All
Burning Stealing
Giving
A. UK 2012
%
%
%
%
U.Selfish
37%
25%
58%
16%
U.Efficient
51%
25%
55%
70%
U.Altruist
27%
25%
0%
70%
U.Invidious
44%
51%
58%
16%
U.Warm glow
34%
25%
0%
94%
U.Inequal. Averse
43%
61%
36%
37%
N.observations
1295
370
555
370
A. UK 2014
U.Selfish
U.Efficient
U.Altruist
U.Invidious
U.Warm glow
U.Inequal. Averse
N.observations

%
40%
54%
23%
44%
23%
46%
720

%
18%
18%
18%
38%
18%
41%
144

%
58%
52%
0%
58%
0%
53%
432

%

B. Kenya
U.Selfish
U.Efficient
U.Altruist
U.Invidious
U.Warm glow
U.Inequal. Averse
N.observations

%
44%
51%
18%
49%
18%
49%
990

%
13%
13%
13%
40%
13%
44%
198

%
58%
54%
0%
58%
0%
57%
594

%
30%
79%
79%
30%
79%
32%
198

C. Uganda
U.Selfish
U.Efficient
U.Altruist
U.Invidious
U.Warm glow
U.Inequal. Averse
N.observations

%
53%
61%
22%
54%
22%
51%
810

%
36%
36%
36%
41%
36%
56%
162

%
61%
65%
0%
61%
0%
55%
486

%
48%
74%
74%
48%
74%
33%
162

8%
99%
99%
8%
99%
29%
144

Table 9. Joining by treatment -- with choice parameters
VARIABLES
Kenya
Uganda
Oxford 2012
Gain from joining
Kenya x gain from joining
Uganda x gain from joining
Oxford 2012 x gain from joning
Initial endowment
Kenya x initial endowment
Uganda x initial endowment
Oxford 2012 x initial endowment
Gamma
Constant

(1)
Burning

(2)
Stealing

(3)
Giving

-0.397*** -0.0817
-0.0259
(-3.309) (-0.833) (-0.376)
-0.282*
-0.0624
0.0800
(-1.916) (-0.518)
(1.183)
0.0115
0.104
-0.0684
(0.117)
(1.242)
(-0.380)
0.697*** 0.459*** 0.389***
(11.98)
(3.706)
(11.81)
-0.543*** -0.0891 -0.446***
(-3.762) (-0.214) (-5.918)
-0.860**
-0.461
-0.446***
(-2.355) (-1.484) (-6.899)
-0.367*** -0.211*
0.646***
(-7.327) (-1.764)
(2.785)
-0.635*** -0.462*** -0.110**
(-5.001) (-4.819) (-2.354)
0.682*** 0.387**
0.136**
(4.042)
(2.448)
(2.222)
0.538
0.355**
0.0771
(1.511)
(2.513)
(0.826)
0.286** 0.00931
-0.184
(2.244) (0.0931) (-1.029)
0.125
-0.275*** -0.210***
(1.413)
(-4.023) (-3.148)
0.860*** 1.024*** 0.882***
(10.09)
(10.74)
(17.52)

Observations
1,059
R-squared
0.166
F-test Africa
5.667
Prob > F
0.001
F-test Africa x gain from joining
9.338
Prob > F
0.009
F-test Africa x initial endowment
8.269
Prob > F
0.002
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Gain from joining = (groupreturn-1) * initial endowment

1,509
0.098
0.347
0.710
1.105
0.346
4.464
0.022

1,175
0.070
1.288
0.292
34.579
0.000
2.469
0.104

Table 10. Joining, expectations, and past play
Regressor
Expected burning/stealing/receiving
Kenya x expected burning/stealing/receiving
Uganda x expected burning/stealing/receiving
Oxford 2012 x expected burning/stealing/receiving
Own past burning/stealing/giving
Kenya x own past burning/stealing/giving
Uganda x own past burning/stealing/giving
Oxford 2012 x own past burning/stealing/giving

Kenya
Uganda
Oxford 2012
Gain from joining
Kenya x gain from joining
Uganda x gain from joining
Oxford 2012 x gain from joining
Initial endowment
Kenya x initial endowment
Uganda x initial endowment
Oxford 2012 x initial endowment
Gamma
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(1)
Game 1

(2)
Game 2

(3)
Game 3

-0.288**
(-2.581)
0.454**
(2.587)
0.293**
(2.086)
0.208*
(1.853)
-0.333**
(-2.503)
0.613**
(2.715)
0.590***
(3.194)
0.495**
(2.752)

0.0288
(0.149)
0.168
(0.836)
0.0594
(0.273)
-0.217
(-1.063)
-0.0213
(-0.175)
0.193
(1.351)
0.307
(1.679)
0.0209
(0.136)

-0.0664
(-0.678)
0.219*
(1.896)
0.109
(0.852)
-0.0209
(-0.255)
0.298
(0.754)
0.0812
(0.188)
-0.0203
(-0.0484)
-0.0629
(-0.143)

-0.542*** -0.220*
-0.116
(-4.782) (-1.960) (-1.175)
-0.407***
-0.185
0.0250
(-3.010) (-1.198)
(0.306)
-0.0468 0.271*** -0.0720
(-0.749)
(3.097)
(-0.415)
0.704*** 0.442*** 0.380***
(8.643)
(3.008)
(12.23)
-0.592*** -0.592*** -0.487***
(-3.877) (-3.003) (-7.012)
-0.537***
-0.350
-0.416***
(-2.996) (-0.999) (-8.153)
-0.377***
-0.226
0.687***
(-5.517) (-1.633)
(3.007)
-0.577*** -0.455*** -0.109**
(-4.255) (-5.104) (-2.308)
0.649*** 0.492*** 0.176**
(3.684)
(4.017)
(2.781)
0.180
0.315**
0.0805
(0.756)
(2.463)
(0.792)
0.228*
0.0208
-0.189
(1.740)
(0.205)
(-1.079)
0.127
-0.352*** -0.231***
(1.473)
(-4.642) (-3.825)
0.926*** 1.048*** 0.899***
(20.47)
(12.21)
(18.55)
1,042
0.198

1,384
0.123

1,015
0.093

Table 11. Burning, stealing and giving -- controlling for expectations
Regressors

Burning
Part 1
Part 3

Expected burning/stealing/receiving

0.167*
(1.895)
Kenya x expected burning/stealing/receiving
-0.0959
(-0.995)
Uganda x expected burning/stealing/receiving
-0.165
(-1.428)
Oxford 2012 x expected burning/stealing/receiving 0.211**
(2.577)
Kenya
Uganda
Oxford 2012
Difference in endowment
Kenya x difference in endowment
Ugand x difference in endowment
Oxford 2012 x difference in endowment
Endowment of other player
Kenya x endowment of other player
Uganda x endowment of other player
Oxford 2012 x endowment other player
Gamma
Constant

Observations
R-squared
F-test country
Prob > F
F-test country#diff
Prob > F
F-test country#expectax
Prob > F
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.249**
(2.736)
-0.187*
(-1.855)
0.0489
(0.206)
0.0713
(0.521)

-0.0437
(-0.702)
0.0546
(0.544)
-0.154***
(-2.948)
0.0623***
(3.870)
-0.0186
(-0.737)
-0.0554**
(-2.088)
0.0187
(1.271)
-0.0150
(-0.382)
0.0321
(0.693)
0.0167
(0.259)
0.154***
(3.033)
-0.927
(-1.667)
0.0903
(1.362)

0.0627
(0.634)
-0.151
(-0.675)
-0.000566
(-0.0128)
0.00793
(0.456)
-0.00753
(-0.172)
0.162
(1.461)
0.00316
(0.145)
0.0141
(0.554)
-0.0230
(-0.310)
0.212
(1.330)
-0.000906
(-0.0370)
-0.173**
(-2.213)
-0.00665
(-0.180)

1,714
0.143
0.677
0.516
2.183
0.132
1.019
0.374

1,115
0.177
0.457
0.638
1.103
0.348
2.122
0.141

Stealing
Part 1
Part 3
0.518*** 0.934***
(5.925)
(7.039)
-0.364*** -0.581***
(-3.537) (-3.726)
-0.392*** -0.704***
(-3.720) (-4.023)
0.0647
-0.176
(0.441)
(-0.912)

Giving
Part 1
Part 3
0.0251*
(1.896)
0.0274
(0.505)
-0.0533
(-1.201)
0.0507*
(1.910)

0.0563*
(2.062)
0.0794
(1.305)
-0.0761
(-1.595)
0.00697
(0.233)

0.133
0.275** -0.0561*
0.0581
(1.485)
(2.160)
(-1.774)
(1.542)
0.258**
0.134
0.0604 0.0902**
(2.556)
(0.709)
(1.190)
(2.696)
-0.0940
-0.108
0.00856
0.0913
(-0.750) (-0.754)
(0.598)
(1.313)
0.0844*** 0.0332 -0.0177* -0.0165
(4.301)
(0.755)
(-1.977) (-1.608)
-0.0535
-0.0862 0.0333** 0.0417
(-1.647) (-1.244)
(2.772)
(1.537)
-0.0239
0.146
0.0215
0.00798
(-0.953)
(1.669)
(0.912)
(0.606)
0.0559
0.105** 0.00930 -0.147*
(1.126)
(2.339)
(0.625)
(-1.846)
0.0318
0.00323 -0.0182
-0.0124
(0.613) (0.0642) (-1.616) (-1.187)
0.0654
-0.0611 0.0860*** -0.0162
(1.121)
(-0.552)
(3.745)
(-0.681)
-0.0201
0.141
0.0419
0.0185
(-0.324)
(1.184)
(0.824)
(0.866)
0.0212
0.112** 0.00511 -0.0865
(0.234)
(2.796)
(0.396)
(-1.243)
-0.335***
-0.162 -0.0201*** -0.0307*
(-8.351) (-1.384) (-3.695) (-1.925)
0.186*
0.0637 0.0332*** 0.0247*
(2.046)
(0.495)
(2.919)
(1.894)
3,600
0.187
3.295
0.055
1.376
0.003
7.787
0.273

1,583
0.236
2.464
0.107
3.150
0.001
8.999
0.062

1,570
0.075
2.475
0.106
3.851
0.036
0.895
0.422

1,249
0.115
4.899
0.321
1.195
0.074
2.914
0.017

