                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MONETARY POLICY SPILLOVERS AND THE TRILEMMA IN THE NEW NORMAL:
     PERIPHERY COUNTRY SENSITIVITY TO CORE COUNTRY CONDITIONS

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                          Menzie D. Chinn
                                              Hiro Ito

                                        Working Paper 21128
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21128


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




The financial support of faculty research funds of University of Southern California, the University
of Wisconsin, Madison, and Portland State University is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Ting
Ting Lu for her excellent research assistance, Clas Wihlborg, Atish Rex Ghosh, Sandra Eickmeier, and
Arnaud Mehl for helpful comments, and Jing Cynthia Wu, Fan Dora Xia, Jens Christensen, and Glenn
D. Rudebusch for sharing the shadow interest rate data. An earlier version of this paper circulated
as “Analysis on the Determinants of Sensitivity to the Center Economies.” All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Spillovers and the Trilemma in the New Normal: Periphery Country Sensitivity
to Core Country Conditions
Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 21128
April 2015, Revised November 2015
JEL No. F33,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

We investigate why and how the financial conditions of developing and emerging market countries
(peripheral countries) can be affected by the movements in the center economies - the U.S., Japan,
the Eurozone, and China. We apply a two-step approach. First, we estimate the sensitivity of countries’
financial variables to the center economies [policy interest rate, stock market prices, and the real effective
exchange rates (REER)] while controlling for global and domestic factors. Next, we examine the association
of the estimated sensitivity coefficients with the macroeconomic conditions, policies, real and financial
linkages with the center economies, and the level of institutional development. In the last two decades,
for most financial variables, the strength of the links with the center economies have been the dominant
factor while the movements of policy interest rate also appear sensitive to global financial shocks around
the emerging market crises of the late 1990s and since the global financial crisis of 2008. While certain
macroeconomic and institutional variables are important, the arrangement of open macro policies such
as the exchange rate regime and financial openness are also found to have direct influence on the sensitivity
to the center economies. An economy that pursues greater exchange rate stability and financial openness
faces a stronger link with the center economies through policy interest rates and real effective exchange
rate (REER) movements. We also find exchange market pressure (EMP) in peripheral economies is
sensitive to the movements of the center economies’ REER and EMP during and after the global financial
crisis. Open macro policy arrangements, especially exchange rate regimes, also have indirect effects
on the strength of financial linkages, interacting with other macroeconomic conditions. Thus, trilemma
policy arrangements, including exchange rate flexibility, continue to affect the sensitivity of developing
countries to policy changes and shocks in the center economies.


Joshua Aizenman                                       Hiro Ito
Economics and SIR                                     Portland State University
USC                                                   1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
University Park                                       Portland, Oregon 97201
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                            ito@pdx.edu
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Menzie D. Chinn
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
1. Introduction

        The integrated nature of the financial system was amply demonstrated by the turmoil in
emerging market currency and bond markets in the wake of Fed Chairman Bernanke’s
statements regarding the normalization of U.S. monetary policy in 2013 (“taper tantrum”).
Following close on the heels of complaints about unconventional monetary policy
implementation in the preceding years, it is clear that – at a minimum – policymakers in
emerging market economies perceive an increasing vulnerability to the whims of the global
financial system.
        The idea that the monetary policies of financial center countries have large spillover
effects on the smaller economies is not new. During the mid-1990s, when advanced economy
central bankers raised policy rates, after several years of negative real interest rates, similar
complaints were lodged, and some may partly trace the financial crises in Latin America and
subsequently in East Asia to the cycle in core country policy interest rates.
        One key difference is that in the earlier episode’s aftermath, the semi-fixed exchange rate
regimes were tagged as a contributing factor. In contrast, countries adhering to a variety of
exchange rate regimes all experienced challenges in insulating their economies in the most recent
episode. This has led to a grand debate about the continued relevance of the “impossible trinity”
or “monetary trilemma”.
        Since Mundell (1963) outlined the hypothesis of the monetary trilemma, fundamental
policy management in the open economy has been viewed as policy trade-offs among the choices
of monetary autonomy, exchange rate stability, and financial openness.4 The hypothesis and its
extensions in recent years suggest a continuous trade off between the three trilemma dimensions,
with the possibility that a fourth policy goal, financial stability, may augment it and turn it into a
quadrilemma where international reserves may play a role as buffers (Aizenman, 2013).
        In contrast, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis (GFC), Rey (2013) concluded
that the economic center’s (CE) monetary policy influences other countries’ national monetary
policy mostly through capital-flows, credit growth, and bank leverages, making the types of
exchange rate regime of the non-CEs irrelevant. In other words, the countries in the periphery
(PH) are all sensitive to a “global financial cycle” irrespective of exchange rate regimes. In this

4
 See Aizenman, et al. (2010, 2011, 2013), Obstfeld (2014), Obstfeld, et al. (2005), and Shambaugh (2004) for
further discussion and references dealing with the trilemma.

                                                        1
view, the “trilemma” reduces to an “irreconcilable duo” of monetary independence and capital
mobility. Consequently, restricting capital-mobility may be the only way for non-EC countries to
retain monetary autonomy. The recent experience of Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and
Turkey – the “Fragile Five” – during the taper tantrum episode may make the “irreconcilable duo”
view convincing to many observers.
        In this paper, we investigate whether Rey’s view means the end of the trilemma
hypothesis or a premature prediction that is not supported by the data. Inferences based on the
data from the times of heightened volatility emanating from the CE might be modified once we
examine how the propagation of large shocks from the EC can be affected by economic
structures and measures of the trilemma variables. In a world of more than hundred countries,
one ignores heterogeneity at one’s own risk. For instance, the trade-offs facing the OECD
countries may differ from emerging markets economies and developing countries as well as
whether they are manufacturing- or commodity-based economies.5 Furthermore, large shocks
from the EC during the GFC and the following Euro debt crisis may have altered the
transmission dynamics, especially in comparison to the preceding decade of illusory tranquility.6
        Many studies such as Ahmed and Zlate (2013), Forbes and Warnock (2010), Fratzscher
(2011), and Ghosh, et al. (2012) have documented the importance of global factors such as
advanced economy interest rates and global risk appetite in affecting capital flows to small open
economies. Nonetheless, these studies have also highlighted that domestic, country-specific
factors also retain importance. In particular, the institutional and macroeconomic policy
frameworks of the emerging market economies also determine the variations in flows.
        Given this context, we focus on the questions of why movements in the major advanced
economies often have large effects on other financial markets, how these cross-market linkages
have changed over time, and what kind of factors contribute to explaining the sensitivity to the
movements in the major economies. More specifically, we conduct an empirical analysis on what
determines the sensitivity of economies to factors pertaining to the core economies in the world,
specifically, the U.S., the Euro area, Japan, and China.


5
  For example, maintaining exchange rate stability could be more important for developing countries whose growth
strategy is reliant on the exports of a narrower variety of manufactured goods or commodities than advanced
economies with more diversified economic structures.
6
  As one indirect evidence, Aizenman, et al. (2015) show that the global financial crisis of 2008 caused structural
changes in the patterns of holding international reserves (IR)

                                                         2
        In Section 2, we detail the framework of the exercise we employ for our empirical
exploration. We report and discuss the estimation results in section 3. In Section 4, we further
extend the analysis by investigating the sensitivity of the exchange market pressure (EMP) in
peripheral economies to the movements of the center economies’ financial variables and its
determinants. In Section 5, we make concluding remarks.


2. The Empirical Methodology
        For our empirical exploration, we employ an estimation process similar to that employed
by Forbes and Chinn (2004), which is composed of two steps of estimations. First, we investigate
the degree of the sensitivity of several important financial variables to global, cross-country, and
domestic factors. Second, treating the estimated sensitivity as a dependent variable, we examine
their determinants among a number of country-specific variables. In so doing, we disentangle
roles of countries’ macroeconomic conditions or policies, real or financial linkage with the center
economy, or the level of institutional development of the countries.


2.1 The First-Step: Estimating Sensitivity Coefficients
        The main objective of this first step estimation is to estimate the correlation of a specific
financial variable between country i and each of the center economies while controlling for
global and domestic factors. The estimated coefficient of our focus is ˆ FiC . A significantly

positive ˆ FiC indicates a closer linkage between country i and economic center country C, as

shown in (1):


                         G               C
        RitF   Fit    Fit
                           G
                               Z itG    Fit
                                           C
                                               X itC   Fit Yit   it .               (1)
                        g 1             c 1




Where the Z iG is a vector of global factors, the X iC is a vector of cross-country factors, and Yit is

a control variable for domestic factors. C represents the center economies: the U.S., the Euro
area, Japan, and China. ˆiiC , the estimate of our focus, represents the extent of sensitivity of a

financial variable ( RitF ) to cross-country factors, or more specifically, linkages to the four major
economies. As for the financial variable as the dependent variable, we are interested in the short-

                                                               3
term policy interest rate and the rate of change in the real effective exchange rate (REER). We
also tested the linkages of stock market price changes and the sovereign bond spread between the
center and non-center economies. However, the results are much less robust or yield fewer
insightss at times. Hence, we omit reporting and discussing the results, though they can be found
in our working paper version of this article (Aizenman, et al., 2015).
         We use money market rates to represent policy short-term interest rate. In recent years,
all of the advanced major economies, the U.S., the Euro area, and Japan have implemented
extremely loose monetary policy in the aftermath of the global financial crisis (GFC). Given that
both the U.S. and Japan have lowered their policy interest rates down to or near zero, official
policy interest rates may not capture the actual state of monetary policy. In recent years, several
researchers have estimated “shadow interest rates” to represent the actual state of liquidity
availability by allowing the estimated shadow rates to drop below the zero bound. We use these
shadow rates for the three advanced economies to estimate more realistic correlations between
the policy interest rates of the center economies and the sample countries. For the U.S. and the
Euro area, we use the shadow interest rates estimated by Wu and Xia (2014). For Japan, we use
the shadow rates estimated by Christensen and Rudebusch (2014). We use the REER indices
from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (IFS).
         For a vector of global factors ( Z iG ), we have two subsets of global factors. The first
subset of global factors include “real” variables – global interest rates (for which we will use the
first principal component of U.S. Federal Reserve, ECB, and Bank of Japan’s policy interest
rates); oil prices; and commodity prices. When we estimate for the policy interest rate correlation,
we do not include the first component of U.S. FRB, ECB, and Bank of Japan’s interest rates as
part of the global factor vector because it would overlap with XC. To avoid multicollinearity or
redundancy, we also use the first principal component of oil and commodity prices as a control
variable for input or commodity prices.7
         The second subset is “financial.” In this group, we include the VIX index from the
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), as a proxy for the extent of investors’ risk aversion,
and the “Ted spread,” which is the difference between the 3-month Eurodollar Deposit Rate in

7
 To control for global macroeconomic conditions, we also tested the growth rate of world trade as one of the
variables in the vector of real global factors. It turned out that including this variable does not change the results for
both the first and second stage estimations. To keep the model parsimonious and save the degree of freedom, we
decided not to include the variable for world trade growth.

                                                             4
London (LIBOR) and the 3-month U.S. Treasury Bill yield. This latter measure gauges the
general level of stress in the money market for financial institutions. The same set of global
factors, except for the principal components of the global interest rates, is used for all the
estimations regardless of the dependent variable.
         The vector of cross-country linkage factors (XC) corresponds to the dependent variable.
For example, if the short-term interest rate for country i is the dependent variable, X iC includes
the short-term interest rates of the four center economies.8 We implement the estimation for each
of the sample countries for the two dependent variables and for the sample period of 1986
through 2012. To control for domestic economic conditions, we include the year-on-year growth
rate of industrial production index. All the data used for this exercise are of monthly frequency.
The same set of explanatory variables (except for the world interest rate) is regressed against the
two financial variables.
         Because we deal with a relatively long sample period, coefficient instability is a concern.
Hence, we estimate the above regressions for each of the three year non-overlapping panels,
starting in 1986.9 That means that ˆFit
                                     C
                                         is time-varying across the panels.
         We also estimate two specifications. One specification excludes China as one of the
“center economies.” In this model setup, we are testing the sensitivity of our sample economies
to the traditionally-defined major economies of the U.S., the Euro area, and Japan.10 The other
model does include China as one of the center economies.
         Our panel data are composed of about 100 countries including both advanced economies
(IDC) and less developed countries (LDC), with the sample size varying depending on data
availability. In our sample, the U.S. and Japan are not included in any of estimates. As for the
Euro member countries, they are removed from the sample after the introduction of the euro in
January 1999 or they become member countries, whichever comes first. We also have a
subsample of emerging market countries (EMG) within the LDC subsample.11


2.2 The Second Step: Explaining the Sensitivity Coefficients

8
  For the Euro Area’s variables before the introduction of the euro in 1999, the GDP-weighted average of the
variable of concern for the original 12 Euro countries is calculated and included in the estimation.
9
  We also tested using five year panels. Since the results are qualitatively similar, we decide not to report the results.
10
   Excluding China mitigates data limitations as well, especially for the second-step of the estimation procedure.
11
   The emerging market countries (EMG) are defined as the countries classified as either emerging or frontier during
the period of 1980-1997 by the International Financial Corporation plus Hong Kong and Singapore.

                                                            5
         Once we estimate  Fit
                            C
                                for each of the dependent variables, we regress ˆ Fit
                                                                                   C
                                                                                       on a number of
country-specific variables.


         ˆFit
           C
                 0  1 OMPFit   2 MCFit  3 LINKFit   4 INSTFit  5 CRISISFit  uFit                (2)


         There are four groups of explanatory variables. The first group of explanatory variables is
a set of open macroeconomic policy choices ( OMPi ), for which we include the indexes for
exchange rate stability (ERS) and financial openness (KAOPEN) from the trilemma indexes by
Aizenman, et al. (2013).12 A country that has a fixed exchange rate arrangement with a major
country, or the base country, is more subject to financial shocks occurring to the base country if
it has more open financial markets. Saxena (2008) found the extent of pass-through from foreign
interest rates to domestic interest rates is higher under floating exchange rate regimes than
pegging regimes, however.13 Christiansen and Pigott (1997) also suggest that even under floating
exchange rate regimes, foreign factors play an important role in affecting long-term interest rates.
Hence, it is an empirical question how and to what extent both financial openness and exchange
rate stability matter for transmitting financial shocks.14 As another variable potentially closely
related to the trilemma framework, we suspect the level of international reserves (IR) holding
may affect the extent of cross-country financial linkages and include the variable for IR holding
(excluding gold) as a share of GDP.15
         The group MCi includes macroeconomic conditions such as inflation volatility, current
account balance, and public finance conditions. As the measure of public finance conditions, we
include either gross national debt or general budget balance, both expressed as shares of GDP.


12
   As Mundell (1963) argued and Aizenman, et al. (2013) and Ito and Kawai (2012) have empirically shown it holds,
a country may simultaneously choose any two, but not all, of the three goals of monetary policy independence,
exchange rate stability, and financial market openness to the full extent. Given this linearity, we only include the two
trilemma indexes out of the three.
13
   To explain the counterintuitive results, Saxena argues that the classification of exchange rate regimes may allow
some of the countries that conduct active but incomplete foreign exchange interventions to be classified as “floating”
regimes so that the results for the floating regimes may include those of de facto pegging regimes. Also, she argues
countries with floating exchange rates tend to have more developed financial markets which tend to follow the trend
of the center country’s financial markets.
14
   Gosh, et al. (2014, 2015) find that floating exchange rate regimes also help mitigate the extent of susceptibility to
financial vulnerabilities, exchange rate vulnerability, and crisis occurrence.
15
   Aizenman, et al. (2010, 2011) show the macroeconomic impact of trilemma policy configurations can depend
upon the level of IR holding.

                                                          6
We use the data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook
Database.
        In addition to these groups of variables, we will include variables that reflect the extent of
linkages with the center countries (LINK). One linkage variable is meant to capture real, trade
linkage, which we will measure as: TR _ LINKip  IMPipC GDPip where IMP i C is total imports

into center economy C from country i, that is normalized by country i’s GDP. Another linkage
variable is financial linkage, FIN_LINKip. We will measure it with the ratio of the total stock of
foreign direct investment from country C in country i as a share of country i’s GDP
( FDINV i C ).16
        Another variable that also reflects the linkage with the major economies is the variable
for the extent of trade competition (Trade_Comp). Trade_Comp measures the importance to
country i of export competition in the third markets between country i and major country C.
Shocks to country C, and especially shocks to country C that affects country c’s exchange rate,
could affect the relative price of country C’s exports and therefore affect country i through trade
competition in third markets. See Appendix for the variable construction. A higher value of this
measure indicates country i and major economic C exports products in similar sectors so that
their exported products tend to be competitive to each other.
        The fourth group is composed of the variables that characterize the nature of institutional
development (INST), namely, variables for financial development and legal development. As
Caballero-Farhi-Gourinchas (2008) theoretically predict and Chinn and Ito (2007) empirically
show, both Financial and legal development are important factors for the volume and directions
of cross-border capital flows. Alfaro, et al. (2008) argue that institutional development is also an
important factor. If these factors affect cross-border capital flows, they should also affect the
extent of sensitivity to financial shocks occurring to the center economies.
        To measure the level of financial development, we use the first principal component of
financial development (FD) using the data on private credit creation, stock market capitalization,
stock market total value, and private bond market capitalization all as shares of GDP.
Additionally, we also include as a measure of legal development the first principal component of



16
  We also tried the variable for bank lending provided by the center economies. However, since it turned out to be
persistently insignificant across different estimation models, we dropped the variable from the estimation models.

                                                         7
law and order (LAO), bureaucratic quality (BQ), and anti-corruption measures (CORRUPT), all
from the ICRG database. Higher values of these variables indicate better conditions.
        The precision of ˆFit
                           C
                               could be reduced by economic or financial disruptions. To control
for that, we include a vector of currency and banking crises (CRISIS). We use the crisis dummies
from Aizenman and Ito (2013) to identify the two types of the crises. For currency crisis,
Aizenman and Ito use the exchange market pressure (EMP) index using the exchange rate
against the currency of the base country. The banking crisis dummy is based on the papers by
Laeven and Valencia (2008, 2010, 2012).
        The variables in MC and INST are included in the estimations as deviations from the U.S.,
Japanese, Chinese, and Euro Area’s counterparts. The variables in vectors OMP, MC, and INST
are sampled from the first year of each three year panels to minimize the effect of potential
endogeneity. Also, to capture global common shocks, we also include time fixed effects.
Furthermore, to account for potential outliers on the dependent variable, we use the robust
regression estimation technique for all the estimations.


3. Empirical Results
3.1 First-Step Estimations
The Contributions of Different Factor Vectors
        For the first-step estimation, we regress each of the two dependent variables, policy
interest rate and REER changes, on four groups of explanatory variables: real global, financial
global, cross-country link, and domestic factors for three-year, non-overlapping panels in the
1986-2012 period.
        To grasp the general trend of the groups of factors that influence the financial variables,
we focus on the joint significance of the variables included in the real global, financial global,
cross-country, and domestic groups. Figure 1 illustrates the proportion of countries for which the
joint significance tests are found to be statistically significant (with the p-value less than 10%)
for each of the four financial variables. The figure illustrates the proportion for the groups of
advanced economies (IDC) and less developed economies (LDC) after 1992.17 Our discussions


17
  The figures in Figure 1 are based upon the specification that includes China as a major economy while the figures
based on the specification without China as a center economy yields similar observations. We also conduct the same
exercise for the group of EMGs. The figures for the EMG group are qualitatively similar to those of the LDC group.
Hence, we omit discussing them here.

                                                         8
focuses on the estimation results of developing countries although we also present the results of
developed countries mainly for comparison purposes.
        The graphical depictions in Figure 1 lead to the following conclusions. First, the
movements of both the policy interest rates and real effective exchange rates of the center
economies explain most joint-significantly the variation of the variables for the non-center
economies, indicating the influence of the major economies is the greatest for both financial
variables.18
        Second, as far as policy interest rate is concerned, the proportion of joint significance is
also relatively high for the group of “financial global” variables, especially for the EMG
countries. Unsurprisingly, the last two three-year panels indicate high proportions of joint
significance for both country groups, suggesting global financial factors have been playing an
important role in affecting the policy interest of countries, both developed and developing. This
result is consistent with the Rey’s (2013) thesis of “global financial cycles.” In the panels for
1998-2000 and 2001-2003, the proportions of financial global factors also appear high for both
country groups.19 Given the emerging market crises in the 1998-2000 period, and dot com bust
of the 2001-2003 period, these results suggest that economies are more exposed to global
financial shocks during periods of financial turbulence while also following center monetary
policies.
        Third, for REER changes, the movements of the center economies are critically important
for both country groups. Interestingly, the highest proportion of developing countries appear
sensitive to the REER movements of the center economies in 2010-2012. These results are
consistent with the reactions expressed by emerging market policy makers to the taper in Fed
quantitative easing, especially those characterized as “Fragile Five.”
        Overall, in accord with Rey (2013), these figures suggest that economies, both advanced
and developing, are subject to the financial conditions of the center economies. We investigate
the determinants of the degree of sensitivity to the financial conditions of the center economies
in the next subsection.


18
   This observation is also applicable for sovereign term spreads and stock market price changes, though less
significantly (not reported). The contribution of the major economies becomes bigger (not reported) for most of the
financial variabels, which is expected considering that this group of economies have more developed and open
financial markets.
19
   Again, this is more distinct for the EMG group.

                                                         9
Contributions of China as a Major Economy
        Before moving on to examine the determinants of the degree of sensitivity to the CE’s
financial conditions, let us question the assumption used thus far that China belongs in the set of
CE’s. That question is motivated by the fact that, as documented in many studies, there is still
much room for China to further develop and open its financial markets; hence its financial
influence might not be proportionate to its economic output.20
        Hence, we test whether the results of the previous exercise of testing the joint
significance of each vector of explanatory variables would be affected if we exclude China from
the group of the CE’s. When we do, we find that the general characteristics observed in Figure 1
remain qualitatively intact (results not reported), suggesting that the financial influence of China
remains limited.
        To test this assertion more formally, we compare the adjusted R-squared values of the
two specifications for each country and each three-year panel, and for each of the two financial
variables. Figure 2 illustrates the cross-country average differences in the adjusted-R squared
values between the estimation with China as one of the CE’s and the one without for both of the
two financial variables. The averages of the gap are calculated for the groups of developed
countries, developing countries, emerging market countries, and East Asian emerging market
economies as a comparison.21
        In the case of the policy interest rate model, including China as a major country increases
the adjusted R-squared, especially in the last three years of the 1990s that correspond to the East
Asian crisis. For East Asian emerging market economies, including the Chinese policy interest
rate in the estimation model increases the adjusted R-squared as much as over 15% on average.
Despite the recent impressive rise as an economic power, however, China’s contribution seems
negligible in the last two three-year panels for the policy interest rate model.
        In the REER figure, we see a high increase in the adjusted R-squared in the crisis years of
2007-2009 for emerging market countries, especially those in East Asia (with the additional
contribution of about 18% to the adjusted R-squared). This may reflect the situation where
international trade shrank significantly immediately after the outbreak of the global financial



20
  See Huang, et al. (2013) and Hung (2009) among others.
21
  The group of East Asian emerging market economies includes: Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.

                                                     10
crisis in 2008. In the tight international trade market, trade competitiveness of the world’s largest
exporter may have had a large influence on other trading partners.
        In the models for stock market price changes or sovereign term spreads, China does not
appear influential in most of the sample period (not reported). Considering that China’s financial
markets only became open recently, the lack of influence of China’s financial variables is
unsurprising. Overall, despite certain periods when the country exerts some influence, we
conclude that the financial influence of China is still minimal.22


3.2 Results of the Second-Step Estimation
        Now that we have ˆFit
                           C
                               for both policy interest rates and REER changes, we investigate
the determinants of the extent of linkages using the estimation model based on equation (2). We
estimate the determinants of ˆFit
                               C
                                   for the two financial variables but only use the dependent

variable of ˆ FiC from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center
economies because we concluded that the country’s financial influence in the global financial
markets is minimal. The regressions with China as a center economy yield results qualitatively
similar to those without China.
        Tables 1-1 and 1-2 report the estimation results for the extent of sensitivity of policy
interest rates and REER changes for the FULL, LDC, and EMG samples. The bottom rows of the
tables also report the joint significance tests for each vector of explanatory variables.
        As for the linkage of policy interest rates, reported in Table 1-1, the variables that
characterize countries’ open macro policies affect the sensitivity to the monetary policies of the
center economies. In contrast with Rey’s argument, we find that the type of exchange rate
regimes does matter; countries with greater exchange rate stability tend to be more sensitive to
changes in the CE’s monetary policy, though the estimate is only marginally significant, except
for model (3). Financial openness also contributes to higher degrees of sensitivity to the CE’s
policy interest rates, and its estimate is more persistently and strongly significant. These results
suggest that developing countries or emerging market economies with more stable exchange rate
movements as well as open financial markets are more subject to changes in the policy interest
rates in the CE’s. Interestingly, holding higher levels of foreign reserves tend to help non-CE’s to

22
  Our sample ends in 2012. Hence, the Shanghai stock market crash in 2015, that affected financial markets in other
parts of the world, is outside the scope of our estimation.

                                                        11
shield the impact of changes in the CE’s policy interest rates, i.e., to retain its monetary
autonomy. Exchange rate stability, financial openness, and IR holding are jointly significant for
the group of developing or emerging market countries.
        Among the variables for macroeconomic conditions, only the current account balance
seems to matter. However, the positive estimate on the current account balance appears
somewhat puzzling considering that a country running current account deficit – not surplus –
should be more susceptible to monetary policy changes of the CE’s. The result indicates that a
net capital exporter rather than importer is more sensitive to the monetary policies of the center
economies.
        As for the external link factors, financial linkage through foreign direct investment is the
most important variable in determining how shocks to the CE’s monetary policies affect those of
other non-CE’s for both developing and emerging market countries. A country that receives
more FDI from the CE’s tends to be more sensitive to changes in the monetary policies of the
CE’s.
        Financial development also matters significantly for the LDC sample. In fact, its impact
(i.e., the magnitude of the estimate) is found to larger among LDC’s than among IDC’s (results
not reported). Countries with more developed financial markets tend to be more sensitive to the
changes in the monetary policies of the CE’s. That suggests that countries with deep financial
markets can be good investment destinations for foreign investors, so that their arbitrage actions
may lead those countries to follow the monetary conditions of the CE’s more closely.
        Generally, the models for REER present robust results with good goodness-of-fit as
Table 1-2 reports. Given certain degrees of price stickiness, pursuing greater exchange rate
stability would lead both nominal and real effective exchange rate to be more sensitive to that of
the CE’s. Our results show the positive impact of greater exchange rate stability on the REER
connectivity for all the subsample country groups. Greater financial openness also contributes to
greater sensitivity for developing countries, though not significantly so for the EMG group.
Interestingly, irrespective of group, a country with a higher level of IR holding tends to be more
sensitive to REER changes of the center economies. One interpretation is that a country could
respond to changes in the center economies’ real currency appreciation through foreign exchange
market interventions, inducing a positive correlation; the interpretation of this coefficient is then
not causal.


                                                  12
       Emerging market countries with larger government debt or budget deficits tend to be less
sensitive to the REER of the center economies. These results may reflect the fact that such
countries, which likely face higher inflationary expectations, often face some difficulty in
maintaining real exchange rate stability against the currencies of the major economies despite
their general desire to pursue greater (nominal) exchange rate stability (Aizenman, et al. 2013,
Calvo, et al. 2000).
       Not surprisingly, countries with greater bilateral trade links with the center economies
tend to be more sensitive to the REER movements of the center economies. The negative impact
of trade competitiveness means that peripheral countries with more competitive trade structure
with those of the CE’s tend to become alternative investment destination if a shock occurs to the
CE’s. For example, if a shock happens in a way that causes real depreciation of the CE’s
currencies such as predicted slow output growth, an institutional change leading to greater labor
rigidities, and a falling appetite for the center economies’ financial assets, the demand for
financial assets in peripheral economies can rise and push the real values of their currencies.
Interestingly, financial linkage through FDI does not matter for the level of REER connectivity.
       In contrast, countries with more developed financial markets tend to be less sensitive to
the REER movements of the CE’s. These results are consistent with the observation that greater
financial development allows a country to have more flexible exchange rate movements. In other
words, countries could afford to detach their currency values’ movements from those of the
center economies.


3.3 Robustness Checks
       In the previous section, we reported results obtained using robust regression techniques
that account for outliers in both the dependent variable and explanatory variables – the
estimation keeps recursively down-weighting the outliers until it obtains converged estimates. To
further ensure our results are not driven by outliers, we undertake additional sensitivity analyses.
       To begin with, we remove both the fifth and the 95th percentiles of the ˆC sample, and
then re-estimate by reapplying the robust regression technique to the truncated sample. The
results (not reported) remain qualitatively intact. While the magnitude of the estimates change,
their statistical significance remain unchanged. When we repeat by removing the observations
below the 10th percentile and above the 90th percentile of the ˆC ’s, still we obtain qualitatively

                                                  13
similar results. These findings indicate that the results we report in Tables 1-1 and 1-2 are not
driven by outliers.
         Some of the countries in our sample have experienced financial crises. During periods of
financial turbulence, economic variables could exhibit anomalous behavior, leading to extreme
observations. Hence, as a second way to check the robustness of the estimation results, we
interact all the independent variables with a dummy for currency crises to account for potential
effects of currency crisis. For all the ˆC ’s of the three financial variables, we again obtain
qualitatively similar results. Therefore, we conclude that our estimation results are not driven by
extreme values of the explanatory and dependent variables during financial turbulences.


4. Further Analyses
4.1 Open Macro Policy in Conjunction with Other Factors
         In the baseline results of the previous subsection, open macro policy variables are found
to affect the extent of connectivity through financial variables. While these variables may
directly affect the extent of sensitivity to the center economies’ financial variables, it is also
possible that they affect the financial linkages indirectly through other variables.
         To investigate this possibility, we re-estimate the specifications while including
interactive terms between the variables for exchange rate stability and financial openness and
some selected variables, namely, current account balances, government gross debt (both as a
share of GDP), trade demand from the center economies, and the level of financial development.
The results are reported in Tables 2-1 and 2-2 for policy interest rates and the REER,
respectively.23
         We obtain several interesting results. First, while financial development alone would
make developing countries more sensitive to center economies’ monetary policy changes, the
sensitivity would be even greater if the country has more open financial markets or adopts more
flexible exchange rate regime, although theoretically, more flexible exchange rate movements
should make the country less subject to the monetary policies of the center economies, i.e., allow
for greater monetary autonomy.



23
  The estimates for inflation volatility, trade competition, legal development, and currency and banking crisis are
omitted from presentation in the tables due to space limitation.

                                                         14
         Table 3 illustrates the net effects of certain changes in the level of macroeconomic or
institutional variables (X) depending on the levels of both exchange rate stability (ERS) and
financial openness (KAOPEN) – i.e.,  0  1ERS   2 KAOPEN X . In the table, for a certain
magnitude of change in X, ERS and KAOPEN take the values of zero, 0.50, or 1.00.
         Table 3 (a) shows the net impact of a 10 percentage points (ppt) increase in the level of
financial development (as a deviation from the CE’s). From the table, we can see that, except for
the cases of having a rigidly fixed exchange rate regime with intermediately open or closed
financial markets, the net impact of a 10 ppt increase in the level of financial development is
usually positive. The net impact on the connectivity through policy interest rates is larger for
more financially open economies or those with more flexible exchange rate regimes. This
counterintuitive result could possibly be rationalized by the high correlation between financial
development and exchange rate flexibility; higher levels of financial development would lead a
country to become more prepared to adopt greater exchange rate flexibility. Hence, a country
with more developed financial markets and greater exchange rate flexibility could become a
destination for investors’ arbitrage-seeking behavior once the CE’s change their monetary policy
stance, thus leading to more synchronization of policy interest rates. This reasoning is consistent
with the finding that the interactive effect between financial development and financial openness
is positive.
         In Table 2-1, we also see a significant estimate for the interaction between ERS and
import demand from the CE’s. Table 3 (b) reports the net impact of a 5 percentage points (ppt)
increase in the level of import demand shows that the net impact is larger, or less negative, for
economies with more open financial markets or more stable exchange rate regimes. Greater trade
linkage leads to faster transmission of monetary policy from the center economies to peripheral
economies in this globalized world especially when peripheral economies pursue exchange rate
stability.24
         The types of trilemma regimes also affect the connectivity with the CE’s through REER
changes. According to Table 3 (c), the net impact of a 2 ppt deterioration of current account
balance (CAB) is larger for economies with more flexible exchange rate movements, while its

24
   Such a positive interactive effect between import demand from the center economies and greater exchange rate
stability is also observed in the estimation for the stock market price connectivity model (not reported). Peripheral
economies that face strong trade demand from the center economies could be more sensitive to the stock market
movements of the center economies if the countries pursue more stable exchange rate movements.

                                                          15
interactive effect with financial openness is negligible and insignificant. That is, if a shock
occurs to the center economies’ REER, it would be transmitted to peripheral economies more
through nominal exchange rate movements, especially for a country with worsening current
account balances. Hence, given price rigidity, the shock to the CE’s would not be passed on to
peripheral economies when they try to maintain exchange rate stability.
        Pursuit of greater exchange rate stability and financial openness also makes the net
impact of gross debt larger for REER influences (Table 3 (d)). Holding a larger amount of debt
makes a developing country more susceptible to the REER movement of the CE’s currencies if it
pursues greater exchange rate stability and more financial integration, which is consistent with
the economic characteristics of emerging market economies that had gone through financial
crisis in the past. In those crises, a policy interest rate increase in the CE’s, usually the U.S., led
first to real appreciation of the center economy’s currency, then transmitted to peripheral
economies especially when an indebted country pegged their currencies to the center economy’s
currency and had more open financial account. That may also mean that an indebted country is
tempted to monetize its debt, so that the REER transmission would take place more in the form
of higher inflation rather than nominal exchange rate flexibility.
        Even when it adopts stable exchange rate movements, a developing country with more
developed financial markets could make the extent of REER synchronization smaller (Table 3
(e)), though the interactive impact of financial openness is negligible or insignificant. Again, if a
shock occurs to the CE’s, the shock would be transmitted to peripheral economies with more
developed financial markets rather through nominal exchange rate movements.
        Overall, the results shown in Tables 2-1 and 2-2 demonstrate that the types of exchange
rate regimes do matter for the degree of linkage of financial variables between the center and
peripheral economies, both directly and indirectly through other macroeconomic variables such
as current account balances, gross government debt, trade linkages, and financial development.
In this sense, our findings are different from Rey’s “irreconcilable duo,” in which policy makers
face only the dilemma between financial openness and monetary autonomy, not the types of
exchange rate regimes.


4.2 Center Economy Conditions and Exchange Market Pressure



                                                   16
           As we saw in the “taper tantrum” episode in the summer of 2013, a policy change, or
even the mere mention of its possibility, by one of the CE’s may pressure non-center financial
markets. Using the same framework, we now investigate how the financial variables of the CE’s
affect the level of financial stress in the peripheral economies by focusing on the correlation
between the financial variables of the CE’s and the exchange market pressure (EMP) index in
LDC or EMG economies. The CE’s financial variables of our focus are policy interest rates,
REER, and EMP.
           To calculate the EMP index, we follow the oft-used methodology introduced by
Eichengreen et al. (1995, 1996), that is as a weighted average of monthly changes in the nominal
exchange rate (i.e., the rate of depreciation), the international reserve loss in percentage, and the
change in the nominal interest rate with all in respect to the base country in the sense Aizenman,
et al. (2013) do to construct the trilemma indexes.25 The weights are inversely related to each
country’s variances of each of the changes in the three components.
           It is straightforward to see how each of the CE financial variables we focus on can
influence the EMP of the peripheral economies. If the policy interest rates rise in the CE, for
example, that might draw more cross-border capital flows into these economies, including those
which used to flow to peripheral economies. That might increase the level of financial stress on
the peripheral economies, as evidenced by some emerging market economies that experienced
financial difficulties after the United States started tightening its monetary policy in 2013. Hence,
we should expect a positive correlation between the CE’s policy interest rates and the non-center
EMP.
           When the CE’s experience real appreciation of their currencies (i.e., a rise in the REER),
given some price stickiness, that would create (expected) nominal depreciation pressure on a
peripheral economy, which we depict in Figure 3 as an outward shift of the curve for the rate of
return from holding CE’s assets in terms of PH’s currency. If the non-center economy does not
pursue exchange rate fixity, its currency would depreciate (from E0 to E1). If it does pursue
exchange rate fixity, then the non-center’s monetary authorities would have to intervene the
foreign exchange market, decrease its holding of foreign reserves, and end up having a higher
policy interest rate (from RPH,0 to RPH,1). Given that the EMP index is defined as a weighted
average of monthly changes in the rate of depreciation, the percentage loss in international

25
     See Data Appendix for more details.

                                                   17
reserves, and the change in the nominal interest rate, whether non-center’s monetary authorities
pursue exchange rate fixity (i.e., no currency depreciation but a rise in the interest rate and a
reduction in IR holding) or not (i.e., currency depreciation with no or less change in the interest
rate or IR holding), its EMP should rise. Hence, the CE’s REER should be positively correlated
with the non-center’s EMP.
           Lastly, the link between the CE’s EMP and the PH’s EMP is essentially about whether
and to what extent stress in the CE’s financial markets can be contagious and affect the EMP of
non-center economies. We could expect that if a non-center economy is more financially open
and pursues greater exchange stability, then it might be more susceptible to an increase in the
stress level of the CE’s financial markets. However, at the same time, when one or more center
economies experience a rise in the EMP, that would also lead to nominal (and real) appreciation
of non-center’s currencies. In such a case, whether or not the non-center economy intervenes the
foreign exchange market, it could experience a fall in the level of EMP, suggesting a negative
correlation between the CE’s EMP and the non-center’s EMP. This is a question that has to be
addressed empirically; hence, we examine whether CE’s EMP and the non-center’s EMP are
positively or negatively correlated.
           With these theoretical predictions at hand, we first repeat the exercise based on equation
(1), but this time having the EMP indexes of the sample countries as the dependent variable for
all the financial variables tested as explanatory variables. In other words, we examine the extent
of sample countries’ external policy vulnerability to the CE’s policies, namely, the center
economies’ policy interest rates, the REER, and the EMP, while controlling the estimation model
in the same way as in the previous analysis.
           Figure 4 is comparable to Figure 1 in that it illustrates the proportion of countries for
which the joint significance tests are found to be statistically significant (with the p-value less
than 10%) for the three financial variables for .26 We have figures for the groups of advanced
economies (IDC) and less developed economies (LDC) for each of the three financial variables,
each of which includes the proportions for the four vectors of variables.
           Interestingly but not surprisingly, Figure 4 shows that among the advanced economies,
the proportion of countries that received significant influence from the global financial factors
(i.e., their EMP is more vulnerable to the global financial factors) is highest for all of the three

26
     These figures are made using the model that does not include China as a center economy.

                                                          18
financial variables in the 2007-2009 period whereas the proportion for developing countries is
the higher in the 2010-2012 period immediately after the outbreak of the GFC. Generally,
however, the linkages between developing countries’ EMP and CE’s policy interest rates appear
weak. The proportion for the significant linkage rises in the 2010-2012 period, but only to less
than 20%.
       The EMP of developing countries is a little more sensitive to the REER movements of
the center economies. The proportion of developing countries for which the center economies’
REER are jointly significant for the EMP estimation is the highest among the vectors of
explanatory variables in the 2010-2012 period.
       In general, the EMP of developing countries is more exposed to the influence of the
center economies’ EMP. Especially, during the GFC years and in their aftermath, developing
countries’ EMP is found more sensitive to the movements of the EMP of the CE’s, indicating
that financial stress that arose in the CE’s must have been transmitted to developing countries
during and after the GFC.
       Figure 5 illustrates the proportion of the countries for which the estimated coefficients of
the CE’s financial variables are found to have a significantly positive or negative ˆC with the p-

value less than 10%. We predict ˆC  0 for policy interest rates and REER, and ˆC  0 or

ˆC  0 for the EMP, whose results we illustrate in panels (a) through (d), respectively.
       Roughly speaking, when we focus on the test of ˆC  0 , the three center economies’
financial variables are relatively equally influential on the EMP of developing countries, except
for the 2007-2009 and 2010-2012 periods in which either the U.S. alone or both the U.S. and the
Euro area are influential, reflecting the GFC and the Euro debt crisis. It is interesting to note,
however, that the highest portion of developing countries have their EMP significantly positively
affected by the policy interest rate of the Euro area in most of the time periods. Also, the REER
of Japan and the U.S. appear influential on developing countries’ EMP in the last three-year
panel. Overall, the EMP of the center economies was jointly significant as an influencer on
developing countries’ EMP in Figure 4, but the result seems to be more driven by the negative
effects of the center economies’ EMP as panel (d) shows, indicating that the negative effects of
the CE’s EMP is more of a case. Considering that the US dollar and the Japanese yen had been
the currencies most heavily used in carry trade and also providing safe haven for international


                                                  19
investors during the GFC and in its immediate aftermath, the crisis in the 2007-2009 period let
these currencies to appreciate significantly. The appreciation of the CE’s currencies led to a fall
in the EMP of these economies, which at the same time also meant depreciation of the currencies
of the non-center countries. That explains the finding that more non-center countries’ EMP
appears to be negatively correlated with the CE’s EMP during the GFC and the following period.
         Figure 6 illustrates the average estimated impacts of the U.S. REER and EMP
( ˆREER
    US
         and ˆEMP
               US
                   ) on non-center economies’ EMP for the group of developed countries (IDC),
emerging market economies (EMEs), and non-emerging market developing countries (non-EMG
LDC) for the three year panels starting with 1995-2000 through 2010-12.27
        According to Figure 6 (a), the average impact of the U.S. REER ( ˆREER
                                                                           US
                                                                                ) on the EMP
fluctuates but remains persistently positive for IDC and EMEs. Interestingly, the average
responsiveness of the EMEs’ EMP to the U.S. REER slightly rose in the 2010-12 period.28 Based
on the estimation results, for the group of EMEs, if the U.S. REER rises (i.e., real appreciation)
by 10%, the EMP on average would rise by about 1.2. This (unit-less) figure stands for about
0.6-0.8 standard deviations of major EMEs’ EMP, which is not unsubstantial.
        Figure 6 (b) shows that for the last decade or so, the impact of the U.S. EMP on sample
countries’ EMP has been negative for both IDC and EME groups. Using both panels of Figure 6,
we can argue that, if the U.S. raises its policy rate, that would cause U.S. REER to rise and PE’s
REER to fall, which leads PE’s EMP to rise while the U.S. EMP falls. This is consistent with the
nervousness shared among many EMEs since the U.S. Fed suggested the possibility of lifting the
zero interest rate policy in the summer to fall of 2015.
        Now, we repeat the second-step estimation, but the dependent variable this time will be
the estimated coefficient for the impact ( ˆC ) on the sample countries’ EMP of the CE’s financial

variables: policy interest rates, the REER, and the EMP. We report the results in Tables 4-1 to 4-
3.29
        Table 4-1 shows that we do not obtain robust results when we estimate the determinants
of the estimated impact ( ˆC ) of the CE’s policy interest rates on the sample countries’ EMP. The


27
   The x‐axis of the figure only shows the last years of the three year panels.
28
   These observations are qualitatively intact when we look at the country group medians.
29
   We continue to use the robust regression estimation technique to accommodate potential extreme values of the
EMP index.

                                                        20
estimate for the variables of financial development is persistently significant and negative,
suggesting that a country equipped with more developed financial markets tends to be able to
shield itself from the center economies’ policy interest rate changes affecting its EMP.
Interestingly, while we found that a country with more developed financial markets tends to have
a policy rate more sensitive to those of the center economies in Table 1-1, here, more developed
financial markets may also help absorb and internalize shocks from changes in the center
economies’ policy interest rates. That might explain the motivation for developing countries to
develop their financial markets.
       Such an insulating effect of financial development is also observed in the results for the
factors affecting the link between the center economies’ REER and the sample countries’ EMP
as is shown in Table 4-2. The negative coefficient on financial openness appears somewhat
counterintuitive, considering that more open financial markets would allow for more rapid
capital flight if center economies experience real appreciation of their currencies. However, more
open financial markets often lead to more financial development (Chinn and Ito, 2006), so that it
may also complement the shock-absorbing effect of general financial development. Or, it could
be also possible that an economy with greater financial openness – especially toward outward
capital flows – may be able to benefit from more risk sharing. While developing countries with
greater inflation volatility tend to have their EMP more vulnerable to real appreciation of the
CE’s currencies, we also see some evidence that those with worse current account balances or
deficit, also tend to be more vulnerable to the CE’s currency values. In contrast to financial
openness being a significant factor, the types of exchange rate regimes do not appear to affect the
link between the CE’s REER and the peripheral economies’ EMP.
       The estimated effect of greater import demand from the CEs is found negative. If the
CE’s currencies experience real appreciation, a peripheral economy that has stronger trade ties
with the center economies could experience real depreciation especially when it has stronger
trade ties with the center economies.
       Table 4-3 reports the results of the estimates regarding the factors affecting the impact of
the CE’s EMP on the non-center countries’ EMP. While higher levels of financial openness,
inflation volatility, and financial development might lead developing countries to face higher, or
more positive, degrees of connectivity between the CEs and non-center economies through their
EMP, higher levels of government debt, budget deficit, current account deficit, trade demand,


                                                 21
and legal development would lead to lower degrees of the CE-PH EMP connectivity. The latter
group of significant estimates may appear puzzling. However, Panel (d) of Figure 5 helps us
interpret these results. First of all, there are more developing countries which turn out to have
negative connectivity between their EMP and that of the center economies. Also, appreciation of
the CE’s currencies, especially the dollar and the Japanese yen during the GFC and its aftermath
contributed to lowering the EMP of the CE’s. However, negative sensitivity indicates that a fall
in the CE’s EMP led to a rise in the PH’s EMP, and our results indicate that such a movement is
more applicable to economies with higher government debt or budget deficit, current account
deficit, and more developed legal systems.
         As we did with the original model, we now interact some of the explanatory variables
with the open macro variables of exchange rate stability and financial openness to examine if
there is any interactive or indirect effects of open macro policy arrangements. We report the
results in Table 5. Columns (1) through (3) report the estimation results on the estimated linkage
between the CE’s REER and the PH’s EMP, and columns (4) through (6) those on the estimated
linkage between the CE’s EMP and the PH’s EMP.30
         Since we have many interaction terms, we again estimate the marginal effects of a certain
change in a macroeconomic or institutional variable for the levels of exchange rate stability and
financial openness being either zero, 0.50, or 1.00 and report the results in Table 6.
         According to Table 6 (a), for a developing country with the greater exchange rate
stability or relatively closed financial openness, greater financial development makes its
economy’s EMP levels more sensitive to changes in the center economies’ REER. If an economy
of concern runs a current account deficit, Table 6 (b) indicates that a peripheral economy’s EMP
would be more sensitive to REER changes in the center economies when it pursues greater
exchange rate stability or more financial openness, though the impact of financial openness is
insignificant and rather small. When a PH economy strengthens its trade ties with the center
economies (by 5 percentage point), it makes the PH economy’s EMP more sensitive to the CE’s
REER if the PH economy has more flexible exchange rate regime and more open financial
markets.




30
 We do not report the results for the estimations on the link between the CE’s policy interest rates and the PH’s
EMP due to the weak results of the main model in Table 4-1.

                                                         22
          When we examine the indirect effects of exchange rate stability and financial openness
for the EMP-EMP connectivity between the center and non-center, peripheral economies, Table
6 (d) shows that if a country worsens its current account balance, its impact would be larger, or
less negative, on the EMP-EMP connectivity for a country that pursues greater financial
openness and greater exchange rate flexibility. During the 2007-2009 and 2010-2012 periods
particularly, a country with worsening current account balance would face more negative EMP-
EMP link with the center economies if has more rigid exchange rate regime and more closed
financial markets while the effect of an exchange rate regime type is stronger than that of
financial openness regime.
          Similar interactions with exchange rate stability and financial openness are also found for
the impact of stronger trade linkages with the center economies. Having greater trade linkages
with the CE would contribute to more positive EMP-EMP linkages if a country pursues greater
financial openness and greater exchange rate flexibility. However, it also means that the extent of
the negative EMP-EMP relationship is stronger for a country with more closed financial markets
and a more rigid exchange rate regime though the estimate with exchange rate regimes is
statistically insignificant.
          Hence, as was in the previous analysis, open macro policy arrangements have not just
direct but also indirect impacts on the linkage between the center economies’ policy interest rates,
REER, or EMP and our sample developing countries’ EMP. Hence, it is safe to conclude that
trilemma policy arrangements do affect the sensitivity of developing countries to policy changes
in the center economies, although not always in accord with priors.


5. Concluding Remarks
          Shocks occurring to the center economies are transmitted to other parts of the world,
often buffeting smaller, open economies such emerging market economies. The increasingly
integrated nature of the global financial markets may require a re-think of the role of monetary
policy and the trilemma hypothesis, particularly in this post-Global Financial Crisis (GFC)
period.
          This paper investigates the questions of whether and how the financial conditions of
developing and emerging market countries are affected by the movements of financial variables
in the center economies, namely, the U.S., Japan, the Euro area, and China. Our empirical


                                                  23
method relies upon a two-step approach. We first investigate the extent of sensitivity of several
important financial variables, such as policy interest rate and the real effective exchange rates, to
those of the center economies while controlling for global and domestic factors. Once we
measure the degree of sensitivity, we examine the determinants of sensitivity by examining a
number of country-specific macroeconomic conditions or policies, real or financial linkages with
the center economy, and the levels of institutional development.
       We find that for both policy interest rates and the REER, the link with the CE’s has been
dominant for developing and emerging market economies in the last two decades. At the same
time, the movements of policy interest rates are found to be more sensitive to global financial
shocks around the time of the emerging markets’ crises in the late 1990s and early 2000s and
since the time of the GFC of 2008.
       While China’s weight in the world economic output has clearly increased dramatically,
including China as one of the center economies does not necessarily increase the goodness of fit
in the regressions estimating financial variable sensitivity. This finding suggests that, for now,
China does not exert substantial influence in financial markets on a level rivalling that of other
center economies such as the U.S., the Euro area, and Japan.
       The results from the second step estimates that investigate the determinants of sensitivity
to the CE’s financial variables suggest that while the levels of direct trade linkage, financial
linkage through FDI, trade competition, financial development, current account balances, and
national debt are important, the arrangement of open macro policies such as the exchange rate
regime and financial openness are also found to have direct influences on the sensitivity to the
CE’s. As theory suggests, we find that an economy that pursues greater exchange rate stability
and financial openness would face a stronger link with the CE’s through policy interest rates and
REER movements.
       We also find that the degree of exchange rate stability and financial openness do matter
for the level of sensitivity when they are interacted with other variables such as current account
balances, gross national debt, trade demand, and financial development. For example, if a
developing country receives higher import demand from the CE’s, that would strengthen the link
between the peripheral and center economies through policy interest rates when the PH has a
policy arrangement of pursuing both greater exchange rate stability and financial openness. Such
a policy arrangement would also make the impact of having greater gross debt on the link


                                                 24
between CE’s and PH’s REER. Thus, we conclude that open macro policy arrangements do have
both direct and indirect impacts on the extent of sensitivity to the center economies.
       We also investigate whether the exchange market pressure (EMP) of the PH’s is sensitive
to the movements of the CE’s policy interest rates, REER, and EMP. We find that the EMP of
the PH’s is sensitive to the movements of the center economies’ REER and the EMP during the
GFC and the following period.
       When we reapply the second-step estimation to the estimated sensitivity of our sample
countries’ EMP to the CE’s financial variables, we find that a country with higher levels of
financial development can mitigate the effect of changes in the center economies’ policy interest
rates on the level of EMP it faces. While the real appreciation of the CE’s could lead to higher
EMP of the peripheral economies, higher levels of financial development, greater financial
openness, strong trade ties with the CEs, and more stable inflation would help reduce the EMP
sensitivity to center economies’ REER.
       While higher levels of financial openness, inflation volatility, and financial development
lead developing countries to face higher, or more positive, degrees of sensitivity between the
CE’s and non-center’s EMP, higher levels of government debt or budget deficit, current account
deficit, trade demand, and legal development lead to the opposite. These characteristics are
consistent with those of many countries whose EMP negatively related with the CE’s EMP
during and after the GFC.
       The impact of the interaction between open macro policy variables with macroeconomic
and institutional conditions are also detected. For example, when a country pursues greater
exchange rate stability but less of financial openness, more financial development makes its
economy’s EMP levels more sensitive to changes in the center economies’ REER. If a non-
center economy runs current account deficit, its sensitivity to the REER the center economies
would rise when it pursues greater exchange rate stability. A current account deficit country
finds its EMP more positively correlated with the EMP of the center economies if it pursues
greater financial openness and greater exchange rate flexibility. Having greater trade linkages
with the CE contributes to more positive EMP-EMP linkages if a country pursues greater
financial openness. Thus, trilemma policy arrangements do affect the sensitivity of developing
countries to policy changes in the center economies both directly and indirectly.



                                                25
       In this study, not only do we evidence that the open macro policy choice is “still” dictated
by the hypothesis of the trilemma, but also we provide much more nuanced, indirect effects of
trilemma policy arrangements. Particularly, unlike the recent “irreconcilable duo” argument, we
do find that the types of exchange rate regimes do affect the extent of sensitivity to changes in
financial conditions or policies in the center economies. Hence, the requiem for the trilemma
need not yet be written.




                                                 26
References:
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych, 2008. "Why Doesn't Capital
       Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," The Review of
       Economics and Statistics 90(2): 347-368.
Ahmed, S. and A. Zlate. 2013. “Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New
       World?” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance
       Discussion Papers, #1081. Washington, D.C.: Federal Reserve Board (June).
Aizenman, Joshua. 2013. “The impossible Trinity – from the Policy Trilemma to the Policy
       Quadrilemma,” Global Journal of Economics, 2013, 02:01.
Aizenman, Joshua and Hiro Ito. 2013. Forthcoming in the Journal of International Money and
       Finance. Also available as NBER Working Paper #19448 (September 2013).
Aizenman, Joshua, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Hiro Ito. 2015. “International Reserves Before and
       After the Global Crisis: Is There No End to Hoarding?” Journal of International Money
       and Finance Volume 52 (April 2015), Pages 102–126.
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2015. “Monetary Policy Spillovers and the
       Trilemma in the New Normal: Periphery Country Sensitivity to Core Country Conditions,”
       NBER Working Paper #21128 (May 2015).
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2013. Review of International Economics,
       21(3), 447–458 (August).
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2011. “Surfing the Waves of Globalization:
       Asia and Financial Globalization in the Context of the Trilemma,” Journal of the
       Japanese and International Economies, vol. 25(3), p. 290 – 320 (September).
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2010. “The Emerging Global Financial
       Architecture: Tracing and Evaluating New Patterns of the Trilemma Configuration,”
       Journal of International Money and Finance 29 (2010) 615–641.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008a, “An Equilibrium
       Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review,
       98(1) (March): 358-393.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart. “Fear Of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 2002, v107(2,May), 379-408.



                                              27
Christensen, J. H. E., and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2014 “Estimating Shadow-rate Term Structure
       Models with Near-zero Yields,” Journal of Financial Econometrics 0, 1-34.
Christiansen, H. and C. Pigott. 1997. “Long-Term Interest Rates in Globalised Markets”, OECD
       Economics Department Working Papers no 175.
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito. 2007. “Current Account Balances, Financial Development and
       Institutions: Assaying the World 'Savings Glut',” Journal of International Money and
       Finance, Volume 26, Issue 4, p. 546-569 (June).
Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,”
       Paper presented at the symposium New Challenges for Monetary Policy, August 26–28,
       Jackson Hole, WY.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz. 1995. “Exchange Market Mayhem: The
       Antecedents and Aftermaths of Speculative Attacks”, Economic Policy, 21, pp. 249-312,
       October.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises:
       First Tests”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 98(4), pp. 463−484.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Poonam Gupta, 2014, “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations of
       Reduced Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets, mimeo (UC
       Berkeley: January).
Forbes, Kristin J. and Menzie D. Chinn. 2004. “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in
       Financial Markets over Time,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, August, 86(3):
       705–722.
Forbes, K. J. and F. E. Warnock, 2012. Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
       Retrenchment. Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 235-251.
Fratzscher, M. 2011. “Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis,”
       NBER Working Paper 17357 (Cambridge: NBER).
Ghosh, A. R., J. Kim, M. Qureshi, and J. Zalduendo, 2012. Surges. IMF Working Paper
       WP/12/22.
Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan David Ostry, and Mahvash Saeed Qureshi. 2014. “Exchange Rate
       Management and Crisis Susceptibility: A Reassessment,” IMF Working Papers 14/11,
       Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.



                                              28
Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan D Ostry, and Mahvash S Qureshi. 2015. “Exchange Rate Management
       and Crisis Susceptibility: A Reassessment,” IMF Economic Review, Palgrave Macmillan,
       vol. 63(1), pages 238-276, May.
Huang, Y., X. Wang, and N. Lin. 2013. “Financial Reform in China: Progresses and Challenges,”
       In Patrick, H. and Y. C. Park, eds. The Ongoing Financial Development of China, Japan,
       and Korea, Columbia University Press, New York: Columbia University.
Hung, J. H. 2009. “China’s Approach to Capital Flows since 1978” In Y.W. Cheung and K.
   Wang, ed. China and Asia: Economic and Financial Interactions, Routledge Studies in the
   Modern World Economy.
Ito, H. and M. Kawai. 2012. “New Measures of the Trilemma Hypothesis and Their Implications
       for Asia.” ADBI Working Paper 381. (February 2012).
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2010. “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and the
       Ugly,” IMF Working Paper No. 10/44. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2012. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working
       Paper WP/12/163, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2008. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working
       Paper WP/08/224, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Mundell, R.A. 1963. Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
       Exchange Rates. Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science. 29(4): 475–85.
Obstfeld, M. 2014. “Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization”, mimeo,
       University of California, Berkeley.
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor. 2005. “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs
       among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility.” Review of Economics
       and Statistics 87 (August): 423–438.
Rey, H. 2013. “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
       Independence,” prepared for the 2013 Jackson Hole Meeting.
Saxena, Sweta C. 2008. “Capital Flows, Exchange Rate Regime and Monetary Policy,” BIS
       Papers No 35. Basle: Bank for International Settlements.
Shambaugh, J. C., 2004. The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 119 (1), 301-52.



                                               29
Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia. 2014. “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary
      Policy at the Zero Lower Bound”, NBER Working Paper No. 20117.




                                           30
Appendix: Data Descriptions and Sources

Policy short-term interest rate – money market rates Extracted from the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics (IFS).
Stock market prices – stock market price indices from the IFS
Sovereign bond spread – the difference between the long-term interest rate (usually 10 year
government bond) and the policy short-term interest rate – i.e., the slope of the yield curve, IFS.
Real effective exchange rate (REER) – REER index from the IFS. An increase indicates
appreciation.
Global interest rate – the first principal component of U.S. FRB, ECB, and Bank of Japan’s
policy interest rates.
Commodity prices – the first principal component of oil prices and commodity prices, both from
the IFS.
VIX index – It is available in http://www.cboe.com/micro/VIX/vixintro.aspx and measures the
implied volatility of S&P 500 index options.
“Ted spread” – It is the difference between the 3-month Eurodollar Deposit Rate in London and
the 3-month U.S. Treasury Bill yield.
Industrial production (IP) – It is based on the industrial production index from the IFS.
Exchange rate stability (ERS) and financial openness (KAOPEN) indexes – From the trilemma
indexes by Aizenman, et al. (2013).
International reserves (IR) – international reserves minus gold divided by nominal GDP. The
data are extracted from the IFS.
Gross national debt and general budget balance – both are included as shares of GDP and
obtained from the World Economic Outlook (WEO) database.
Trade demand by the center economies ( TR _ LINK ip ) – TR _ LINKip  IMPipC GDPip where IMPi C
is total imports into center economy C from country i, that is normalized by country i’s GDP
based on the data from the IMF Direction of Trade database.
FDI provided by the center economies ( FDINV i C )– It is the ratio of the total stock of foreign
direct investment from country C in country i as a share of country i’s GDP. We use the OECD
International Direct Investment database. Due to possible nonstationarity of the data series, we
include the first-difference of the FDI data series.
Trade competition (Trade_Comp) – It is constructed as follows.

                                  100             ExpWC , k ExpWi , k 
             Trade _ Comp       C
                                 i                        *
                            Max(Trade _ Comp) k  ExpWW , k GDPi 
                                                                       

Exp WC , k   is exports from large-country c to every other country in the world (W) in industrial sector
k whereas       Exp WW , k   is exports from every country in the world to every other country in the world
(i.e. total global exports) in industrial sector k. Exp Wi ,k is exports from country i to every other


                                                           31
country in the world in industrial sector k, and GDPi is GDP for country i. We assume
merchandise exports are composed of five industrial sectors (K), that is, manufacturing,
agricultural products, metals, fuel, and food.
This index is normalized using the maximum value of the product in parentheses for every
country pair in the sample. Thus, it ranges between zero and one.31 A higher value of this
variable means that country i’s has more comparable trade structure to the center economies.
Financial development (FD) – It is the first principal component of private credit creation, stock
market capitalization, stock market total value, and private bond market capitalization all as
shares of GDP.32
Legal development (LEGAL) – It is the first principal component of law and order (LAO),
bureaucratic quality (BQ), and anti-corruption measures (CORRUPT), all from the ICRG
database. Higher values of these variables indicate better conditions.
Currency crisis (CURRENCY) – It is from Aizenman and Ito (2013) who use the exchange
market pressure (EMP) index using the exchange rate against the currency of the base country.
We use two standard deviations of the EMP as the threshold to identify a currency crisis.
Banking crisis (BANKCRISIS) – It is from Aizenman and Ito (2013) who follow the
methodology of Laeven and Valencia (2008, 2010, 2012). For more details, see Appendix 1 of
Aizenman and Ito (2013).
Exchange market pressure (EMP) index –It is defined as a weighted average of monthly changes
in the nominal exchange rate, the international reserve loss in percentage, and the nominal
interest rate. The nominal exchange rate is calculated against the base country that we use to
construct the trilemma indexes (see Aizenman, et al., 2008). The weights are inversely related to
each country’s variances of each of the changes in the three components over the sample
countries.
      EMPi ,t   (% ei ,t )   [  (ii ,t  ib ,t )   (% ri ,t  % rb )

                                                    (1 /  % ei ,t )                                                              (1 /   (ii ,t ib ,t ) )
     where                                                                                         ,                                                                            ,
                         (1 /  % ei ,t )  (1 /   (ii ,t ib ,t ) )  (1 /  % ri ,t  % r )          (1 /  % e )  (1 /   (ii ,t ib ,t ) )  (1 /  % ri ,t  % r )
                                 (1 /  % ri ,t % r )
     
          (1 /  % ei ,t )  (1 /   (ii ,t ib ,t ) )  (1 /  % ri ,t % r )

b stands for the “base country,” which is defined as the country that a home country’s monetary
policy is most closely linked with as in Shambaugh (2004) and Aizenman, et al. (2013). The base
countries are Australia, Belgium, France, Germany, India, Malaysia, South Africa, the U.K., and
the U.S. The base country can change as it has happened to Ireland, for example. Its base country
was the U.K. until the mid-1970s, and changed to Germany since Ireland joined the European
Monetary System (EMS).


31
   This variable is an aggregated version of the trade competitiveness variable in Forbes and Chinn (2004). Their
index is based on more disaggregated 14 industrial sectors.
32
   Because the private bond market capitalization data go back only to 1990, the FD series before 1990 are
extrapolated using the principal component of private credit creation, stock market capitalization, and stock market
total values, which goes back to 1976. These two FD measures are highly correlated with each other.

                                                                                                     32
To construct the crisis dummies in three-year panels, we assign the value of one if a crisis occurs
in any year within the three-year period.




                                                33
                               Table 1-1: Factors Affecting Policy Interest Rate Sensitivity, 1986-2012
                                                            FULL            FULL             LDC             LDC            EMG             EMG
                                                              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
       Open Macro Policy       Exchange rate stability        -0.167         -0.349            4.862          3.392            3.657          3.098
            (OMP)                                            (0.796)        (0.878)         (2.693)*         (2.447)         (2.448)         (2.268)
                                 Financial openness            0.223         0.249            5.455           5.777           7.930           7.491
                                                             (0.720)        (0.805)        (2.403)**       (2.259)**      (2.245)***      (2.154)***
                                     IR Holding               -1.419         -2.034          -13.803         -11.343         -12.400         -13.557
                                                             (2.082)        (2.277)         (7.342)*        (6.541)*       (6.254)**       (5.820)**
        Macro. Conditions         CA balance (%)              6.550          5.943           19.282          24.284          41.092          39.017
             (MC)                                          (2.979)**       (3.580)*        (9.666)**      (10.541)**     (10.507)***     (10.451)***
                                    Inflation Vol.           14.135           9.400          19.270          23.910            9.839         10.727
                                                            (11.231)        (6.003)         (34.312)        (15.012)        (28.624)        (12.515)
                                   Gross debt (%)              0.064                          -0.963                          -1.420
                                                             (0.467)                         (1.592)                         (1.289)
                                 Budget balance (%)                          7.715                           -2.145                         22.313
                                                                            (4.818)                        (15.342)                        (16.492)
          External Link          Trade competition            0.442           0.390          -4.540          -6.454         -11.187         -11.246
             (LINK)                                         (2.764)         (2.800)         (9.166)         (7.550)         (7.868)        (6.633)*
                                   Trade demand              -0.133          1.263           6.868            8.340         11.068           11.898
                                                            (3.104)         (3.422)        (11.125)        (10.116)         (9.170)         (8.609)
                                   FDI from CEs             17.785          19.231          49.264          44.044          42.633           41.347
                                                          (4.191)***      (4.791)***     (16.003)***     (15.113)***     (13.001)***     (12.732)***
        Institutional Dev.            Fin. Dev.              -0.346          0.370           9.570            7.651           8.137           7.931
              (INST)                                        (0.699)         (0.803)       (2.500)***      (2.427)***      (2.207)***      (2.168)***
                                     Legal Dev.              -0.718          -1.766          -4.831          -5.933          -7.132          -7.115
                                                            (1.384)         (1.482)         (6.555)         (5.974)         (5.530)         (5.199)
             Crises                Currency crisis           -0.058          -0.739          -3.589          -2.712          -3.212          -3.422
            (CRISIS)                                        (0.658)         (0.704)         (2.595)         (2.178)         (2.167)        (1.872)*
                                   Banking crisis            0.415           0.596           0.544            1.410          0.766           1.292
                                                            (0.532)         (0.574)         (2.096)         (1.838)         (1.870)         (1.676)
                                           N                   611             674            386              432             327             371
                                      Adj. R2                 0.05            0.05            0.09             0.08           0.12            0.13
                                   # of countries               59              59             41               41              31              31
                                    F-test, OMP                0.88            0.76           0.01             0.01            0.00            0.00
                                   F-test, Macro               0.10            0.01           0.24             0.03            0.00            0.00
                                  F-test, Ext. Link            0.00            0.00           0.00             0.00            0.00            0.00
                                  F-test, Inst. Dev.           0.59            0.49           0.00             0.01            0.00            0.00
                                     F-test, All               0.00            0.00           0.00             0.00            0.00            0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The second
estimation is conducted for the estimates ˆ FiC from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center economies. Time fixed effects
for the three-year panels and the constant are also included, though their estimates are not reported.
                                                                            34
                   Table 1-2: Factors Affecting Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) Sensitivity, 1986-2012
                                                            FULL            FULL            LDC             LDC             EMG            EMG
                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
       Open Macro Policy       Exchange rate stability        0.614           0.643           0.718          0.807            0.725          0.760
            (OMP)                                         (0.076)***      (0.074)***      (0.132)***     (0.121)***      (0.135)***      (0.123)***
                                 Financial openness          0.348           0.263           0.377          0.311            0.157          0.074
                                                          (0.077)***      (0.075)***      (0.126)***      (0.121)**         (0.137)        (0.132)
                                     IR Holding              0.936           0.863           1.038           0.919           0.761          0.606
                                                          (0.208)***      (0.202)***      (0.334)***     (0.320)***       (0.331)**       (0.314)*
        Macro. Conditions         CA balance (%)             1.096           0.668           0.921          0.459            1.360          0.684
             (MC)                                         (0.342)***       (0.328)**       (0.545)*        (0.536)        (0.563)**        (0.553)
                                    Inflation Vol.            3.429          -0.973          2.824          -0.840            2.706         -0.868
                                                          (1.234)***       (0.493)**       (1.674)*        (0.671)          (1.672)        (0.634)
                                   Gross debt (%)            -0.078                          -0.072                          -0.138
                                                            (0.049)                         (0.078)                        (0.075)*
                                 Budget balance (%)                          0.401                          1.018                             2.366
                                                                            (0.472)                        (0.963)                        (0.956)**
          External Link          Trade competition           -1.606          -1.326          -1.625         -1.262          -1.275           -0.866
             (LINK)                                       (0.275)***      (0.244)***      (0.427)***     (0.372)***      (0.429)***       (0.374)**
                                   Trade demand               1.744          1.703            1.763          1.877           2.022            2.151
                                                          (0.295)***      (0.280)***      (0.483)***     (0.460)***      (0.463)***      (0.439)***
                                   FDI from CEs              -0.618          -0.634          -0.335         -0.372          -0.110           -0.272
                                                            (0.381)        (0.380)*         (0.673)        (0.668)         (0.643)          (0.639)
        Institutional Dev.            Fin. Dev.              -0.002          -0.030          -0.171         -0.211          -0.076           -0.125
              (INST)                                        (0.071)         (0.070)         (0.119)       (0.117)*         (0.119)          (0.117)
                                     Legal Dev.              -0.103          -0.098          -0.007         -0.212           0.076           -0.234
                                                            (0.138)         (0.130)         (0.296)        (0.290)         (0.296)          (0.289)
             Crises                Currency crisis            0.159           0.121           0.282          0.165           0.349            0.207
            (CRISIS)                                       (0.066)**       (0.063)*        (0.127)**       (0.113)       (0.120)***        (0.108)*
                                   Banking crisis            -0.013          -0.062           0.001         -0.108          -0.092           -0.204
                                                            (0.052)         (0.049)         (0.096)        (0.087)         (0.102)        (0.091)**
                                           N                   537             592             294            332             254              290
                                      Adj. R2                  0.23           0.22            0.22           0.23            0.27             0.28
                                   # of countries               49              49              30             30              23               23
                                    F-test, OMP                0.00            0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00
                                   F-test, Macro               0.00            0.03            0.12           0.25            0.02             0.01
                                  F-test, Ext. Link            0.00            0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00
                                  F-test, Inst. Dev.           0.68            0.51            0.33           0.10            0.81             0.33
                                     F-test, All               0.00            0.00            0.00           0.00            0.00             0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The second
estimation is conducted for the estimates ̂Fi
                                            C
                                               from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center economies. Time fixed effects for
the three-year panels and the constant are also included, though their estimates are not reported.
                                                                            35
                                     Table 2-1: Interactive Effects and Policy Interest Rate Sensitivity, 1986-2012
                                         FULL        FULL         FULL         LDC           LDC           LDC          EMG          EMG          EMG
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
           Exchange rate stability         0.330      -0.619       -1.166         5.309        -7.884      -11.771         5.130      -5.971        -3.383
                                         (0.909)     (1.547)      (1.733)      (2.751)*       (7.206)      (8.226)     (2.570)**     (5.128)       (5.496)
             Financial openness           -1.575       0.323       -1.467        -1.269         6.516        5.335         0.974       9.544         3.303
                                         (1.485)     (0.750)      (1.517)       (5.169)     (3.105)**      (7.412)       (4.436)   (2.450)***      (4.863)
                IR Holding                -2.079      -1.826       -2.209       -12.865       -13.232      -10.147       -10.817      -9.973        -9.538
                                         (2.370)     (2.217)      (2.477)      (7.555)*       (9.713)     (10.706)       (6.644)     (7.006)       (7.298)
              CA balance (%)               6.666      13.660       11.367        28.248        41.970       63.029        19.791      32.486        21.459
                                         (8.238)    (6.801)**    (10.431)      (23.271)      (29.384)     (39.890)      (20.440)    (22.619)      (26.431)
              Gross debt (%)               0.133       0.178        0.571         0.497        -0.544        1.770        -0.799      -0.481         0.318
                                         (0.997)     (0.924)      (1.299)       (3.049)       (4.196)      (5.395)       (2.508)     (2.829)       (3.406)
               Trade demand               -6.866      -1.300      -11.344        -4.779       -56.321     -100.895        -2.923     -23.766       -37.035
                                         (8.407)     (6.050)     (10.104)      (23.448)    (26.507)**    (40.442)**     (19.569)    (18.546)      (26.549)
                 Fin. Dev.                 5.090       0.817        7.242        17.031        30.152       30.181        17.133      19.735        23.187
                                       (1.670)***    (1.302)    (1.986)***   (4.719)***    (5.726)***    (7.591)***   (3.992)***   (3.985)***   (4.896)***
               KAO x CAB                   0.682                    2.780        -8.557                    -35.884       41.950                     32.968
                                        (10.604)                 (10.864)      (31.196)                   (44.266)      (28.319)                  (31.667)
                KAO x Debt                -0.076                   -0.167        -2.212                     -6.466        -1.060                    -1.710
                                         (1.439)                  (1.470)       (5.014)                    (7.066)       (4.206)                   (4.516)
           KAO x Trade Demand              9.961                  10.946        16.625                     43.098        31.202                     33.056
                                        (10.026)                 (10.224)      (29.872)                   (41.279)      (25.211)                  (26.674)
                KAO x FD.                 -7.340                   -7.209       -15.549                     18.749       -17.676                   -11.610
                                       (2.097)***               (2.152)***    (6.714)**                   (9.583)*    (5.954)***                  (6.511)*
                ERS x CAB                            -13.799      -12.085                    -49.790       -52.504                      7.265       -2.590
                                                    (10.909)     (12.174)                   (43.898)      (49.343)                   (35.144)     (37.970)
                ERS x Debt                            -0.476       -1.044                     -3.001        -1.671                     -2.863       -2.430
                                                     (1.680)      (1.878)                    (7.163)       (7.990)                    (4.841)      (5.062)
            ERS x Trade Demand                         2.812        8.142                    123.275       148.706                    67.204        62.633
                                                    (10.849)     (12.105)                  (48.777)**   (53.871)***                 (35.799)*    (36.936)*
                 ERS x FD.                            -1.977       -4.651                    -30.529       -43.333                    -21.751      -16.831
                                                     (2.200)     (2.469)*                  (9.015)***   (10.280)***                (6.665)***    (7.173)**
                      N                   611           611          611        386            386            386        327             327          327
                  Adj. R2                 0.07          0.04         0.07       0.09           0.15           0.18       0.16            0.15         0.16
               # of countries              59            59           59         41             41             41         31              31           31
                F-test, OMP               0.61          0.76         0.48       0.13           0.07           0.33       0.14            0.00         0.45
               F-test, Macro              0.52          0.12         0.40       0.59           0.50           0.43       0.77            0.56         0.88
             F-test, Ext. Link            0.00          0.00         0.00       0.12           0.00           0.00       0.27            0.00         0.05
             F-test, Inst. Dev.           0.01          0.72         0.00       0.00           0.00           0.00       0.00            0.00         0.00
             F-test, Int. Terms           0.01          0.63         0.02       0.25           0.00           0.00       0.02            0.01         0.04
                 F-test, All              0.00          0.00         0.00       0.00           0.00           0.00       0.00            0.00         0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The estimates for
inflation volatility, FDI from the CEs, trade competition, legal development, currency and banking crisis dummies, and time fixed effects are omitted from
presentation due to space limitation.



                                                                                      36
                                              Table 2-2: Interactive Effects and REER Sensitivity, 1986-2012
                                       FULL          FULL         FULL         LDC          LDC          LDC          EMG          EMG          EMG
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
           Exchange rate stability        0.623        0.341        0.355       0.735         0.552         0.566        0.743       0.520        0.528
                                     (0.077)***     (0.160)**    (0.159)**   (0.134)***     (0.327)*     (0.331)*   (0.136)***     (0.329)      (0.335)
            Financial openness            0.330         0.362       0.309        0.523         0.431        0.537        0.381       0.188        0.392
                                      (0.142)**    (0.077)***    (0.140)**    (0.277)*    (0.122)***    (0.266)**      (0.269)     (0.131)      (0.255)
                IR Holding                0.944         1.171       1.141        1.042         1.682        1.668        0.717       1.188        1.131
                                     (0.208)***    (0.212)***   (0.212)***   (0.344)***   (0.333)***   (0.342)***    (0.342)**   (0.326)***   (0.339)***
              CA balance (%)              0.413        -0.194      -0.810       -0.139        -2.651       -2.966        0.110      -0.849       -1.175
                                        (0.737)       (0.640)     (0.895)      (1.056)     (1.024)**    (1.285)**      (1.044)     (1.036)      (1.217)
              Gross debt (%)              0.064        -0.175      -0.042       -0.215        -0.435       -0.525       -0.278      -0.464       -0.541
                                        (0.099)      (0.090)*     (0.123)      (0.155)    (0.155)***   (0.195)***     (0.146)*   (0.147)***   (0.184)***
               Trade demand               1.794         0.801       0.705        1.920         1.135        1.200        2.404       1.030        1.072
                                      (0.722)**       (0.547)     (0.839)     (1.019)*       (0.879)      (1.286)    (0.972)**     (0.843)      (1.212)
                 Fin. Dev.               -0.165         0.394       0.252       -0.253         0.461        0.371       -0.260       0.475        0.276
                                        (0.155)    (0.124)***     (0.182)      (0.217)     (0.195)**      (0.256)      (0.213)    (0.186)**     (0.239)
               KAO x CAB                  0.936                     0.975       1.426                       0.535        1.873                    0.533
                                        (0.928)                   (0.915)      (1.424)                    (1.383)      (1.487)                  (1.463)
                KAO x Debt               -0.228                    -0.208       0.258                       0.182        0.247                    0.151
                                       (0.135)*                   (0.133)      (0.249)                    (0.242)      (0.237)                  (0.226)
           KAO x Trade Demand            -0.033                     0.385       -0.052                      0.052       -0.291                    0.032
                                        (0.859)                   (0.848)      (1.340)                    (1.292)      (1.279)                  (1.215)
                KAO x FD.                 0.225                     0.210        0.087                      0.078        0.271                    0.388
                                        (0.193)                   (0.191)      (0.330)                    (0.318)      (0.337)                  (0.324)
                ERS x CAB                              2.010        1.827                     4.950         4.834                     2.873       2.722
                                                    (1.128)*      (1.123)                 (1.640)***   (1.672)***                  (1.634)*     (1.713)
                ERS x Debt                             0.223        0.213                     0.727         0.714                     0.638       0.631
                                                     (0.164)      (0.164)                  (0.281)**    (0.284)**                 (0.273)**    (0.277)**
           ERS x Trade Demand                          1.823        1.534                     0.759         0.748                     1.893       1.809
                                                    (0.998)*      (0.996)                   (1.750)       (1.782)                   (1.734)     (1.761)
                 ERS x FD.                            -0.798       -0.820                    -1.326        -1.280                    -1.217      -1.263
                                                   (0.223)***   (0.223)***                (0.348)***   (0.354)***                (0.341)***   (0.354)***
                      N                 537             537          537        294            294           294       254             254         254
                  Adj. R2               0.23            0.26         0.26       0.21           0.32          0.31      0.27            0.37        0.36
               # of countries            49              49           49         30             30            30        23              23          23
                F-test, OMP             0.00            0.00         0.00       0.00           0.00          0.00      0.00            0.00        0.00
               F-test, Macro            0.10            0.01         0.09       0.22           0.00          0.00      0.13            0.00        0.01
             F-test, Ext. Link          0.00            0.00         0.00       0.00           0.00          0.00      0.00            0.02        0.01
             F-test, Inst. Dev.         0.23            0.01         0.32       0.47           0.03          0.23      0.46            0.02        0.29
             F-test, Int. Terms         0.17            0.00         0.00       0.68           0.00          0.00      0.51            0.00        0.00
                 F-test, All            0.00            0.00         0.00       0.00           0.00          0.00      0.00            0.00        0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The estimates for
inflation volatility, FDI from the CEs, trade competition, legal development, currency and banking crisis dummies, and fixed effects are omitted from
presentation due to space limitation.



                                                                                  37
                                 Table 3: Net Effects for Developing Countries Conditional on KAOPEN and ERS
               (a) Effect of Financial Development (+10 ppt)                                 (c) Effect of CAB Deterioration (–2 ppt)
                      in the MM-MM Link Estimation                                             in the REER-REER Link Estimation
                                      KAOPEN*                                                                     KAOPEN
                                     0.00     0.50     1.00                                                    0.00      0.50      1.00
                 ERS*     0.00       3.02     3.96     4.89                                  ERS*     0.00      0.06     0.05      0.05
                          0.50       0.85     1.79     2.73                                           0.50      0.01     0.01      0.00
                          1.00      -1.32    -0.38     0.56                                           1.00     -0.04     -0.04     -0.05

                    (b) Effect of Trade Demand (+5 ppt)                                          (d) Effect of Gross Debt (+10 ppt)
                      in the MM-MM Link Estimation                                              in the REER-REER Link Estimation
                                       KAOPEN                                                                     KAOPEN
                                     0.00     0.50     1.00                                                    0.00      0.50      1.00
                 ERS*     0.00      -5.04    -3.97     -2.89                                 ERS*     0.00     -0.05     -0.04     -0.03
                          0.50      -1.33    -0.25     0.83                                           0.50     -0.02     -0.01     0.00
                          1.00       2.39     3.47     4.55                                           1.00      0.02     0.03      0.04

                                                                                           (e) Effect of Financial Development (+10 ppt)
                                                                                                   in the REER-REER Estimation
                                                                                                                  KAOPEN
                                                                                                                0.00     0.50      1.00
                                                                                             ERS*     0.00      0.04     0.04      0.04
                                                                                                      0.50     -0.03     -0.02     -0.02
                                                                                                      1.00     -0.09     -0.09     -0.08
Note: “*” superscripted to KAOPEN or ERS in the tables means that the interaction term between KAOPEN or ERS and the variable of concern is found to be
statistically significant in each respective estimation.

                                                                            38
           Table 4-1: Factors Affecting Exchange Market Pressure Sensitivity to Core Interest Rates, 1986-2012
                                                         FULL             FULL              LDC              LDC              EMG             EMG
                                                          (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)
    Open Macro Policy      Exchange rate stability         19.51            42.38            109.52          116.18           -27.89           18.89
         (OMP)                                           (74.81)          (65.80)          (178.29)        (151.16)         (166.17)        (143.51)
                             Financial openness           29.82            -18.37           -176.90         -267.83           -64.27         -124.24
                                                         (69.70)          (60.91)          (153.11)       (132.45)**        (143.52)        (125.55)
                                 IR Holding              308.11           246.58             555.75          353.87           577.64          382.42
                                                        (198.48)         (178.78)          (478.13)        (414.46)         (413.08)        (373.90)
     Macro. Conditions         CA balance (%)            237.08           120.23            -182.76         -530.44           251.10         343.03
          (MC)                                          (289.19)         (274.40)          (617.52)        (622.50)         (671.41)        (611.66)
                                Inflation Vol.           914.73           445.22           3,224.51         608.21           457.93          196.27
                                                       (1,245.72)        (492.18)         (2,521.27)       (949.83)        (2,134.15)       (781.49)
                               Gross debt (%)             -86.98                            -127.91                          -152.37
                                                        (45.22)*                           (101.25)                         (80.82)*
                             Budget balance (%)                           129.37                            1,423.31                         362.80
                                                                         (369.62)                           (900.83)                        (967.51)
       External Link          Trade competition           -31.18           37.31             577.77           771.16          -59.62         260.37
          (LINK)                                        (261.70)         (232.57)          (578.58)         (492.02)        (493.08)        (426.45)
                               Trade demand              337.07            42.98           -173.50           -422.24          205.64         -107.52
                                                        (293.46)         (256.64)          (704.03)         (599.29)        (574.06)        (501.74)
                               FDI from CEs            -1,366.16         -973.90            -806.81          -646.05          308.98          348.21
                                                      (387.70)***      (347.64)***        (1,017.54)        (885.59)        (816.23)        (731.21)
     Institutional Dev.           Fin. Dev.              -164.75          -144.22           -551.32          -525.94         -284.73         -316.95
           (INST)                                      (67.36)**        (60.63)**        (159.12)***      (142.14)***      (138.00)**      (124.21)**
                                 Legal Dev.               96.50            90.87             -33.72            -3.74         -164.35         -287.82
                                                        (134.15)         (112.62)          (417.41)         (350.29)        (347.30)        (299.65)
          Crises               Currency crisis            66.02            41.14              75.07            51.40          128.84           53.55
         (CRISIS)                                        (63.20)          (53.84)          (165.46)         (130.15)        (136.54)        (109.50)
                               Banking crisis              -9.38            2.81             -80.82           -54.80          -58.82          -60.30
                                                         (51.47)          (43.73)          (133.33)         (108.92)        (118.01)         (97.87)
                                       N                    625             678                382              418            321              355
                                  Adj. R2                   0.14            0.11              0.09             0.09            0.10            0.11
                               # of countries                59              59                 40               40             30              30
                                F-test, OMP                 0.44            0.43               0.34             0.13           0.54             0.53
                               F-test, Macro                0.23            0.72               0.33             0.43           0.31             0.90
                              F-test, Ext. Link             0.01            0.02               0.60             0.30           0.90             0.89
                              F-test, Inst. Dev.            0.04            0.06               0.00             0.00           0.07             0.01
                                 F-test, All                0.01            0.05               0.08             0.05           0.39             0.14
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The second
estimation is conducted for the estimates ̂Fi
                                            C
                                               from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center economies. Time fixed effects for
the three-year panels and the constant are also included, though their estimates are not reported.
                                                                            39
                Table 4-2: Factors Affecting Exchange Market Pressure Sensitivity to Core REER, 1986-2012
                                                             FULL         FULL           LDC            LDC            EMG             EMG
                                                              (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
           Open Macro Policy     Exchange rate stability      -4.296        -5.331       -1.954          -4.870         1.244           -2.477
                (OMP)                                         (3.269)      (3.274)      (3.291)         (3.384)        (4.044)         (4.165)
                                  Financial openness          -9.415        -7.166       -7.360          -6.084         -8.324          -6.339
                                                           (3.046)***    (3.031)**    (2.827)***      (2.965)**      (3.493)**        (3.644)*
                                      IR Holding             -14.635      -15.171        -9.791        -10.705        -11.470          -12.454
                                                             (8.674)*     (8.896)*      (8.827)         (9.279)       (10.053)        (10.852)
            Macro. Conditions       CA balance (%)           -21.217      -16.464       -24.993        -15.372        -31.781          -20.494
                 (MC)                                       (12.638)*     (13.654)    (11.400)**       (13.936)      (16.339)*        (17.753)
                                     Inflation Vol.           14.329       58.052        -2.863         73.630         13.702           80.103
                                                             (54.439)   (24.490)**     (46.546)      (21.265)***      (51.937)      (22.682)***
                                    Gross debt (%)             1.207                     -0.992                         0.257
                                                              (1.976)                   (1.869)                        (1.967)
                                  Budget balance (%)                      -8.721                       -14.180                         -24.878
                                                                         (18.392)                     (20.168)                        (28.082)
              External Link        Trade competition          16.175      16.889        16.344          17.914          13.900          15.391
                 (LINK)                                      (11.437)    (11.572)      (10.681)       (11.015)         (12.000)       (12.377)
                                     Trade demand            -14.134      -7.330       -25.070         -20.335         -33.885        -27.703
                                                             (12.824)    (12.770)     (12.997)*       (13.417)       (13.970)**      (14.563)*
                                     FDI from CEs             20.388      17.320        23.582          21.515          34.115          32.611
                                                             (16.943)    (17.298)      (18.785)       (19.826)        (19.864)*       (21.223)
            Institutional Dev.         Fin. Dev.              -8.604      -8.868         -7.133         -6.044          -8.104          -6.107
                  (INST)                                   (2.943)***   (3.017)***    (2.938)**       (3.182)*        (3.358)**       (3.605)*
                                       Legal Dev.             21.851      24.437          7.902          7.784          15.612          15.026
                                                           (5.862)***   (5.604)***      (7.706)        (7.842)         (8.452)*       (8.697)*
                 Crises             Currency crisis           7.238        7.495          7.464          8.885           6.067           6.188
                (CRISIS)                                   (2.762)***   (2.679)***    (3.055)**      (2.914)***        (3.323)*       (3.178)*
                                     Banking crisis           5.694        7.428          2.254          3.863           7.808           9.125
                                                            (2.249)**   (2.176)***      (2.461)        (2.439)       (2.872)***     (2.841)***
                                             N                 625          678            382            418             320             355
                                        Adj. R2                0.15         0.18           0.12          0.18            0.14            0.19
                                     # of countries             59           59             40            40               30             30
                                      F-test, OMP              0.00         0.01           0.02           0.03            0.06            0.12
                                     F-test, Macro             0.37         0.04           0.14           0.00            0.27            0.00
                                    F-test, Ext. Link          0.31         0.35           0.19           0.26            0.10            0.20
                                    F-test, Inst. Dev.         0.00         0.00           0.05           0.14            0.02            0.09
                                       F-test, All             0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00            0.00            0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The second
estimation is conducted for the estimates ̂Fi
                                            C
                                               from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center economies. Time fixed effects for
the three-year panels and the constant are also included, though their estimates are not reported.

                                                                            40
   Table 4-3: Factors Affecting Exchange Market Pressure Sensitivity to Core Exchange Market Pressure, 1986-2012
                                                                 FULL         FULL          LDC          LDC          EMG           EMG
                                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                Open Macro Policy     Exchange rate stability    -0.091       -0.134        0.207        0.095        0.055         0.007
                     (OMP)                                       (0.115)      (0.115)      (0.140)      (0.153)       (0.167)      (0.181)
                                       Financial openness         0.330        0.195        0.589        0.443        0.590         0.424
                                                                (0.107)***    (0.107)*    (0.120)***   (0.134)***   (0.144)***    (0.159)***
                                           IR Holding             0.363        0.425       -0.254       -0.185        -0.209       -0.134
                                                                 (0.304)      (0.314)      (0.376)      (0.420)       (0.414)      (0.472)
                Macro. Conditions        CA balance (%)           1.305        0.597        1.327        0.852        1.494         1.051
                     (MC)                                       (0.443)***    (0.482)     (0.485)***    (0.631)      (0.673)**     (0.772)
                                          Inflation Vol.          5.177        0.502        5.963        4.604        6.017         4.199
                                                                (1.910)***    (0.864)     (1.981)***   (0.963)***   (2.140)***    (0.987)***
                                         Gross debt (%)          -0.140                    -0.252                     -0.268
                                                                (0.069)**                 (0.080)***                (0.081)***
                                       Budget balance (%)                      0.721                     1.888                      2.322
                                                                              (0.649)                  (0.914)**                   (1.222)*
                  External Link         Trade competition        -0.634       -0.568       -0.355       -0.377        -0.246       -0.355
                     (LINK)                                      (0.401)      (0.408)      (0.455)      (0.499)       (0.494)      (0.538)
                                          Trade demand            0.687        0.773       -0.829       -0.470        -0.594       -0.187
                                                                 (0.450)      (0.450)*     (0.553)      (0.608)       (0.576)      (0.633)
                                          FDI from CEs           -1.636       -1.859        0.428       -0.081        -0.245       -0.781
                                                                (0.594)***   (0.610)***    (0.800)      (0.898)       (0.818)      (0.923)
                 Institutional Dev.         Fin. Dev.             0.138        0.100        0.269        0.235        0.217         0.163
                       (INST)                                    (0.103)      (0.106)     (0.125)**     (0.144)       (0.138)      (0.157)
                                            Legal Dev.           -0.311        0.019       -0.794       -0.554        -0.703       -0.405
                                                                 (0.206)      (0.198)     (0.328)**     (0.355)      (0.348)**     (0.378)
                      Crises             Currency crisis          0.205        0.143        0.424        0.538        0.382         0.547
                     (CRISIS)                                   (0.097)**     (0.094)     (0.130)***   (0.132)***   (0.137)***    (0.138)***
                                          Banking crisis          0.028        0.131       -0.068        0.097        -0.150        0.021
                                                                 (0.079)      (0.077)*     (0.105)      (0.110)       (0.118)      (0.124)
                                                  N               625          678          382          418           321          355
                                             Adj. R2              0.22         0.19         0.31         0.27          0.32         0.30
                                          # of countries           59           59           40           40            30           30
                                           F-test, OMP            0.02         0.15         0.00         0.01          0.00         0.07
                                          F-test, Macro           0.00         0.19         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00
                                         F-test, Ext. Link        0.02         0.01         0.22         0.52          0.37         0.49
                                         F-test, Inst. Dev.       0.26         0.53         0.02         0.13          0.07         0.41
                                            F-test, All           0.00         0.01         0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00
Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The second
estimation is conducted for the estimates ̂Fi
                                            C
                                               from the first-step estimation that does not include China as one of the center economies. Time fixed effects for
the three-year panels and the constant are also included, though their estimates are not reported.




                                                                             41
  Table 5: Interactive Effects and Exchange Market Pressure Sensitivity to Core Exchange
                                 Market Pressure, 1986-2012
                                   Corr. b/w CE’s REER and Countries’       Corr. b/w CE’s EMP and Countries’
                                                  EMP                                      EMP
                                    FULL          LDC             EMG         FULL         LDC          EMG
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
         Exchange rate stability       8.351        19.587         18.713      -0.277         0.402        0.439
                                     (6.225)    (6.890)***      (7.407)**     (0.220)       (0.302)      (0.322)
          Financial openness         -10.296       -21.161        -17.558      -0.204         0.097        0.118
                                    (5.571)*    (6.143)***     (6.421)***     (0.197)       (0.269)      (0.280)
              IR Holding             -20.095       -14.726         -6.901       0.460        -0.058       -0.087
                                   (8.947)**       (9.031)       (10.064)     (0.317)       (0.395)      (0.438)
            CA balance (%)            59.261        67.269         28.283       1.191         0.973        2.029
                                    (38.237)    (33.026)**       (34.914)     (1.353)       (1.446)      (1.520)
            Gross debt (%)            -5.544        -2.352         -0.804      -0.029        -0.281       -0.357
                                     (4.768)       (4.475)        (4.500)     (0.169)       (0.196)     (0.196)*
             Trade demand             39.433         8.589         14.270      -2.600        -3.573       -3.522
                                    (36.107)      (33.085)       (34.822)    (1.278)**    (1.448)**    (1.516)**
               Fin. Dev.             -11.077       -10.351        -12.094       0.827         0.495        0.240
                                     (7.359)       (6.344)       (6.609)*   (0.260)***     (0.278)*      (0.288)
             KAO x CAB               -54.082       -24.893        -68.213      -3.164        -3.496       -2.907
                                    (40.153)      (36.908)       (42.483)    (1.421)**    (1.616)**      (1.849)
              KAO x Debt              5.922         -7.144         -5.077      -0.108        -0.170       -0.198
                                     (5.373)       (5.804)        (5.926)     (0.190)       (0.254)      (0.258)
         KAO x Trade Demand          -21.672        18.136         -0.896       4.677         5.619        5.333
                                    (37.200)      (34.012)       (35.047)   (1.317)***   (1.489)***   (1.526)***
              KAO x FD.               -8.619       -16.551        -19.001      -0.635        -0.326       -0.243
                                     (7.891)     (7.932)**      (8.584)**    (0.279)**      (0.347)      (0.374)
              ERS x CAB              -65.220      -108.129         -1.265       3.797         4.131        1.684
                                    (44.338)   (40.888)***       (50.437)    (1.569)**    (1.790)**      (2.196)
              ERS x Debt               6.127        10.041          6.626      -0.013         0.313        0.431
                                     (6.840)       (6.647)        (6.758)     (0.242)       (0.291)      (0.294)
         ERS x Trade Demand          -75.257       -90.629        -89.484      -1.263        -2.984       -2.035
                                   (42.484)*    (44.369)**      (49.458)*     (1.504)       (1.942)      (2.153)
               ERS x FD.             17.335        26.167         32.941       -0.510        -0.038       0.225
                                    (9.273)*    (8.749)***    (10.051)***     (0.328)       (0.383)      (0.438)
                    N                   625           382            320         625           382          321
                Adj. R2                 0.16          0.18           0.16       0.22           0.31         0.32
             # of countries              59            40             30          59            40           30
              F-test, OMP               0.03          0.00           0.01        0.17          0.48         0.46
             F-test, Macro              0.29          0.23           0.88        0.04          0.01         0.01
           F-test, Ext. Link            0.05          0.07           0.17        0.02          0.06         0.13
           F-test, Inst. Dev.           0.00          0.21           0.06        0.01          0.11         0.42
           F-test, Int. Terms           0.11          0.01           0.02        0.00          0.00         0.02
               F-test, All              0.00          0.00           0.00        0.00          0.00         0.00

Notes: The estimations are conducted with the robust regression method due to the existence of outliers. *
p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. The estimates for inflation volatility, trade competition, legal development,
currency and banking crisis dummies, and fixed effects are omitted from presentation due to space
limitation.




                                                             42
                     Table 6: Interactive Effects for Developing Countries Conditional on KAOPEN and ERS

                     (a) Effect of FD (+10 ppt)                               (e) Effect of CAB Deterioration (–2 ppt) in the EMP-EMP
                in the REER-EMP Link Estimation                                                      Estimation
                                 KAOPEN*                                                                    KAOPEN*
                               0.00     0.50      1.00                                                    0.00      0.50      1.00
             ERS*    0.00     -1.04     -1.86     -2.69                                 ERS*    0.00      -0.02     0.02      0.05
                     0.50      0.27     -0.55     -1.38                                         0.50      -0.06    -0.03      0.01
                     1.00      1.58     0.75      -0.07                                         1.00      -0.10    -0.07     -0.03

           (b) Effect of CAB Deterioration (–0.02 ppt)                               (f) Effect of Trade Demand (+5 ppt) by the CE
                  in the REER-EMP Estimation                                                   in the EMP-EMP Estimation
                                 KAOPEN                                                                     KAOPEN*
                               0.00     0.50      1.00                                                    0.00      0.50      1.00
             ERS*    0.00     -1.35     -1.10     -0.85                                  ERS    0.00      -0.18    -0.04      0.10
                     0.50     -0.26     -0.02     0.23                                          0.50      -0.25    -0.11      0.03
                     1.00      0.82     1.07      1.32                                          1.00      -0.33    -0.19     -0.05

               (d) Effect of Trade Demand (+5 ppt)
                   in the REER-EMP Estimation
                                 KAOPEN
                               0.00     0.50      1.00
             ERS*    0.00      0.43     0.88      1.34
                     0.50     -1.84     -1.38     -0.93
                     1.00     -4.10     -3.65     -3.20
Note: “*” superscripted to KAOPEN or ERS in the tables means that the interaction term between KAOPEN or ERS and the variable of concern is found
to be statistically significant in each respective estimation.

                                                                       43
                                                             Figure 1: Proportion of Significant F-Tests
                                                                       (a) Policy Interest Rate
                                                IDC Sample                                                                                     LDC Sample
           1




                                                                                                          1
                   .8




                                                                                                                  .8
% of Sig. Estimates




                                                                                               % of Sig. Estimates
           .6




                                                                                                          .6
   .4




                                                                                                  .4
           .2




                                                                                                          .2
           0




                                                                                                          0
                        1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012                                1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                 1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009                                                  1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                            Real Global          Fin. Global                                                               Real Global          Fin. Global
                                            Cross-link           Domestic                                                                  Cross-link           Domestic


                                                                                   (b) REER
                                                IDC Sample                                                                                     LDC Sample
           1




                                                                                                          1
                   .8




                                                                                                                  .8
% of Sig. Estimates




                                                                                               % of Sig. Estimates
           .6




                                                                                                          .6
   .4




                                                                                                  .4
           .2




                                                                                                          .2
           0




                                                                                                          0




                        1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012                                1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                 1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009                                                  1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                            Real Global          Fin. Global                                                               Real Global          Fin. Global
                                            Cross-link           Domestic                                                                  Cross-link           Domestic




                                                                                          44
                                 Figure 2: Changes to Adj. R2 by Adding China as a CE


                                                     ST Policy Rate
               .15
Additional contr. to Adj. R2
      .05      0   .1




                               1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                        1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                                    IDC             LDC
                                                    EMG             E.Asian EMG




                                                          REER
Additional contr. to Adj. R2
   .05        .1
               0         .15




                               1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                        1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                                    IDC             LDC
                                                    EMG             E.Asian EMG



                                                          45
 Figure 3: Exchange Rate, Interest Rate, and Real Money Stock of a Peripheral Country (PH)
              In Response to a Rise in the REER of the Center Economies (CE)

Exchange rate
= price of CE’s currency in PH’s currency




        E1



         E0                                                E e ' E
                                                     RCE 
                                                              E
                                                                 Ee  E
                                                           RCE 
                      RPH ,0            RPH,1                      E
                                                                          PH’s Interest Rate

       M
        
        P 1
       M 
        
        P 0




           PH’s Real Money
           Stock




                                                46
                                                    Figure 4: Proportion of Significant F-Tests – EMP Response
                                                                                   (a) Policy Interest Rate
                                                          IDC Sample                                                                                         LDC Sample
                   1




                                                                                                                       1
                           .8




                                                                                                                               .8
        % of Sig. Estimates




                                                                                                            % of Sig. Estimates
                   .6




                                                                                                                       .6
           .4




                                                                                                               .4
                   .2




                                                                                                                       .2
                   0




                                                                                                                       0
                                 1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012                                     1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                          1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009                                                       1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                                     Real Global           Fin. Global                                                                   Real Global           Fin. Global
                                                     Cross-link            Domestic                                                                      Cross-link            Domestic




                                                                                            (b) REER
                                                        IDC Sample                                                                                          LDC Sample
           1




                                                                                                               1
                   .8




                                                                                                                       .8
% of Sig. Estimates




                                                                                                    % of Sig. Estimates
           .6




                                                                                                               .6
   .4




                                                                                                       .4
           .2




                                                                                                               .2
           0




                                                                                                               0




                                1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012                                     1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                         1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009                                                       1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                                    Real Global          Fin. Global                                                                    Real Global          Fin. Global
                                                    Cross-link           Domestic                                                                       Cross-link           Domestic



                                                                                             (c) EMP


                                                        IDC Sample                                                                                          LDC Sample
           1




                                                                                                               1
                   .8




                                                                                                                       .8
% of Sig. Estimates




                                                                                                    % of Sig. Estimates
           .6




                                                                                                               .6
   .4




                                                                                                       .4
           .2




                                                                                                               .2
           0




                                                                                                               0




                                1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012                                     1992-1994         1998-2000         2004-2006         2010-2012
                                         1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009                                                       1995-1997         2001-2003         2007-2009
                                                    Real Global          Fin. Global                                                                    Real Global          Fin. Global
                                                    Cross-link           Domestic                                                                       Cross-link           Domestic




                                                                                                   47
          Figure 5: Proportion of Significant ˆC  0 or ˆC  0 Tests
(a) Policy Interest Rate ( ˆC  0 )                      (b) REER ( ˆC  0 )




  (c) EMP ( ˆC  0 )                                       (d) EMP ( ˆ C  0 )




                                       48
                                       Figure 6: Country-group Average of the Estimated Coefficients for

                                                    (a) Impact of U.S. REER on Country i’s EMP

                  30
Cond. Corr. b/w US reer and i's EMP
-10      0        10        20




                                      1997         2000          2003          2006          2009          2012

                                                              IDC                Non-EMG LDC
                                                              EMEs



                                                    (b) Impact of U.S. EMP on Country i’s EMP
                  1
Cond. Corr. b/w US emp and i's EMP
-.75 -.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75
                  -1




                                      1997         2000          2003          2006          2009          2012

                                                              IDC                Non-EMG LDC
                                                              EMEs



                                                                        49
