                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  NETWORKS AND MANUFACTURING FIRMS IN AFRICA:
                   RESULTS FROM A RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                           Marcel Fafchamps
                                            Simon R. Quinn

                                         Working Paper 21132
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21132


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2015




Data collection and experimental implementation were funded by the World Bank; we thank Hinh
Dinh for his constant support and encouragement. We thank Sourovi De, Simon Franklin, Anja Grujovic
and Jono Lain for excellent research assistance on this project. We have appreciated the generous assistance
of partner organisations throughout the research process: Economic Development Initiatives in Dar
es Salaam, the Ethiopian Development Research Institute in Addis Ababa and RuralNet Associates
in Zambia. We thank seminar audiences at CERGE-EI, CORE (Université Catholique de Louvain),
the Ethiopian Development Research Institute, the Georgetown Public˛Policy Institute, Monash University,
the 2012 NEUDC Conference (Dartmouth College), the 2013 Annual Conference of the Royal Economic
Society, the University of Gothenburg, the University of Kiel, the University of Oxford, and the University
of Sydney. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Marcel Fafchamps and Simon R. Quinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa: Results from a Randomized Field Experiment
Marcel Fafchamps and Simon R. Quinn
NBER Working Paper No. 21132
April 2015
JEL No. D22,L26,O33

                                            ABSTRACT

We run a novel field experiment to link managers of African manufacturing firms. The experiment
features exogenous link formation, exogenous seeding of information, and exogenous assignment
to treatment and placebo. We study the impact of the experiment on firm business practices outside
of the lab. We find that the experiment successfully created new variation in social networks. We find
significant diffusion of business practices only in terms of VAT registration and having a bank current
account. This diffusion is a combination of diffusion of innovation and simple imitation. At the time
of our experiment, all three studied countries were undergoing large changes in their VAT legislation.


Marcel Fafchamps
Freeman Spogli Institute
Stanford University
616 Serra Street
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
fafchamp@stanford.edu

Simon R. Quinn
Oxford University
simon.quinn@economics.ox.ac.uk
                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


1     Introduction: A novel field experiment
A growing body of applied research finds that management practices differ substantially across

firms — even firms of similar size in the same sector and country: Bloom and Van Reenen

(2007, 2010). This is particularly true in developing economies, where the distribution of

management quality appears — relative to the United States — to have a ‘far larger left tail’

(Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2012; Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts,

2013). Such heterogeneity is one important correlate to ‘persistent performance differences

among seemingly similar enterprises’ (Gibbons and Henderson, 2012; Syverson, 2011; Hsieh

and Klenow, 2009).



This kind of heterogeneity — in both management practices and firm performance — presents

a mystery. It may be true that competition increases pressure on firms to change management

practices, and that such competition may be less intense in developing economies (Bloom,

Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2012). However, this still begs a fundamental question: why don’t

best management practices diffuse from firm to firm along entrepreneurs’ social networks?

Many economists view networking as a valuable business strategy — for sharing information

about customers or suppliers (McMillan and Woodruff, 1999; Greif, 1993), for meeting poten-

tial business partners (Casella and Rauch, 2002), for improving a firm’s access to production

technologies (Parente and Prescott, 1994; Conley and Udry, 2001, 2010), for guiding a firm’s

policies on executive pay (Shue, 2013) and for learning about promising investment opportu-

nities (Patnam, 2013). This may be particularly true in developing economies, where business

networks can often form an attractive substitute to the relatively high transaction costs required

to use the market (Rauch and Casella, 2003).



Indeed, more generally, research on social interactions often finds evidence of large diffusion

effects among peers. These conclusions have been driven by a large number of studies on peer

effects on adolescent health behaviours (Bifulco, Fletcher, and Ross, 2011; Fletcher, 2010;


                                                2               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


        Oster and Thornton, 2012), and on academic performance (Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer, 2011;

        Sacerdote, 2001; Carrell, Sacerdote, and West, 2012; Fafchamps and Mo, 2015). That is, much

        of the evidence on peer effects derives from studies of young respondents, at a highly impres-

        sionable stage of their personal development — where the pressure to conform is high. But firm

        managers are not adolescents — and there are many good reasons to believe that firm managers

        face very different incentives than the kinds of samples generally used for understanding peer

        effects. If, for example, competitive pressures favor firms with better management techniques

        (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2012), we should expect firm managers to be reluctant to

        share business wisdom with their peers.



        For these reasons, business networks form a pressing area for empirical research: such net-

        works are fundamental to understanding heterogeneity in firm performance, and cannot be

        understood through analogies to peer effects in other contexts. However, apart from the ex-

        ploratory work of Fafchamps and Söderbom (2012), remarkably little is known about diffusion

        of management practices along entrepreneurial networks. Do management practices diffuse

        along such networks? If so, what kinds of management practices are affected by the behaviour

        of an entrepreneur’s peers? Can researchers and policymakers change a firm’s network in

        order to encourage the diffusion of best management practices?



        In this paper, we report results from a novel randomized field experiment designed to mea-

        sure peer effects among manufacturing firms in Africa. We run a business plan competition

        in Ethiopia, Tanzania and Zambia, in which aspiring young entrepreneurs present proposals

        for new enterprizes to managers of established manufacturing firms.1 By randomly assigning

        firm managers to different judging committees, we generate exogenous variation in firms’ peer

        networks. This allows causal estimates of the diffusion of management practices through peer

        effects. To our knowledge, this is the first experiment to vary exogenously firms’ networks
1
    The competition is loosely modeled on several popular reality television shows — for example, the program Shark
    Tank in the United States, and the program Dragon’s Den in the United Kingdom and Canada.



                                                         3                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                       Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


of business peers. The experiment has exogenous link formation, exogenous seeding of infor-

mation and exogenous assignment to treatment and placebo, and we study the impact of the

experiment on real firm behavior outside of the lab.



We find only limited evidence of diffusion in management practices. Our experiment suc-

ceeded in creating new business links — in the sense that participants remembered the peers to

whom they had randomly been introduced, and spoke to them after the experiment — but the

experiment did not change managers’ reports of their business friendship networks, nor did it

generate substantial diffusion of management practices. We nonetheless find diffusion of VAT

registration and of having a bank current account. We then run a series of heterogeneity tests

to explore the mechanisms by which this diffusion occurs.



Our study therefore makes two primary contributions. First, and most importantly, we provide

empirical evidence to reconcile the existing tension between recent results on productivity dif-

ferences and recent results on network diffusion. Specifically, we show that diffusion results

from other contexts are unlikely to assist in understanding diffusion of management practices

among competing firms. Second, the paper provides a methodological contribution on the

use of experimental variation to study network behaviour. Several studies have introduced

exogenous variation in information to study the relevance of social links for diffusion (see,

for example, Möbius, Phan, and Szeidl (2010) and Aral and Walker (2011)). But very few

studies have experimentally varied network connections to measure the effect of peer relation-

ships themselves. Centola (2010, 2011) shows how online networks may be created artificially

to study behavioral diffusion in an experimental context (namely, registration for an internet

health forum and participation in an internet-based diet diary). Similarly, several studies have

considered the consequences of random student assignment to peer groups (Sacerdote, 2001;

Zimmerman, 2003; Lyle, 2007, 2009; Shue, 2013), including two experimental studies in a de-

veloping country (Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer, 2011; Fafchamps and Mo, 2015). To our knowl-

edge, our experiment is the first to take a similar approach with firm managers, using a novel

                                               4               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


experimental protocol that had large and significant effects on the creation of entrepreneurial

linkages. In this way, our work shows that field experiments can be used not merely to study

effects within firms or between firms (Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul, 2011), but also effects

through firm peer relationships.



The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines our experimental design, including our

identification strategy. Section 3 describes our implementation of the design, in Ethiopia,

Tanzania and Zambia. Section 4 summarises our results, and Section 5 concludes.



2     The experiment

2.1    Experiment protocol

The competition: To measure the effect of peer relationships on firm performance, we de-
sign an experiment in which managers of manufacturing firms are randomly matched to work

together on a task. The task is related to the challenges of firm management and entrepreneur-

ship — in order to create an environment that encourages participants to share experiences and

opinions on management strategies. The task relates to real and large payoffs to encourage

participants to take the task seriously, and it requires managers to interact on multiple separate

occasions to give several opportunities for personal relationships to develop.



To devise a task that satisfies all these requirements, we organise a business plan competition

in which aspiring young entrepreneurs pitch new business ideas to experienced firm managers,

who act as judges and are our experimental subjects. Competitions such as ours are now being




                                                5               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


        run in several African countries.2



        In our competition, applicants are aspiring entrepreneurs aged between 18 and 25 (inclusive)

        and recruited through advertising by posters, radio and Facebook.3 As part of the application

        process, aspiring entrepreneurs are required to complete a detailed questionnaire about their

        business proposal, and to submit a three-page written business plan. Competition judges assess

        these questionnaires and business plans, along with oral presentations. Judges were drawn

        exclusively among managers of African manufacturing firms.


        Committee judges: Candidates are judged in two ways: by judging committees, and by
        ‘non-committee judges’. Most judging committees comprise five or six judges, who work to-

        gether to assess candidates. Each judging committee assesses 12 applicants.4 This involves

        holding three meetings, each assessing four applicants. These meetings follow a clear proto-

        col. Applicants enter the room one at a time. Each applicant speaks for about 10 minutes, then

        answers questions from committee judges for an additional 10 minutes. Judges then complete

        separate mark sheets, assessing different aspects of the applicant’s performance and business

        idea. Committee members then discuss the applicant for a few minutes, before calling the next

        applicant. At the end of each meeting, the committee is required to reach a joint ranking of all

        of the candidates whom the committee has judged up to that point.5 Each committee is respon-

        sible for awarding one prize of US$1,000, given to the committee’s highest-ranked candidate.6



        We wish to ensure that committee members interact in as natural a manner as possible, with
2
    For example, TechnoServe is currently running the ENGINE business plan competition in Ghana, with substantial
    support from the UK Department for International Development (DFID). The same general format has been used
    recently for the African Innovation Prize (in Burundi, Rwanda and Sierra Leone), the Enablis Entrepreneurial Net-
    work’s Business Plan Competition (in Ghana), the Darecha Business Ideas Competition (in Tanzania), the SEED
    Awards (in Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania and Uganda), the
    StartUp Cup (in Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Rwanda and Zambia) and the YouWiN! competition (in Nigeria).
3
    An example of a promotional poster is included in Appendix 1.
4
    The design is slightly different in Zambia, as we discuss shortly.
5
    Thus, a committee ranks four candidates after its first meeting, eight candidates after its second meeting and 12
    candidates after its final meeting.
6
    In a companion paper, we study the effects of these prizes on candidates.


                                                          6                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                  Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


        suggestions and interjections flowing in a natural group conversation. For this reason, we pre-

        scribe no specific protocol by which committee members are to discuss candidates or to reach

        their decision. As with a criminal jury, we require only that each committee chooses a chair

        and reaches a final consensus ranking at the end of each meeting (which every committee did).

        Each committee judge then receives about US$25 for each session.



        At the conclusion of the competition, we hold a prize-giving ceremony in each country. These

        ceremonies are attended by the committee judges and the competition winners. Judges at these

        ceremonies receive free food and drinks, and are seated with their other committee members.

        These ceremonies are designed to thank participants and congratulate the successful aspiring

        entrepreneurs — and to provide an opportunity for informal social engagement between com-

        mittee members so as to reinforce the treatment.


        Non-committee judges: Candidates are also assessed by ‘non-committee judges’. These
        judges assess the submitted business plans individually, assigning scores without seeing the

        applicants’ oral presentations, and without conferring with other judges.7 Each non-committee

        judge attends only once, and receives about US$25. The role of the non-committee judge is

        therefore designed to act as a placebo to the committee judges: non-committee judges were

        randomised from the same pool of firm managers as the committee judges and were exposed

        to the same pool of new business proposals. We will estimate only on firms that participated

        in the experiment; that is, firms whose representatives were either committee judges or non-

        committee judges.


        Assignment of judges: Judges are assigned to their tasks randomly. Each judge attends the
        competition venue at an agreed time. To maximise participation, judges are allowed to choose

        their preferred competition session.8 Having arrived at this session, judges are then randomly

        assigned either to act as a non-committee judge, or to join a specified judging committee.
7
    Non-committee judges were seated separately, and completed their work under ‘examination conditions’.
8
    Our identification strategy — described shortly — will control for any possible endogeneity arising from this choice.


                                                            7                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                 Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


        This assignment is done by having participants draw cards from a bag. The use of a ‘physical

        randomisation device’ is intended to reassure participants that assignment is random (Harrison,

        Humphrey, and Verschoor, 2010).


        Distribution of factsheets: At the conclusion of the prize-giving ceremonies, we dis-
        tribute factsheets to both committee and non-committee judges. Three of the factsheets sum-

        marise descriptive results from the baseline survey. These results are grouped into topics of

        ‘labour’, ‘innovation’ and ‘exporting’. A fourth factsheet relates to the implementing research

        group (the Centre for the Study of African Economies at the University of Oxford). The dis-

        tribution of factsheets is designed to introduce random variation in information between par-

        ticipants, to provide a further basis for testing information diffusion. The factsheet assignment

        — that is, random distribution of descriptive information from an earlier survey — is loosely

        styled on the work of Jensen (2010).



        Two-thirds of the judges each receive two factsheets; the other one-third receive none. The

        assignment of factsheets to judges is randomised, such that each possible pairing of factsheets

        is equally likely. In appendix we provide further details of the randomisation and show the

        English-language versions of the factsheets.9


        Dyadic data: Our follow-up survey (discussed shortly) includes a set of dyadic questions,
        that is, questions in which respondent i is asked directly about respondent j. For committee

        judges, we ask about (i) all other judges who served on the same committee, (ii) a random sam-

        ple of other committee judges who participated in the competition, and (iii) a random sample

        of non-committee judges who participated in the competition. For non-committee judges and

        entrepreneurs who did not participated, we ask about a random sample of committee judges

        and a random sample of non-committee judges. We ask each respondent about 10 committee

        judges in total, and five non-committee judges. Judges are identified to respondents by name
9
    The factsheets were distributed in English in Zambia, in Amharic in Ethiopia, and in Swahili in Tanzania.



                                                          8                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         and firm – for example, “I will now ask about Mary Smith, from Alpha Manufacturing. . . ”.



         2.2     Identification strategy

         Creation of network links: We begin our analysis by measuring the effect of the exper-
         iment on network formation. We do this by testing whether judges remember being on the

         same committees, and whether judges have had any discussions since the experiment. We use

         a very simple dyadic regression structure; having asked firm i about firm j, we estimate:


                                              yij = α0 + α1 · Sij + εij ,                                    (1)


         where yij is some outcome of interest (for example, a dummy for whether the representative

         of firm i said that (s)he had spoken to the representative of firm j), and Sij is a dummy for

         whether i and j were on the same committee together.10 We use the dyadic clustering method

         of Fafchamps and Gubert (2007).11



         We begin by considering whether respondents remember having been on the same judging

         committee, defining yij as a dummy for whether judge i answers in the affirmative to the

         question, “Were you on a judging panel with this person?”.12 We expect that judges on the

         same committee will be much more likely to answer ‘yes’ (indeed, if all respondents had

         perfect recall, we would have β0 = 0 and β1 = 1). We go on to estimate whether judge i

         spoke to judge j, and then consider topics of discussion (namely, whether the judges discussed

         ‘export strategies’, ‘labour management’ and ‘innovation and business advice’).
10
     That is, Cij is defined from our official records of committee membership.
11
     We thank Bruno Caprettini for providing very useful code for dyadic regressions with an incomplete adjacency
     matrix. Note that, because our network adjacency matrix is sparse, the dyadic method is almost identical here to the
     two-way clustering method of Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2011).
12
     That is, we are estimating equation 1 as a Linear Probability Model. Since Pij is binary, we would obtain identical
     estimates if we were to use marginal effects from a probit or logit model.




                                                            9                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                 Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         Perceptions of business networks: We complement the dyadic regressions by testing
         whether the experiment changed committee judges’ perceptions of their business networks.

         For this, we will take a set of outcomes recording respondents’ perception of business friend-

         ship networks (for example, measuring whether the respondent has any friends or relatives as

         bank officials). For judge i randomized from session s, we estimate:


                                              yis1 = β · Ci + µs + εis ,                                  (2)


         where yis1 is a measure of business friendship networks at time t = 1. We cluster εis by

         judging committee.13


         Diffusion of business practices: Several papers have studied natural experiments in which
         peers are randomly matched. Sacerdote (2001) studies the consequences of random assignment

         of of roommates and dormmates at Dartmouth College; he argues that matched peers exhibit

         significant positive correlation in academic results and joining of social groups. However, even

         peer groups formed by random assignment are susceptible to common shocks; for this reason,

         positive correlations between peers’ outcome variables need not imply network diffusion. This

         has been emphasised by Lyle (2007, 2009) in studying academic peer effects among cadets at

         West Point. Lyle argues that researchers should estimate network diffusion by considering the

         effects of peers’ pre-assignment characteristics (see also Zimmerman (2003)). This approach

         has been adopted in several subsequent papers, including by Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2011).



         This is the approach we take. To measure diffusion, we use a ‘linear-in-sum’ specification,

         in which we explain a firm’s management practices at follow-up by the number of its peers

         having adopted particular management practices at baseline. The management practices that

         we consider are each represented by dummy variables; we therefore nest the linear-in-sum

         specification within a probit model. (This follows directly the general approach of Banjeree,
13
     For clustering purposes, non-committee judges are each dealt with as belonging to a ‘one-person committee’.



                                                          10                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackon (2013), who nest a linear-in-means specification within a

         logit model.)



         Specifically, for firm i in randomization session s at time t = 1, we estimate:

                                                                         
                                                           X
           Pr yis1 = 1 {yjs0 : j ∈ Ci } , yis0 ,                 yks0 , ns 
                                                           k∈Si
                                                                                                                

            = Φ β0 + β1p ·
                              X                     X                                       X
                                     yjs0 + β1n ·          (1 − yjs0 ) + β2 · yis0 + β3 ·          yks0 + β4 · ns  ,
                              j∈Ci                  j∈Ci                                    k∈Si

                                                                                                                     (3)


         where yis1 is a dummy for whether the firm follows a particular management practice, Si

         is the set of firms in the same randomization session as firm i (with cardinality ns ) and Ci

         is the set of other firms on the same committee as firm i (defined as an empty set for non-
                                                P
         committee judges). Therefore, the term j∈Ci yjs0 is the sum of firm i’s committee peers who

         had adopted the same management practice at the time of the baseline survey. β1p is our main

         parameter of interest; if firm i is more likely to adopt a management practice because it had

         more peers who had adopted by baseline, we will estimate β1p > 0.



                                                                                           (1 − yjs0 ).14 This allows
                                                                                P
         We also include the sum of peers not adopting at baseline,                 j∈Ci

         us to test between two alternative mechanisms for diffusion. If β1p = −β1n , firms are merely

         imitating their peers: they are more likely to adopt a management practice if more of their

         peers have done so, and less likely to adopt if fewer of their peers have adopted. But if β1p > 0

         and β1n = 0, we have an asymmetric process: a firm is more likely to adopt if it had more

         peers who had adopted, but the firm’s decision to adopt is unaffected by the number of peers

         not adopting. This asymmetric process is similar to Rogers’s (1962) famous notion of ‘diffu-

         sion of innovations’, and to ‘infection’ models of diffusion (Kermark and McKendrick, 1927;
14
     The inclusion of this term exploits
                                      Pthe random assignment of non-committee judges; without
                                                                                         P non-committee judges,
     we would not be able to include j∈Ci (1 − yjs0 ), because it would be collinear with j∈Ci yjs0 .



                                                                  11             Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         Banjeree, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackon, 2013).



         To these terms we add several controls. First, we add the lagged dependent variable, yis0 ; this is

         because, even where groups are formed randomly, yis0 correlates with Ci yjs0 , so its omission

         creates an endogeneity problem (see Guryan, Kroft, and Notowidigdo (2009) and Caeyers

         (2013)). Second, we add the sum of adopters in the randomization session, and the size of that

         session; this controls for possible endogeneity by self-selection into the randomization session.

         We continue to cluster observations by judging committee (where, as before, non-committee

         judges are defined, for clustering purposes, as each comprising a single-judge committee).15


         Inference with multiple outcomes: Our experiment is designed to test for diffusion
         across a wide range of different business practices. We use three methods for inference in

         this multiple-hypothesis context; we use these methods both for estimating the perceptions of

         business networks and for estimating the diffusion of business practices. Our primary method

         of dealing with multiple outcomes is the ‘sharpened q value’ approach of Benjamini, Krieger,

         and Yekutieli (2006). This requires us to group outcomes into related families; the q value then

         controls for each family the False Discovery Rate (‘FDR’), ‘the expected proportion of rejec-

         tions that are type I errors’ (Anderson, 2008). We also report standard p-values for each esti-

         mation separately; this is the appropriate measure for a reader interested in diffusion of some

         particular business practice, ignoring the fact that we tested multiple outcomes (for example,

         if a reader is interested specifically in whether VAT registration diffuses through networks).16
15
     That is, we estimate using Maximum Pseudo-Likelihood.
16
     We have also calculated for each outcome the Family-Wise Error Rate (‘FWER’); these are available on request.
     The FWER is defined as ‘the probability of at least one type 1 error in the family’ (Gibson, McKenzie, and Stillman,
     2011; Shaffer, 1995). We compute the FWER using a Westfall-Young Stepdown Bootstrap (Westfall and Young,
     1993; Kling, Liebman, and Katz, 2007; Gibson, McKenzie, and Stillman, 2011; Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel,
     2012). Specifically, we use the algorithm summarized by Anderson (2008), where we re-randomize within each
     competition session. Because it controls the probability of at least one type 1 error — rather than merely the
     expected rate of type 1 errors — the FWER correction is very demanding (Gibson, McKenzie, and Stillman, 2011).
     In general, the FWER values follow the same patterns as for the p values and the sharpened q values — however,
     being a more conservative test, these values are generally larger than the sharpened q.




                                                           12                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                  Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         3     Experiment implementation

         3.1     Sample

         We ran this experiment in 2011 in Ethiopia, Tanzania and Zambia. Participating manufacturing

         firms were initially surveyed between November 2010 and January 2011, as part of a World

         Bank study on ‘African Competitiveness in Light, Simple Manufactured Goods’.17 In each

         country, a sampling frame was constructed from firm lists obtained from the Bureau of Statis-

         tics, Chambers of Commerce and other similar organisations. These sources do not provide

         sufficient coverage of small and informal firms, so the sampling frame is complemented by

         firms selected in geographical areas with a concentration of informal firms.



         The sample is designed to cover a combination of small firms (with 1 – 20 permanent employ-

         ees) and medium firms (21 – 100 permanent employees), with approximately half of sampled

         firms in each category. Figure 1 shows the distributions of firm size across the three countries.18


                                                  < Figure 1 here. >


         The sample is designed to cover a variety of manufacturing sectors. Specifically, we sought

         to divide the sample more or less equally between food processing, garment manufacturing,

         leather products, metal products and wood products. Table 1 records the distribution of manu-

         facturing sector by country.


                                                   < Table 1 here. >


         Within each firm, we interview someone in a senior management position — in most cases, the

         firm manager. Table 2 shows the distribution of respondents’ management position by country,
17
     This project is summarised at http://econ.worldbank.org/africamanufacturing, and the main re-
     port has been published as Dinh, Palmade, Chandra, and Cossar (2012).
18
     Note that, for graphical clarity, we have truncated the firm size above at 25; a total of 21 firms had more than 25
     permanent employees at baseline.




                                                           13                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         for the sample participating in the experiment.19


                                                   < Table 2 here. >


         Tables 3 and 4 test balance in baseline covariates. Table 3 compares baseline covariates be-

         tween committee and non-committee judges. For each variable, the table reports p-values for

         a t-test of equality in means and a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for distributional equality. The

         table shows that the samples are generally well balanced: the only significant differences be-

         tween groups are in the distribution of baseline permanent employees (though not a significant

         mean difference), and a significant difference in whether the firm had acquired machinery in

         the previous year.20


                                                   < Table 3 here. >


         We conducted a follow-up survey in each country between November 2011 and January 2012.

         This involved resurveying the firms that participated in the experiment and those that did not.



         3.2     Running the experiment

         The Aspire Business Ideas Competition was run simultaneously in Addis Ababa, Dar es Salaam

         and Lusaka in July and August 2011. 192 competitors participated in Ethiopia. In Tanzania,

         the number was 179. In Zambia, where we received fewer applications, we had only 90 com-

         petitors. We distributed a total of 40 prizes, each of US$1,000: 16 prizes in each of Ethiopia
19
     In Tanzania and Zambia, our original sample also includes a number of respondents holding relatively junior roles
     in their firms; for example, respondents who described themselves as ‘technicians’. In those two countries, we
     deliberately favoured more senior respondents for participation in the experiment. Where we needed to use more
     junior respondents to fill judging committees, we then exclude them from the analysis.
20
     Of course, these differences could have been eliminated had we randomised after matching on covariates; for ex-
     ample, using the method of Bruhn and McKenzie (2009). However, we decided that the particular challenges of
     running a socialisation experiment with firm managers weighed in favour of the simpler randomisation device, i.e.
     drawing cards from a bag. There were two main reasons for this. First, we wanted to reassure participants that
     assignment to committees was done randomly. Second, we wanted to allow the possibility that judges may not
     arrive at their agreed time; i.e. we wanted to randomise the group of judges who actually arrived, rather than those
     who merely indicated their willingness to do so.




                                                           14                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         and Tanzania, and eight prizes in Zambia.21



         Table 5 shows the consequent assignments to committee and non-committee judging; Table 6

         shows how committee judges were assigned to different committees.22


                                                 < Table 5 here. >

                                                 < Table 6 here. >



         4     Results

         4.1     Creation of network links

         We begin by considering the probability of creating network links (equation 1). Table 7 reports

         results. The table shows that being on the same panel had a large and highly significant effect

         on the probability of creating a relevant network link. Column 1 shows that there is a 2.5%

         probability that judge i claims to have been on a judging committee with judge j if the judges

         were not, in fact, on a committee together. For judges on a committee together, the probability

         increases by 35.7 percentage points. Column 2 shows a highly significant effect on the prob-

         ability of having spoken since the conclusion of the Aspire Competition. The magnitude of

         this effect is about 16%; on average, each judge has spoken to approximately one of his or her

         committee peers. Sharing a committee also increased the probability of having discussed man-

         agement practices; we find significant positive effects on the probability of having discussed

         export strategies (column 3), labor management (column 4) and innovation (column 5).


                                                 < Table 7 here. >
21
     In Zambia, we had 16 committees — but, because of the smaller number of applicants, awarded only eight prizes.
     We chose the eight prize winners from the 16 highest-ranked applicants by randomly matching committees in pairs.
     Within each pair, we awarded the prize to the committee winner with the better average scores from the ‘non-
     committee judges’.
22
     Note that two committees in Zambia each comprised only two judges (shown in square brackets); we drop these
     four judges from the subsequent analysis.




                                                         15                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                  Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


         4.2     Perceptions of business networks

         Our experiment significantly changed the probability of judges having spoken — but did it af-

         fect judges’ general perceptions of their business networks? To test this, we estimate equation

         2, reporting sharpened q-values and then standard p-values. We estimate on various measures

         of participants’ perceptions of their business networks; results are reported in Appendix 2.

         We find no effect of being a committee judge on any of these measures.23 This immediately

         suggests that our generated network links between firm managers are unlikely to have large

         diffusion effects. We caused reasonably large increases in the probability of managers remem-

         bering each other — and the probability of having discussed relevant management practices

         — but this did not translate into changes in managers’ perceptions of their business networks

         (nor, crucially, in their perception of the ability of those networks to help the firm).



         4.3     Diffusion of business practices

         We now test directly for diffusion in management practices, by estimating equation 3. To

         do this, we group our measures of business practices into four families: (i) formalisation,

         (ii) labour management, (iii) relations with clients and suppliers and (iv) innovation. Table 8

         reports our diffusion tests for four business practices relating to firm formalisation. We find

         significant positive diffusion for two outcomes: being registered for VAT (column 1), and for

         having a bank current account (column 3). We estimate that having a committee peer with VAT

         registration at baseline increased the probability of VAT registration at follow-up by about 7

         percentage points, and that having a committee peer with a bank current account at baseline

         increased the probability of having a bank current account by about 4 percentage points at

         follow-up. We find no significant evidence of diffusion in our measures of labour management,

         relations with clients and suppliers, or innovation. For completeness, we report these estimates

         in Appendix 2.
23
     Across the four tables, three outcomes are either significant or marginally significant — but the p-values increase
     substantially when correcting for multiple inference.




                                                           16                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


                                                   < Table 8 here. >


         It is notable that all three study countries were undergoing important VAT reforms at the time of

         our experiment. In Ethiopia, legislation was enacted in December 2008 to widen substantially

         the powers of the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority in enforcing VAT compliance.24

         This reform was making headlines in the Ethiopian business community around the time of our

         experiment; for example, in one prominent case, four businessmen were jailed in 2010 after

         employees of the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority disguised themselves as cus-

         tomers and purchased a small plastic product for 24 Ethiopian Birr (approximately US$1.50)

         (Sebsibe, 2010).25 In Tanzania, legislation was enacted in May 2010 to require the use of

         Electronic Fiscal Devices; this substantially expanded the ability of the Tanzania Revenue

         Authority to determine which traders would be required to register for VAT, and to demand

         compliance.26 This led to an increase in VAT revenues of approximately 40% between the

         2010/11 financial year and the 2011/12 financial year — that is, exactly at the time that our

         experiment was running — which the Tanzania Revenue Authority directly attributed to the

         introduction of Electronic Fiscal Devices (Chiwango, 2012). Similarly, in Zambia, legislation

         entered into force in January 2010 to increase penalties and powers against unregistered firms;

         the changes imposed tax on supplies made by unregistered taxable suppliers and made unreg-

         istered suppliers liable for back payments they should have made (including interest).27 At

         the time, the Zambia Revenue Authority described this amendment as ‘introduced to curb the

         incidence of non-registration for VAT. . . ’ (Zambia Revenue Authority, 2009).


24
     Proclamation No. 609/2008 was enacted on 25 December 2008. Among other changes, it amends Article 30 of the
     Value Added Tax Proclamation No. 285/2002. It provides that the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority may,
     without court order, seize ‘any illegal vouchers, documents or books of account they encounter’, and that these shall
     be admissible evidence in court. It also provides that police force may be used to do this, and that the police shall
     be required to cooperate with the Authority to seize such documents.
25
     The businessmen were released from jail after serving one month of a two year sentence, following a ruling of the
     Federal Supreme Court: Sebsibe (2010).
26
     The relevant legislation is the Value Added Tax (Electronic Fiscal Devices) Regulations 2010, which were enacted
     and entered into force on 28 May 2010. Supporting amendments to the Value Added Tax Act were made by Part
     XII of the Finance Act 2010, which was enacted on 15 June 2010 and received assent on 23 June 2010.
27
     The relevant legislation is the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Act No. 29 of 2009, which came into effect on 1
     January 2010.

                                                            17                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


Of course, we cannot claim a direct causal link between these reforms and our experimental

results; it is possible that we would have found the same effect on VAT registration even if the

regulatory environment were much more settled. Nonetheless, this is clearly an important and

interesting aspect of the institutional context: it suggests that firms were looking to learn from

peers’ experience with a business practice that was, at the time, attracting substantial attention

and concern among the business community.



4.4    Mechanisms for diffusion

We have found some evidence, though limited, of diffusion of management practices related

to firm formalisation. So how does such diffusion occur? In this section, we run a series

of complementary tests, to explore the potential mechanisms that might explain the limited

diffusion that we do observe.


Imitation, or diffusion of innovation? Our identification strategy allows us to test be-
tween two alternative mechanisms for diffusion: (i) an ‘imitation’ model, in which firms copy

their peers both in adopting and in not adopting (β1p = −β1n ), and (ii) an asymmetric ‘diffusion

of innovation’ process, in which firms copy peers in adopting, but are not affected by non-

adoption (β1p > 0 and β1n = 0). Table 8 tests the null hypothesis of innovation. We strongly

reject this null in the case of VAT registration: firms are more likely to register if they have

peers who have done so, but are no less likely to register if they have more peers who have

not done so (p = 0.005). Similarly, we find suggestive evidence of an asymmetry for the case

of having a bank current account: firms are 4 percentage points more likely to have a bank

account for each peer that does so (significant), and 2 percentage points less likely to have a

bank account for each peer that does not (not significant). However, we cannot reject a null

hypothesis that this is a simple imitation process (p = 0.367).


Sharing a committee, or speaking? One possibility is that our experiment facilitated
diffusion simply by having placed entrepreneurs on a committee together: entrepreneurs then


                                               18                 Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


choose with whom they wish to speak, and diffusion occurs through having spoken. Alterna-

tively, it may be that diffusion needed more — that it required not merely for us to place judges

on a committee together, but also to prompt judges to speak with each other. In some sense, the

former mechanism is more complex: it suggests that managers choose optimally with whom

they will speak, on the basis of some characteristics observable to each other. In contrast, the

latter mechanism is more deterministic: it suggests that diffusion occurred through the rela-

tionships that we created, rather than through the relationships that judges chose.



To distinguish between these two mechanisms, we return to the dyadic data — and, for the

first time in the paper, we exploit the random distribution of factsheets. Table 9 uses a dyadic

Linear Probability Model (analogous to equation 1). It tests how the factsheets influenced

the probability of judge i remembering judge j, having spoken to judge j since the Aspire

Competition, and the probability of having discussed management practices. We estimate this

probability as a function of (i) the factsheets that judge j received (which we expect to have

little effect, if any), and (ii) whether judges i and j received the same factsheet. We find

that having randomly received the same factsheet increased significantly the probability of

having spoken since the competition (column 2), and the probability of having discussed both

labor management and innovation (columns 4 and 5); these effects are all approximately of a

magnitude of 5 percentage points.


                                       < Table 9 here. >


Our random distribution of factsheets therefore generated random variation in the probability

of having spoken — above the variation we generated by the formation of the judging com-

mittees. We can exploit this random variation to distinguish between our two hypothesised

mechanisms for diffusion. To do this, we generate a predicted probability of having spoken

from column 2 of Table 9. We now run a diffusion estimation in which we interact base-

line peer characteristics with (i) the predicted probability of having spoken (which we denote
 \ and (ii) a dummy for whether judge i reports having spoken to judge j, less the pre-
spoken)

                                               19               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


                             \ If diffusion occurs via self-selected conversations, we should expect
         dicted probability spoken.

         this second term to be non-zero. In contrast, if diffusion occurs through conversations that we

         induced by the distribution of factsheets, we expect the first term to be non-zero.28 We estimate

         on the two outcomes for which, in the primary specifications, we found significant diffusion.

         We calculate the p-values using a wild bootstrap procedure, in which we repeat both the dyadic

         first stage and the probit second stage.29



         The results are reported in Table 10. In both cases, we find that it is the interaction with the

         predicted measure of having spoken — rather than the interaction with the ‘residual’ — that is

         larger, and that has the smaller p-value. (Indeed, in each case, the interaction with the predicted

         measure of having spoken is reasonably close to being significant: p = 0.162 and p = 0.105.)

         The diffusion that we observed is explained more through variation that we induced in the

         probability of having spoken, rather than by variation caused by managers’ own decision to

         seek out peers whose expertise might benefit their firms.


                                                   < Table 10 here. >


         Firm size effects: Next, we test for heterogeneity by firm size. To do this, we bifurcate
         our sample at the median firm size (four permanent employees); we denote firms with more

         than four employees as ‘large’ and firms with four or fewer as ‘small’. We repeat our earlier

         estimations on VAT registration and having a bank account, but allow effects to differ by firm

         size. Table 11 reports the results. In each case, we test for whether firms have different reac-

         tions to small peers as to large; we also test for whether small and large firms behave differently.



         We find interesting differences between the diffusion of VAT registration and the diffusion of

         having a bank current account. For VAT registration, firm size seems to matter little. Smaller
28
     For this section, we are therefore making the simplifying assumption that diffusion from firm j to firm i only occurs
     if the manager of i reports having spoken to the manager of firm j.
29
     For this algorithm, we use the sample cluster definition as in the earlier specifications — namely, we cluster by
     committee and, for clustering purposes, treat non-committee judges as each forming their own committee.


                                                            20                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                       Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


firms and larger firms react in very similar ways to their peers’ registration, and firms react

in a similar way to smaller peers as to larger peers. For having a bank account, larger firms

react significantly more than smaller firms. Indeed, we estimate that a large firm is about nine

percentage points more likely to adopt a bank account if a large peer has done so at baseline

(significant at the 1% level); the estimate is almost identical (7 percentage points) for a large

firm reacting to a small firm having a bank account.


                                      < Table 11 here. >


Sectoral effects: The previous results suggest that the characteristics of firms’ peers are
not particularly important for diffusion: firms react similarly as to large peers as to small. To

extend this analysis, we allow for heterogeneity by whether peers are in the same sector. If

diffusion occurs because firms seek to imitate others in the same sector — for example, in an

attempt to catch up with competitors — then a firm should react to the business practices only

of other firms in the same sector. Table 12 tests this formally. We find no additional diffusion

of business practices from firms in the same sector.


                                      < Table 12 here. >



5     Conclusions
In this paper we report results from a field experiment designed to exogenously vary peer net-

works. To our knowledge, our experiment is the first to take this approach with firm managers,

using a novel experimental protocol that has large and significant effects on the creation of

social links between firm managers and entrepreneurs. This paper demonstrates that field ex-

periments can be used to study peer effects.



Our results present a stark contrast to findings from earlier studies of network diffusion — in

particular, studies of adolescent health and of student academic performance. That literature


                                               21               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


has provided evidence of diffusion of knowledge and behaviors along peer networks. We only

find limited evidence of diffusion in business practices — despite the fact that our experiment

induced a large and highly significant change in link formation between managers. For the

sample as a whole, we uncover positive diffusion of VAT registration and of having a bank

current account. We find interesting heterogeneity in diffusion patterns for these variables.

Diffusion appears to be a combination of ‘diffusion of innovation’ (for the relatively novel

business practice: VAT registration) and simple imitation (for the long-standing business prac-

tice: having a bank account).



In both cases, diffusion does not appear to be particularly purposive or strategic. Three separate

heterogeneity tests support this conclusion. First, observed diffusion appears to be driven by

exogenous variation in the probability of having spoken, rather than by managers seeking out

particular peers to help their firms. Second, firms do not react more to the business practices of

peers of the same approximate size. Third, firms do not react more to peers in the same sector.

These results paint a less sophisticated — i.e., more serendipitous — picture of the diffusion

of business practices than economists sometimes assume.



There may be several reasons that we do not find more evidence of diffusion. It may be that

diffusion among firm managers requires more time, or a stronger network treatment. Nonethe-

less, our experiment induced large variation in network links — so why did managers not use

this opportunity to adopt new management practices? There may be several strategic reasons.

First, entrepreneurs may face incentives not to encourage technology adoption by peers who

could then compete away their profit (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995). Additionally, contact

among peers may diffuse not only of tales of success, but also of entrepreneur horror stories —

for example, stories of firms that tried and failed at exporting, or at introducing new products.

Finally, managers may feel sufficiently set in their existing practices — or sufficiently wary of

experimentation — not to see a need to learn from other managers’ experiences (Callander and

Matouschek, 2013). For all of these reasons, business networks need not provide a sufficient

                                               22               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


basis for reducing the heterogeneity of either management practices or productivity outcomes

between competing firms. These findings contribute to our understanding how inferior busi-

ness practices and productivity differentials may persist among firms (Bloom and Van Reenen,

2007).




References
A NDERSON , M. L. (2008): “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of
  Early Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
  Projects,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484), 1481–1495.

A RAL , S., AND D. WALKER (2011): “Creating Social Contagion Through Viral Product De-
  sign: A Randomized Trial of Peer Influence in Networks,” Management Science, 57(9),
  1623–1639.

BANDIERA , O., I. BARANKAY, AND I. R ASUL (2011): “Field Experiments with Firms,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 63–82.

BANJEREE , A., A. C HANDRASEKHAR , E. D UFLO , AND M. JACKON (2013): “The Diffusion
  of Microfinance,” Science, 341.

B ENJAMINI , Y., A. M. K RIEGER , AND D. Y EKUTIELI (2006): “Adaptive Linear Step-up
   Procedures That Control the False Discovery Rate,” Biometrika, 93(3), 491–507.

B IFULCO , R., J. M. F LETCHER , AND S. L. ROSS (2011): “The Effect of Classmate Char-
   acteristics on Post-Secondary Outcomes: Evidence from the Add Health,” American Eco-
   nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1), 25–53.

B LOOM , N., B. E IFERT, A. M AHAJAN , D. M C K ENZIE , AND J. ROBERTS (2013): “Does
   Management Matter? Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1),
   1–51.

B LOOM , N., R. S ADUN , AND J. VAN R EENEN (2012): “Management as Technology?,” Work-
   ing Paper.

B LOOM , N., AND J. VAN R EENEN (2007): “Measuring and Explaining Management Prac-
   tices Across Firms and Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351–
   1408.



                                            23               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                  Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


        (2010): “Why do Management Practices Differ Across Firms and Countries?,” The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1), 203–224.

B RUHN , M., AND D. M C K ENZIE (2009): “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice
   in Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pp.
   200–232.

C AEYERS , B. (2013): “Social Networks, Community-Based Development and Empirical
   Methodologies,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Oxford Department of Economics.

C ALLANDER , S., AND N. M ATOUSCHEK (2013): “A Simple Theory of Growth in a Compli-
   cated World,” Working paper.

C AMERON , A., J. G ELBACH , AND D. M ILLER (2011): “Robust Inference with Multiway
   Clustering,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 29(2), 238–249.

C ARRELL , S. E., B. S ACERDOTE , AND J. E. W EST (2012): “From Natural Variation to
   Optimal Policy? The Importance of Endogenous Peer Group Formation,” Econometrica.

C ASELLA , A., AND J. R AUCH (2002): “Anonymous Market and Group Ties in International
   Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 58(1), 19–47.

C ASEY, K., R. G LENNERSTER , AND E. M IGUEL (2012): “Reshaping Institutions: Evidence
   on Aid Impacts Using a Pre-Analysis Plan,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

C ENTOLA , D. (2010): “The Spread of Behavior in an Online Social Network Experiment,”
   science, 329(5996), 1194–1197.

        (2011): “An Experimental Study of Homophily in the Adoption of Health Behavior,”
  Science, 334(6060), 1269–1272.

C HIWANGO , A. (2012): “TRA: Electronic Fiscal Devices Already Making a Difference,”
   Business Times, 8 December 2012.

C ONLEY, T., AND C. U DRY (2001): “Social Learning through Networks: The Adoption of
   New Agricultural Technologies in Ghana,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
   83(3), 668–673.

C ONLEY, T. G., AND C. R. U DRY (2010): “Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in
   Ghana,” The American Economic Review, pp. 35–69.

D INH , H., V. PALMADE , V. C HANDRA , AND F. C OSSAR (2012): Light Manufacturing in
   Africa: Targeted Policies to Enhance Private Investment and Create Jobs. World Bank Pub-
   lications.

D UFLO , E., P. D UPAS , AND M. K REMER (2011): “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and the
  Impact of Tracking: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya,” The American
  Economic Review, 101(5), 1739–1774.



                                            24              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                   Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


FAFCHAMPS , M., AND F. G UBERT (2007): “The Formation of Risk Sharing Networks,” Jour-
  nal of Development Economics, 83(2), 326–350.

FAFCHAMPS , M., AND D. M O (2015): “Peer Effect Heterogeneity in Computer Assisted
  Learning: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Working paper (Stanford University).

FAFCHAMPS , M., AND M. S ÖDERBOM (2012): “Network Proximity and Business Practices
  in African Manufacturing,” Working Paper.

F LETCHER , J. M. (2010): “Social Interactions and Smoking: Evidence using Multiple Student
   Cohorts, Instrumental Variables, and School Fixed Effects,” Health Economics, 19(4), 466–
   484.

F OSTER , A., AND M. ROSENZWEIG (1995): “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
   Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy, pp.
   1176–1209.

G IBBONS , R., AND R. H ENDERSON (2012): “What Do Managers Do? Exploring Persis-
   tent Performance Differences Among Seemingly Similar Enterprises,” in The Handbook of
   Organizational Economics, ed. by R. Gibbons, and J. Roberts. Princeton University Press.

G IBSON , J., D. M C K ENZIE , AND S. S TILLMAN (2011): “The Impacts of International Mi-
   gration on Remaining Household Members: Omnibus Results from a Migration Lottery
   Program,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4), 1297–1318.

G REIF, A. (1993): “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
  Maghribi Traders’ Coalition,” The American Economic Review, pp. 525–548.

G URYAN , J., K. K ROFT, AND M. N OTOWIDIGDO (2009): “Peer Effects in the Workplace:
  Evidence from Random Groupings in Professional Golf Tournaments,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4), 34–68.

H ARRISON , G., S. H UMPHREY, AND A. V ERSCHOOR (2010): “Choice Under Uncertainty:
  Evidence from Ethiopia, India and Uganda,” The Economic Journal, 120(543), 80–104.

H SIEH , C.-T., AND P. J. K LENOW (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
   and India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.

J ENSEN , R. (2010): “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,”
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515–548.

K ERMARK , M., AND A. M C K ENDRICK (1927): “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory
   of Epidemics. Part I,” in Proc. R. Soc. A, vol. 115, pp. 700–721.

K LING , J. R., J. B. L IEBMAN , AND L. F. K ATZ (2007): “Experimental Analysis of Neigh-
   borhood Effects,” Econometrica, 75(1), 83–119.

LYLE , D. (2007): “Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects from Randomly
  Assigned Social Groups at West Point,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2),
  289–299.

                                            25              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


          (2009): “The Effects of Peer Group Heterogeneity on the Production of Human Cap-
  ital at West Point,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pp. 69–84.

M C M ILLAN , J., AND C. W OODRUFF (1999): “Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in
  Vietnam,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4), 1285–1320.

M ÖBIUS , M., T. P HAN ,   AND   A. S ZEIDL (2010): “Treasure Hunt,” Working Paper.

O STER , E., AND R. T HORNTON (2012): “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Peer Ef-
   fects in Menstrual Cup Take-Up,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(6),
   1263–1293.

PARENTE , S., AND E. P RESCOTT (1994): “Barriers to Technology Adoption and Develop-
  ment,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 298–321.

PATNAM , M. (2013): “Corporate Networks and Peer Effects in Firm Policies,” Working Paper.

R AUCH , J., AND A. C ASELLA (2003): “Overcoming Informational Barriers to International
   Resource Allocation: Prices and Ties,” The Economic Journal, 113(484), 21–42.

ROGERS , E. M. (1962): Diffusion of Innovations. Glencoe: Free Press.

S ACERDOTE , B. (2001): “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
   Roommates,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 681–704.

S EBSIBE , M. (2010): “Tena Kebede Out of Prison,” Addis Fortune, 1 August 2010.

S HAFFER , J. P. (1995): “Multiple Hypothesis Testing,” Annual review of psychology, 46(1),
   561–584.

S HUE , K. (2013): “Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assign-
   ment of MBA peers,” Review of Financial Studies, 26(6), 1401–1442.

S YVERSON , C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature,
   49(2), 326–365.

W ESTFALL , P. H., AND S. S. YOUNG (1993): Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples
  and Methods for p-Value Adjustment.

Z AMBIA R EVENUE AUTHORITY (2009): “Practice Note No. 1/2010,” Domestic Taxes Divi-
   sion.

Z IMMERMAN , D. (2003): “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
   Experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), 9–23.




                                               26             Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                    Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


    Figures and tables (main text)




                        Figure 1: Size distribution of sampled firms




 This figure shows the size distribution of the sampled firms. We show the histogram across all
firms, with kernel density plots by country (for which we use a bandwidth of 4 for each kernel).
For graphical clarity, we have truncated the firm size above at 25; a total of 21 firms had more
                            than 25 permanent employees at baseline.




                                              27              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                              Table 1: Sector of manufacturing
                                                       E THIOPIA    TANZANIA     Z AMBIA

                                 FOOD PROCESSING        53   21%     21    8%    38   14%

                                    GARMENTS            48   19%     58   22%    65   25%




28
                                 LEATHER PRODUCTS       49   20%     37   14%    42   16%

                                 METAL PRODUCTS         46   18%     50   19%    61   23%

                                  WOOD PRODUCTS         54   22%     96   37%    57   22%

                                      TOTAL           250    100%   262   100% 263    100%




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                             Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                   Table 2: Management seniority
                                                                                    ETHIOPIA       TANZANIA   ZAMBIA


                                        OWNER AND MANAGER                                  94            91      109   294

                                       PRESIDENT         /   MANAGER                       93           100       76   269

                                  VICE PRESIDENT     /   DEPUTY MANAGER                    23             0        5   28




29
                                         DEPARTMENT HEAD                                    9            37       17   63

                                 ACCOUNTS   /   FINANCE      /   ADMINISTRATION            17             0        0   17

                                                   OTHER                                    2             1        4    7

                                                                                          238           229      211   678




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                             Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                 Table 3: Covariate balance: Committee judges versus non-committee judges
                                                                        COMMITTEE JUDGE           NON - COMMITTEE JUDGE           Equality (p)
                                                                        N     Mean     Std.Dev     N     Mean      Std.Dev       Mean     Distr.

                                 Total permanent employees             237    5.768     8.560     100    6.950       7.761      0.235        0.037∗∗

                                 Dummy: Owner is female                237    0.169     0.375     98     0.204       0.405      0.445        1.000

                                 Owner’s age (years)                   236    38.432    8.737     99    38.000       9.805      0.691        0.925

                                 Dummy: Firm registered                237    0.502     0.501     100    0.570       0.498      0.256        0.874

                                 Dummy: Production uses electricity    237    0.793     0.406     100    0.760       0.429      0.500        1.000

                                 Number of local competitors           232    20.203   49.022     98    18.969      37.242      0.823        0.223




30
                                 Number of friends in business         223    11.242   18.151     96     9.635      11.243      0.423        0.988

                                 Number of regular suppliers           231    4.693     4.734     99     4.677       6.040      0.980        0.854

                                 Dummy: Firm exports                   237    0.051     0.220     100    0.050       0.219      0.981        1.000

                                 Number of product types               234    6.885    11.415     99     7.646      22.918      0.686        0.852

                                 Dummy: Acquired machinery             231    0.385     0.488     99     0.515       0.502      0.029∗∗      0.178

                                 Dummy: Bank account                   237    0.506     0.501     99     0.515       0.502      0.883        1.000


                                 ‘Mean equality (p)’ reports the p-value from a two-sample t test with equal variances.
                                 ‘Distr. equality (p)’ reports the p-value from a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (calculated exactly).




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                       Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                                 Confidence: ‘∗’: 90%; ‘∗∗’: 95%; ‘∗ ∗ ∗’: 99%.
                                                       Table 4: Covariate balance: Participants versus non-participants
                                                                              PARTICIPANT          NON - PARTICIPANT          Equality (p)
                                                                         N     Mean     Std.Dev    N     Mean    Std.Dev     Mean     Distr.

                                 Total permanent employees              337    6.119     8.337    343    7.703    12.611    0.054∗    0.427

                                 Dummy: Owner is female                 335    0.179     0.384    336    0.149     0.356    0.290     0.996

                                 Owner’s age (years)                    335    38.304    9.053    333   39.465    10.651    0.129     0.366

                                 Dummy: Firm registered                 337    0.522     0.500    340    0.535     0.499    0.734     1.000

                                 Dummy: Production uses electricity     337    0.783     0.413    343    0.764     0.425    0.544     1.000

                                 Number of local competitors            330    19.836   45.788    330   18.827    45.436    0.776     0.300




31
                                 Number of friends in business          319    10.759   16.380    325    9.305    12.190    0.201     0.967

                                 Number of regular suppliers            330    4.688     5.151    329    5.003     8.555    0.567     0.516

                                 Dummy: Firm exports                    337    0.050     0.219    343    0.070     0.255    0.286     1.000

                                 Number of product types                333    7.111    15.704    338    5.796     7.454    0.165     0.638

                                 Dummy: Acquired machinery              330    0.424     0.495    326    0.485     0.501    0.121     0.557

                                 Dummy: Bank account                    336    0.509     0.501    337    0.507     0.501    0.969     1.000


                                 ‘Mean equality (p)’ reports the p-value from a two-sample t test with equal variances.
                                 ‘Distr. equality (p)’ reports the p-value from a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (calculated exactly).




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                                 Confidence: ‘∗’: 90%; ‘∗∗’: 95%; ‘∗ ∗ ∗’: 99%.
                                 Table 5: Assignment to treatment: Committee and non-committee judges
                                              PANEL JUDGE    NON - PANEL JUDGE    NON - PARTICIPANT


                                 E THIOPIA         86                 40                 112




32
                                 TANZANIA          90                 44                 124

                                 Z AMBIA           63                 22                 158

                                                   239               106                 394




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                        Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                             Table 6: Assignment to treatment: Judging committees
                                             A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J   K   L   M   N   O     P     TOTAL


                                 E THIOPIA   6   6   6   6   5   5   5   5   6   5   3   6   5   6   5     6      86




33
                                 TANZANIA    6   5   6   6   6   6   5   5   6   6   6   4   6   6   6     5      90

                                 Z AMBIA     4   4   4   5   5   6   6   4   4   3   3   3   3   5   [2]   [2]    63




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                       Table 7: Results: Creation of network links

                                                                      (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)
                                                                                                                            discussion topics
                                                                 remembers           spoken since           exports            labor          innovation

                                 Dummy: Same panel                  0.357               0.161               0.030              0.065                 0.118
                                                                  (0.024)∗∗∗          (0.016)∗∗∗          (0.010)∗∗∗         (0.010)∗∗∗            (0.014)∗∗∗

                                 Constant                           0.025               0.013               0.003              0.006                 0.010




34
                                                                  (0.003)∗∗∗          (0.002)∗∗∗          (0.001)∗∗∗         (0.001)∗∗∗            (0.002)∗∗∗

                                 Observations                        9602                9602                9602              9602                  9602
                                 The unit of observation is a dyadic response. Parentheses show standard errors, allowing for dyadic clustering.
                                 ‘Remembers’ is a dummy for ‘Were you on a judging panel with this person?’.
                                 ‘Spoken since’ is a dummy for ‘Have you spoken to this person since the Aspire Competition awards ceremony?’.
                                 ‘Exports’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss export strategies?’.
                                 ‘Labor’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss labor management?’.
                                 ‘Innovation’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss innovation and business advice?’.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                                Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                      Table 8: Diffusion results: Formalisation

                                                                                     (1)                     (2)      (3)         (4)


                                 Sum of peers adopting                             0.066                   0.016     0.044       0.029
                                                                                  [0.015]∗∗               [0.258]   [0.081]∗    [0.258]
                                                                                  (0.004)∗∗∗              (0.409)   (0.050)∗∗   (0.341)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                         0.003                   0.008     -0.022      -0.022
                                                                                  [0.669]                 [0.669]   [0.669]     [0.669]
                                                                                  (0.757)                 (0.372)   (0.200)     (0.110)

                                 Controls                                            3                       3         3          3




35
                                 Observations                                       333                     326       329        326
                                 H0 : Imitation (p)                               0.005∗∗∗                 0.277     0.367      0.826

                                 Baseline adoption                                   8%                    16%       42%         32%
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm is registered for VAT (‘missing’ = ‘no’)
                                 2: Whether the firm’s financial statements are certified by external auditor.
                                 3: Whether the firm has a bank current account.
                                 4: Whether the firm has a savings account.

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                          Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                            Table 9: Results: Creation of network links: Effect of receiving the same factsheet

                                                                                (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                                                                          discussion topics
                                                                           remembers        spoken since       exports        labor       innovation

                                 Dummy: Received the same sheet               0.013            0.067∗∗          0.011        0.042∗∗          0.053∗
                                                                             (0.037)           (0.033)         (0.013)       (0.021)          (0.028)

                                 CSAE sheet                                  0.084∗∗            0.029         -0.027∗∗       -0.007            0.024
                                                                             (0.034)           (0.026)         (0.012)       (0.016)          (0.022)

                                 Exports sheet                                0.027            0.043∗           0.007        -0.006            0.024
                                                                             (0.036)           (0.023)         (0.013)       (0.015)          (0.023)

                                 Innovation sheet                             0.040             0.015           0.016        0.040∗∗          0.039∗




36
                                                                             (0.037)           (0.028)         (0.012)       (0.017)          (0.024)

                                 Labor sheet                                 -0.012            -0.038          -0.018∗       -0.024∗         -0.040∗
                                                                             (0.034)           (0.024)         (0.011)       (0.013)         (0.021)

                                 Constant                                    0.327∗∗∗         0.134∗∗∗        0.037∗∗∗      0.056∗∗∗         0.093∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.036)          (0.020)         (0.011)       (0.012)          (0.015)
                                 Observations                                   976              976             976           976              976
                                 The unit of observation is a dyadic response. Parentheses show standard errors, allowing for dyadic clustering.
                                 ‘Remembers’ is a dummy for ‘Were you on a judging panel with this person?’.
                                 ‘Spoken since’ is a dummy for ‘Have you spoken to this person since the Aspire Competition awards ceremony?’.
                                 ‘Exports’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss export strategies?’.
                                 ‘Labor’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss labor management?’.
                                 ‘Innovation’ is a dummy for ‘Did you discuss innovation and business advice?’.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                        Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                 Table 10: Results: Diffusion and the probability of having spoken

                                                                                         (1)           (2)

                                                          \
                                      Σ (peer adopting × spoken)                        0.379         0.213
                                                                                       (0.162)       (0.105)

                                                                   \
                                      Σ [peer adopting × (spoken −spoken)]              0.003         0.034
                                                                                       (0.988)       (0.493)




37
                                      Controls                                            3            3

                                      Observations                                       333          329

                                      Outcome variables:
                                      1: Whether the firm is registered for VAT (‘missing’ = ‘no’)
                                      2: Whether the firm has a bank current account

                                      ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                      Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                          Table 11: Diffusion results and firm size
                                                                                                     (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
                                                                                                     Registered for VAT                Has a bank current account
                                                                                                  Small firms    Large firms          Small firms     Large firms

                                 Sum of small peers adopting                                            0.069               0.103       0.033               0.074
                                                                                                       (0.069)∗            (0.291)     (0.231)             (0.275)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting                                       -0.008               0.026       0.036            -0.073
                                                                                                       (0.513)             (0.121)     (0.126)         (0.019)∗∗

                                 Sum of large peers adopting                                            0.038               0.119       0.006             0.086
                                                                                                       (0.089)∗           (0.030)∗∗    (0.885)         (0.007)∗∗∗




38
                                 Sum of large peers not adopting                                        0.025               0.007       -0.078             -0.072
                                                                                                       (0.368)             (0.761)     (0.200)             (0.299)

                                 Controls                                                                 3                  3            3                  3


                                 Observations                                                            197                136          195                134
                                 H0 : Common reaction to large and small peers (p)                      0.329              0.825        0.137              0.986
                                 H0 : Common parameters between large and small firms (p)                         0.317                          0.019∗∗

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                            Table 12: Diffusion results and sector
                                                                                   (1)            (2)

                                 Sum of peers adopting                            0.083          0.044
                                                                               (0.006)∗∗∗       (0.065)∗

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                        0.005         -0.016
                                                                                 (0.596)        (0.420)

                                 Sum of peers adopting (same sector)              -0.079         0.003
                                                                                 (0.389)        (0.946)




39
                                 Sum of peers not adopting (same sector)         -0.013         -0.020
                                                                                 (0.451)        (0.511)

                                 Controls                                           3              3

                                 Observations                                      333            329
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm is registered for VAT (‘missing’ = ‘no’)
                                 2: Whether the firm has a bank current account.

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                           Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


Appendix 1: Further details on the experiment protocol
Advertising
Figure 2 shows the poster used in Zambia. This poster was translated into Amharic and Swahili
and displayed in public places in Addis Ababa, Dar es Salaam and Lusaka. The content and
stye of the poster formed the basis for other advertising run on radio and on Facebook.

In all three countries, applicants were able to apply by submitting a hard copy application
form; in Tanzania and Zambia, applicants were also given the option of applying online.


Factsheets
Figures 3 to 6 show the English versions of the four factsheets distributed in each country.
As noted, the factsheets relate to the Centre for the Study of African Economies, exporting,
innovation and labour management.

Table 13 shows the structure of factsheet assignment. Each committee judge and each non-
committee judge was randomly assigned to a row in this table, so that all rows were filled
before assigning judges to any new positions. This ensured that, so far as possible, two-thirds
of judges received factsheets and one-third did not; it also ensures that, so far as possible, each
possible pair of factsheets was assigned the same number of times.




                                                40               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




Figure 2: Advertising for aspiring entrepreneurs: Zambian poster




                ASPIRE
  Do you aspire to be a successful entrepreneur?
  Do you aspire to start your own business?
  Do you have a business idea that needs support?

  If so, apply for the chance to win US$1,000 to help you to start
  your own business!

  The Centre for the Study of African Economies (University of Oxford, UK) is interested in
  learning about the growth of new business ideas in Zambia. We are running a business
  ideas competition for aspiring young entrepreneurs, and we want you to apply!

 Who: Applications are open to any aspiring entrepreneur aged 18 – 25, male or female.
       (Note that you may be required to provide proof of your age.)
 What: In July and August, we will be running a competition to reward aspiring
       entrepreneurs. You can win the chance to present and explain your idea to a
       group of Zambian business leaders. Those with the best project win US$1,000!
  How: Apply online at www.csae.ox.ac.uk/aspire/zambia. There is no application cost.
 When: It’s with immediate effect and applications close on 22 July at 6pm.




                      TO WIN
         US$1,000!!

                                             41                   Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




Figure 3: Factsheet: The Centre for the Study of African Economies



                                  The Centre for the Study
                                   of African Economies

                                   Did you know...?
     CSAE is celebrating 25 years of studying economic issues in Africa
     CSAE was founded at the University of Oxford in 1986. This year, CSAE hosted its 25th Anniversary
     Conference, on the theme of ‘Economic Development in Africa’. There were 270 presentations and
     almost 400 participants.

     Paul Collier, the CSAE Director, has just published a new book
     In his latest book ‘The Plundered Planet’, Professor Collier argues that countries can ensure
     equitable development by using technological innovation, environmental protection and better
     government regulation. Professor Collier is one of the promoters of the Natural Resource Charter, a
     set of principles for governments and societies to use wisely the development opportunities created by
     natural resources.

                        Professor Paul Collier                            ‘The Plundered Planet’




     You can learn more about CSAE and our research from our website: www.csae.ox.ac.uk.

     Videos from the 25th Anniversary Conference are available at http://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/conferences/.


                    Marcel Fafchamps                                       Simon Quinn
           Professor of Development Economics                         Post-doctoral researcher
                   University of Oxford                                University of Oxford




                                                     42                        Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                             Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                                 Figure 4: Factsheet: Exports



                              Asia-Africa Study Factsheet

                                        Did you know...?
Fact 1: African firms could export more
                                                                             Figure 1: Exporting and firm size



Research shows that Chinese firms are more
likely to export than firms of a similar size in
Africa. Figure 1 illustrates this. This suggests
that more African firms could follow the
Chinese example by exporting.




Fact 2: Firms that export have higher sales
                                                                               Figure 2: Exporting and sales



Exporting is an important way by which a firm
can increase its market. Figure 2 shows the
median sales for African exporters and non-
exporters. On average, exporting firms sell
much more.




Here are some steps that a firm can take to start exporting:
    Identifying export opportunities (for example, by learning about foreign markets, or by
       finding local export agencies);
    Discussing exporting opportunities with a bank or other finance organisation;
    Obtaining any necessary export permits from government authorities;
    Discussing exporting strategies with other firms that export successfully.

We appreciate your participation in the study and we hope that you find this information useful.*
                 Marcel Fafchamps                                                         Simon Quinn
        Professor of Development Economics                                           Post-doctoral researcher
                University of Oxford                                                  University of Oxford
* Your firm was surveyed last year by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at the University of Oxford (UK).This was part of
a research project to learn about African competitiveness in manufacturing. The study covered China, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Tanzania
and Zambia. Many firm managers asked us to pass on results from the study, to help improve their firm’s performance.




                                                                43                               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                             Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                              Figure 5: Factsheet: Innovation



                              Asia-Africa Study Factsheet

                                        Did you know...?
Fact 1: African firms could use experts and consultants more
                                                                          Figure 1: Use of experts/consultants



Research shows that Chinese firms are much
more likely than firms in Africa to use
experts/consultants to develop new products
and to introduce new production processes.
This is illustrated in Figure 1. This suggests
that more African firms could follow the
Chinese example.




Fact 2: African firms could use customer expertise more
                                                                           Figure 2: Use of customer expertise



Customers can be an important source of
ideas and technological expertise. Figure 2
shows that Chinese firms are more likely to
use the expertise of their customers for
developing new products.




Here are some steps that a firm can take to innovate more successfully:
    Finding consulting firms that can advise on introducing new products or processes;
    Speaking to suppliers of machines and equipment about other firms and their innovations;
    Discussing potential innovations with customers;
    Joining a business association;
    Discussing innovation strategies with other firms that innovate successfully.

We appreciate your participation in the study and we hope that you find this information useful.*
                 Marcel Fafchamps                                                         Simon Quinn
        Professor of Development Economics                                           Post-doctoral researcher
                University of Oxford                                                  University of Oxford
* Your firm was surveyed last year by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at the University of Oxford (UK).This was part of
a research project to learn about African competitiveness in manufacturing. The study covered China, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Tanzania
and Zambia. Many firm managers asked us to pass on results from the study, to help improve their firm’s performance.




                                                                44                               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                             Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                  Figure 6: Factsheet: Labour management



                              Asia-Africa Study Factsheet

                                        Did you know...?
Fact 1: Chinese firms produce more per worker than African firms
                                                                      Figure 1: Labour productivity and firm size



Research shows that Chinese and Vietnamese
firms produce substantially more per worker
than firms in Ethiopia, Tanzania or Zambia.




Fact 2: Asian firms hire more educated production workers
                                                                      Figure 2: Workers’ education and firm size



Chinese and Vietnamese firms have a more
highly educated production workforce.
Figure 2 compares the average education of
entry-level production workers. This suggests
that more African firms could follow the
Chinese example.




Here are some steps that a firm can take to produce more per worker:
    Offering on-the-job training or vocational training;
    Relying on more educated workers to supervise production;
    Introducing double or triple work shifts;
    Boosting employee morale by offering eating areas, private lockers and clean toilets;
    Discussing labour management strategies with other firms.

We appreciate your participation in the study and we hope that you find this information useful.*
                 Marcel Fafchamps                                                         Simon Quinn
        Professor of Development Economics                                           Post-doctoral researcher
                University of Oxford                                                  University of Oxford
* Your firm was surveyed last year by the Centre for the Study of African Economies at the University of Oxford (UK).This was part of
a research project to learn about African competitiveness in manufacturing. The study covered China, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Tanzania
and Zambia. Many firm managers asked us to pass on results from the study, to help improve their firm’s performance.




                                                                45                               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




Table 13: Structure of factsheet assignment
                   FACT SHEETS
       CSAE   EXPORTS  INNOVATION    LABOUR
α·1     3       3
α·2             3          3
α·3                        3            3
α·4     3                               3
α·5
α·6
β·1     3       3
β·2             3                       3
β·3                        3            3
β·4     3                  3
β·5
β·6
γ·1     3                  3
γ·2             3          3
γ·3             3                       3
γ·4     3                               3
γ·5
γ·6
δ·1     3                  3
δ·2                        3            3
δ·3             3                       3
δ·4     3       3
δ·5
δ·6
ε·1     3                               3
ε·2             3                       3
ε·3             3          3
ε·4     3                  3
ε·5
ε·6
ζ ·1    3                               3
ζ ·2                       3            3
ζ ·3            3          3
ζ ·4    3       3
ζ ·5
ζ ·6




                    46              Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                       Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


Appendix 2: Additional estimation results
Perceptions of business networks
Table 14 tests for measures of the number of friends (specifically, whether the respondent
has friends or relatives in various positions, and the total number of friends and relatives in
business in other firms). Table 15 tests characteristics of friends (including the respondents’
perceptions of their friends’ experience, firm size, frequency of speaking, and whether the re-
spondents’ friends know each other). Table 16 tests whether respondents have friends who
would help with various aspects of doing business; Table 17 tests whether the respondent has
ever helped any of his her friends or relatives in doing business.


                                       < Table 14 here.   >
                                       < Table 15 here.   >
                                       < Table 16 here.   >
                                       < Table 17 here.   >


Testing diffusion in other business practices
Tables 18, 19 and 20 respectively report measures of diffusion for relations with clients and
suppliers, labour management and of innovation. After correcting for multiple inference, we
find no significant evidence of diffusion in any of these outcomes.

                                       < Table 18 here. >
                                       < Table 19 here. >
                                       < Table 20 here. >

Tables 21 and 22 test measures of relations with clients and suppliers, disaggregating by firm
size. We find a large and highly significant diffusion of advertising, from small firms to large
firms: a large firm is about 23 percentage points more likely to advertise at follow-up as a
result of having a small peer firm that had advertised at baseline (column 1, Table 21). We also
find a large and significant negative diffusion of having sales paid after delivery; a large firm
is approximately 10 percentage points less likely to accept payment after delivery if a small
peer firm does so (column 5, Table 21). We find no significant diffusion effects for small firms
(Table 22).

                                       < Table 21 here. >
                                       < Table 22 here. >

Tables 23 and 24 test for diffusion of various measures of firm innovation, disaggregated by
firm size. As with formalisation, we find large and significant diffusion effects from small firms
to large: this is true in the case of introducing new products (a large firm is 10 percentage points
more likely to do this if a small peer firm has done so previously), and changing production
processes (where the magnitude is 7 percentage points). We find no significant effects for
diffusion to small firms (though note that, for change of production processes, the magnitude
of the estimated effect for diffusion from small firms to small firms is almost identical to the
magnitude from small firms to large firms).

                                                47                Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa


                                      < Table 23 here. >
                                      < Table 24 here. >


Disaggregation by size and sector
Tables 25 and 26 disaggregate by size for measures of labour management; as in Table 20, we
find no significant diffusion effects.

                                      < Table 25 here. >
                                      < Table 26 here. >

Tables 12 to 29 test whether diffusion is stronger between two firms that are in the same sector.
We find no evidence of this across any of the outcomes considered.

                                      < Table 12 here.   >
                                      < Table 27 here.   >
                                      < Table 28 here.   >
                                      < Table 29 here.   >




                                               48               Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                              Table 14: Results: Number of friends

                                                                            (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)           (5)       (6)

                                 Dummy: Committee judge                  -0.067            -0.012           -0.084             0.034         -0.400      0.089
                                                                         [0.427]           [0.689]          [0.427]           [0.427]        [0.689]    [0.427]
                                                                         (0.230)           (0.829)          (0.100)           (0.272)        (0.689)   (0.097)∗

                                 Session dummies                             3                3                 3                3             3          3

                                 Observations                              330               330              329               330           330        327




49
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the respondent has friends or relatives working as bank officials.
                                 2: Whether the respondent has friends or relatives who are elected officials / political party officials.
                                 3: Whether the respondent has friends or relatives who are working for the government.
                                 4: Whether the respondent has friends or relatives who are in business in other firms.
                                 5: Number of friends and relatives who are in business in other firms.
                                 6: Whether the respondent has friends or relatives in the same sector.

                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                                  Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                   Table 15: Results: Characteristics of friends

                                                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)             (4)       (5)

                                 Dummy: Committee judge                   0.017               0.070               0.010           -0.020   -0.033
                                                                         [1.000]             [1.000]             [1.000]         [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                         (0.767)             (0.231)             (0.845)         (0.712)   (0.545)

                                 Session dummies                            3                   3                   3              3         3

                                 Observations                              330                 329                 329            321       321




50
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: On average, business friends/relatives are more experienced than the respondent.
                                 2: On average, business friends/relatives work in a larger firm than the respondent.
                                 3: On average, the respondent speaks at least weekly with his/her business friends/relatives.
                                 4: Some of the respondent’s business friends/relatives know each other.
                                 5: All of the respondent’s business friends/relatives know each other.

                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                     Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                                  Table 16: Results: Friends who could help

                                                                         (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)       (7)       (8)

                                 Dummy: Committee judge                0.010          -0.105            0.008      -0.026          -0.016         -0.001    0.045     0.023
                                                                      [1.000]        [0.550]           [1.000]     [1.000]        [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                      (0.843)       (0.044)∗∗          (0.887)     (0.647)        (0.779)        (0.986)   (0.427)   (0.682)

                                 Session dummies                         3              3                3             3              3            3         3         3

                                 Observations                           327            327              325          328            328           328       328       328

                                 Outcome variables:




51
                                 Respondent has at least one friend/relative in business who could. . .
                                 1: . . . help to identify sources of raw materials domestically.
                                 2: . . . help to identify sources of raw materials in another country.
                                 3: . . . help to identify new markets for your products.
                                 4: . . . help to secure external finance for the firm.
                                 5: . . . help to identify and recruit skilled workers for the firm.
                                 6: . . . provide valuable technological information about which machinery/equipment to purchase for the firm.
                                 7: . . . help to obtain information on where to buy second-hand machinery/equipment.
                                 8: . . . provide information about how to operate and repair machinery/equipment.

                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                      Table 17: Results: Friends whom the respondent has helped

                                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)       (7)       (8)

                                 Dummy: Committee judge                0.081          0.073         0.012          -0.000         0.006         0.016      0.085     -0.019
                                                                      [0.868]        [0.868]       [1.000]        [1.000]        [1.000]       [1.000]    [0.868]   [1.000]
                                                                      (0.157)        (0.174)       (0.824)        (1.000)        (0.918)       (0.789)    (0.145)   (0.761)

                                 Session dummies                         3              3              3             3              3                 3     3         3

                                 Observations                           327            327             326          328            327           296       328       325

                                 Outcome variables:




52
                                 Respondent has helped at least one friend/relative in business . . .
                                 1: . . . to identify sources of raw materials domestically.
                                 2: . . . to identify sources of raw materials in another country.
                                 3: . . . to identify new markets for your products.
                                 4: . . . to secure external finance for the firm.
                                 5: . . . to identify and recruit skilled workers for the firm.
                                 6: . . . by providing valuable technological information about which machinery/equipment to purchase for the firm.
                                 7: . . . to obtain information on where to buy second-hand machinery/equipment.
                                 8: . . . by providing information about how to operate and repair machinery/equipment.

                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                                              Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                      Table 18: Diffusion results: Relations with clients and suppliers

                                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)


                                 Sum of peers adopting                  0.043         0.086       -0.007      0.021    -0.010    -0.003     -0.090
                                                                       [0.166]       [0.166]      [0.651]    [0.215]   [0.648]   [0.651]    [0.166]
                                                                      (0.041)∗∗     (0.033)∗∗     (0.793)    (0.141)   (0.655)   (0.919)   (0.084)∗

                                 Sum of peers not adopting              -0.022        0.009        -0.019     0.025     0.006     0.001     0.001
                                                                       [1.000]       [1.000]      [1.000]    [1.000]   [1.000]   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                      (0.095)∗       (0.444)      (0.144)    (0.333)   (0.732)   (0.920)   (0.854)

                                 Controls                                 3                3           3       3         3         3          3


                                 Observations                            325           324          323       327       327       329       328




53
                                 H0 : Imitation (p)                     0.354        0.017∗∗       0.329     0.090∗    0.895     0.937     0.087∗

                                 Baseline adoption                      34%            13%             25%    65%       39%       3%         5%
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has advertised in the past 6 months
                                 2: Whether the firm pays any purchases before delivery
                                 3: Whether the firm pays any purchases after delivery
                                 4: Whether the firm has any sales paid before delivery
                                 5: Whether the firm has any sales paid after delivery
                                 6: Whether the firm imports
                                 7: Whether the firm exports

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa




                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.
                                                                        Table 19: Diffusion results: Innovation

                                                                                          (1)                          (2)            (3)


                                 Sum of peers adopting                                  0.017                        0.020            -0.049
                                                                                       [0.507]                      [0.507]          [0.181]
                                                                                       (0.505)                      (0.346)         (0.051)∗

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                              0.013                        -0.008          0.008
                                                                                       [1.000]                      [1.000]         [1.000]
                                                                                       (0.411)                      (0.550)         (0.351)

                                 Controls                                                  3                           3               3




54
                                 Observations                                            324                          328             328
                                 H0 : Imitation (p)                                     0.249                        0.587           0.127

                                 Baseline adoption                                       42%                          27%            19%
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has introduced new products in the past year
                                 2: Whether the firm has changed its production processes in the past year (e.g. layout)
                                 3: Whether the firm has changed its product delivery methods in the past year
                                 (Note: The baseline questions for these estimations referred to the last three financial years.)

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                               Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                  Table 20: Diffusion results: Labour management

                                                                             (1)              (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)


                                 Sum of peers adopting                      0.032           -0.043          0.010      0.015     -0.012    -0.008
                                                                           [1.000]         [0.447]         [1.000]    [1.000]   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                           (0.372)        (0.051)∗         (0.746)    (0.437)   (0.532)   (0.705)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                  0.003           -0.011          -0.003     0.003     0.009     0.008
                                                                           [1.000]         [1.000]         [1.000]    [1.000]   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                           (0.709)         (0.298)         (0.889)    (0.881)   (0.582)   (0.598)

                                 Controls                                     3               3              3          3         3         3




55
                                 Observations                                326             327            325        314       316       320
                                 H0 : Imitation (p)                         0.345          0.018∗∗         0.808      0.468     0.925     0.989

                                 Baseline adoption                           9%              36%            42%        56%       43%       34%
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm provides housing for any employees
                                 2: Whether the firm provides free/subsidised meals for any production workers
                                 3: Whether the firm provides toilets with running water for any production workers
                                 4: Whether the firm hires production workers without recommendation/referral
                                 5: Whether the average production worker has more than 7 years’ education
                                 6: Whether entry-level production workers receive more than 1 month’s training

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: † : p < 0.15, ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                    Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                            Table 21: Diffusion results for ‘large’ firms: Relations with clients and suppliers
                                                                           (1)          (2)            (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)       (7)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting              0.233        -0.018       0.065      0.028      -0.096      0.018     -0.013
                                                                        [0.001]∗∗∗    [1.000]      [0.700]    [0.948]    [0.037]∗∗   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                        (0.000)∗∗∗    (0.686)      (0.247)    (0.389)   (0.012)∗∗∗   (0.829)   (0.759)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting          -0.001       0.013        -0.027     -0.026    0.014        0.010     0.008
                                                                         [1.000]      [1.000]      [1.000]    [1.000]   [1.000]      [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                         (0.965)      (0.469)      (0.380)    (0.558)   (0.742)      (0.546)   (0.348)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting              -0.013       0.113        0.011      0.047     -0.017       -0.018
                                                                         [1.000]      [0.920]      [1.000]    [0.920]   [1.000]      [1.000]
                                                                         (0.695)      (0.119)      (0.829)    (0.160)   (0.636)      (0.713)

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting          0.009       -0.001       -0.117      0.035     0.010        -0.011    -0.006
                                                                         [1.000]      [1.000]      [0.011]    [1.000]   [1.000]      [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                         (0.861)      (0.953)    (0.001)∗∗∗   (0.396)   (0.766)      (0.539)   (0.712)




56
                                 Controls                                    3            3          3          3          3           3         3
                                 Observations                               133          133        133        135        135         134       133
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)          0.000∗∗∗      0.906      0.499      0.963      0.125       0.738     0.907
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)           0.938        0.139      0.041∗∗    0.108      0.892       0.565     0.712
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has advertised in the past 6 months
                                 2: Whether the firm pays any purchases before delivery
                                 3: Whether the firm pays any purchases after delivery
                                 4: Whether the firm has any sales paid before delivery
                                 5: Whether the firm has any sales paid after delivery
                                 6: Whether the firm imports
                                 7: Whether the firm exports

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                            Table 22: Diffusion results for ‘small’ firms: Relations with clients and suppliers
                                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting             0.027         0.112       -0.009      0.012      -0.007     0.078      -0.141
                                                                        [0.720]       [0.333]     [0.925]     [0.785]    [0.925]    [0.333]    [0.343]
                                                                        (0.418)      (0.073)∗     (0.836)     (0.560)    (0.841)   (0.036)∗∗   (0.132)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting         -0.029       0.026        0.007      -0.047      0.019     -0.003      0.002
                                                                         [0.627]     [0.914]      [1.000]     [1.000]    [1.000]    [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                        (0.055)∗     (0.159)      (0.683)     (0.386)    (0.462)    (0.647)    (0.828)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting             0.019         0.163       -0.072      0.046      0.075
                                                                        [0.548]       [0.548]     [0.548]     [0.548]    [0.548]
                                                                        (0.591)      (0.098)∗     (0.152)     (0.283)    (0.235)

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting        -0.022       -0.050       -0.006       0.109      -0.022     0.020      -0.001
                                                                        [1.000]      [1.000]      [1.000]     [0.190]    [1.000]    [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                        (0.551)      (0.186)      (0.857)    (0.023)∗∗   (0.652)    (0.310)    (0.962)




57
                                 Controls                                  3             3           3          3          3          3          3
                                 Observations                             192           191         190        192        192        174        180
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)         0.966         0.021∗∗     0.968      0.527      0.795      0.041∗∗    0.133
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)         0.954         0.286       0.237      0.022∗∗    0.529      0.310      0.962
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has advertised in the past 6 months
                                 2: Whether the firm pays any purchases before delivery
                                 3: Whether the firm pays any purchases after delivery
                                 4: Whether the firm has any sales paid before delivery
                                 5: Whether the firm has any sales paid after delivery
                                 6: Whether the firm imports
                                 7: Whether the firm exports

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                             Table 23: Diffusion results for ‘large’ firms: Innovation
                                                                                         (1)                         (2)               (3)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting                            0.101                      0.073              -0.013
                                                                                       [0.051]∗                   [0.051]∗           [0.387]
                                                                                      (0.025)∗∗                  (0.032)∗∗           (0.837)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting                        0.034                     -0.019             -0.003
                                                                                       [1.000]                    [1.000]            [1.000]
                                                                                       (0.314)                    (0.466)            (0.926)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting                           -0.061                     -0.029              -0.122
                                                                                       [0.234]                    [0.397]            [0.163]
                                                                                       (0.189)                    (0.571)           (0.046)∗∗

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting                        0.020                      -0.068             0.022
                                                                                       [0.752]                     [0.338]           [0.752]




58
                                                                                       (0.643)                    (0.084)∗           (0.439)

                                 Controls                                                3                            3                3
                                 Observations                                           134                          134              135
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)                      0.006∗∗∗                      0.172            0.804
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)                       0.492                       0.094∗            0.099∗
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has introduced new products in the past year
                                 2: Whether the firm has changed its production processes in the past year (e.g. layout)
                                 3: Whether the firm has changed its product delivery methods in the past year
                                 (Note: The baseline questions for these estimations referred to the last three financial years.)

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                             Table 24: Diffusion results for ‘small’ firms: Innovation
                                                                                         (1)                         (2)              (3)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting                            0.013                      0.069             -0.039
                                                                                       [0.889]                    [0.131]           [0.458]
                                                                                       (0.710)                   (0.038)∗∗          (0.314)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting                       -0.006                      0.006             0.003
                                                                                       [1.000]                    [1.000]           [1.000]
                                                                                       (0.750)                    (0.762)           (0.808)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting                            0.037                     -0.078            -0.035
                                                                                       [0.823]                    [0.823]           [0.823]
                                                                                       (0.451)                    (0.185)           (0.373)

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting                        0.033                      0.029             0.026
                                                                                       [0.912]                    [0.912]           [0.912]




59
                                                                                       (0.477)                    (0.338)           (0.221)

                                 Controls                                                3                            3               3
                                 Observations                                           190                          194             193
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)                       0.850                       0.037∗∗          0.381
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)                       0.269                        0.425           0.838
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has introduced new products in the past year
                                 2: Whether the firm has changed its production processes in the past year (e.g. layout)
                                 3: Whether the firm has changed its product delivery methods in the past year
                                 (Note: The baseline questions for these estimations referred to the last three financial years.)

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                              Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                     Table 25: Diffusion results for ‘large’ firms: Labour management
                                                                            (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting               0.021         -0.052          0.111         0.064     -0.002     0.149
                                                                          [0.939]       [0.347]         [0.265]       [0.265]   [0.944]    [0.265]
                                                                          (0.806)       (0.343)        (0.088)∗       (0.118)   (0.971)   (0.039)∗∗

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting           0.007         -0.037         -0.032         0.024     -0.016     0.020
                                                                          [1.000]       [1.000]        [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                          (0.674)       (0.125)        (0.431)        (0.597)   (0.694)    (0.550)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting               0.013         -0.021         0.044          0.001     -0.031     -0.196
                                                                          [1.000]       [1.000]        [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [0.434]
                                                                          (0.869)       (0.799)        (0.267)        (0.970)   (0.466)   (0.050)∗

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting           -0.019        0.017          0.027          -0.093    0.040      0.034
                                                                          [1.000]       [1.000]        [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [1.000]




60
                                                                          (0.401)       (0.321)        (0.539)        (0.121)   (0.568)    (0.374)

                                 Controls                                     3             3             3             3         3          3
                                 Observations                                135           135           134           123       131        131
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)            0.743         0.135         0.191         0.114     0.760      0.038∗∗
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)            0.941         0.970         0.139         0.168     0.886      0.089∗
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm provides housing for any employees
                                 2: Whether the firm provides free/subsidised meals for any production workers
                                 3: Whether the firm provides toilets with running water for any production workers
                                 4: Whether the firm hires production workers without recommendation/referral
                                 5: Whether the average production worker has more than 7 years’ education
                                 6: Whether entry-level production workers receive more than 1 month’s training

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                     Table 26: Diffusion results for ‘small’ firms: Labour management
                                                                             (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)

                                 Sum of small peers adopting                0.021          -0.014      -0.030          0.026    -0.007     -0.023
                                                                           [1.000]        [1.000]      [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                           (0.630)        (0.724)      (0.444)        (0.368)   (0.864)    (0.335)

                                 Sum of small peers not adopting            0.006          -0.006       0.018          0.001     0.021      0.017
                                                                           [1.000]        [1.000]      [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                           (0.488)        (0.721)      (0.552)        (0.981)   (0.330)    (0.501)

                                 Sum of large peers adopting                0.048          -0.052      -0.001         -0.064    -0.017     -0.130
                                                                           [1.000]        [1.000]      [1.000]        [1.000]   [1.000]    [1.000]
                                                                           (0.372)        (0.335)      (0.989)        (0.190)   (0.663)   (0.085)∗

                                 Sum of large peers not adopting            0.042          -0.059      -0.054          0.051    -0.028      -0.078
                                                                           [0.139]        [0.417]      [0.441]        [0.441]   [0.686]    [0.139]




61
                                                                          (0.041)∗∗       (0.221)      (0.343)        (0.382)   (0.610)   (0.033)∗∗

                                 Controls                                      3              3            3            3         3          3
                                 Observations                                 191            192          191          191       185        189
                                 H0 : Imitation, small firms (p)             0.526         0.614         0.752        0.487     0.773      0.845
                                 H0 : Imitation, large firms (p)             0.150         0.080∗        0.486        0.867     0.522      0.010∗∗
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm provides housing for any employees
                                 2: Whether the firm provides free/subsidised meals for any production workers
                                 3: Whether the firm provides toilets with running water for any production workers
                                 4: Whether the firm hires production workers without recommendation/referral
                                 5: Whether the average production worker has more than 7 years’ education
                                 6: Whether entry-level production workers receive more than 1 month’s training

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                      Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                         Table 27: Diffusion results and sector: Labour management
                                                                                   (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)

                                 Sum of peers adopting                           0.008        -0.048      0.001        0.031      -0.029       -0.040
                                                                                (0.810)      (0.067)∗    (0.972)      (0.243)    (0.259)      (0.158)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                       0.001        -0.004      0.011       -0.019     0.033         0.019
                                                                                (0.888)      (0.757)     (0.658)      (0.491)   (0.085)∗      (0.292)

                                 Sum of peers adopting (same sector)             0.079        0.017       0.031       -0.057      0.069        0.123
                                                                                [0.640]      [0.880]     [0.880]      [0.640]    [0.640]      [0.348]
                                                                                (0.301)      (0.723)     (0.555)      (0.312)    (0.276)     (0.043)∗∗

                                 Sum of peers not adopting (same sector)         0.006        -0.029      -0.054       0.064       -0.093      -0.037
                                                                                [0.607]      [0.568]     [0.432]      [0.432]     [0.051]∗    [0.568]
                                                                                (0.755)      (0.373)     (0.181)      (0.132)   (0.008)∗∗∗    (0.436)




62
                                 Controls                                          3            3           3           3           3           3

                                 Observations                                      326          327         325        314         316         320
                                 H0 : Imitation (p)                               0.781       0.056∗       0.688      0.699       0.894       0.512
                                 H0 : Imitation, same sector (p)                  0.290        0.825       0.706      0.910       0.716       0.230
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm provides housing for any employees
                                 2: Whether the firm provides free/subsidised meals for any production workers
                                 3: Whether the firm provides toilets with running water for any production workers
                                 4: Whether the firm hires production workers without recommendation/referral
                                 5: Whether the average production worker has more than 7 years’ education
                                 6: Whether entry-level production workers receive more than 1 month’s training

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                         Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                Table 28: Diffusion results and sector: Relations with clients and suppliers
                                                                                 (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)

                                 Sum of peers adopting                          0.039        0.100      -0.015     0.000      0.000     0.012     -0.081
                                                                               (0.104)     (0.015)∗∗   (0.603)    (0.999)    (0.996)   (0.720)   (0.114)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                      -0.014      -0.002     -0.020      0.013      0.010     -0.006    0.000
                                                                               (0.385)      (0.880)    (0.195)    (0.636)    (0.594)   (0.402)   (0.953)

                                 Sum of peers adopting (same sector)            0.027        -0.067     0.028      0.087      -0.032
                                                                               [0.722]      [0.573]    [0.722]    [0.205]    [0.573]
                                                                               (0.524)      (0.207)    (0.490)   (0.034)∗∗   (0.273)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting (same sector)        -0.043       0.039      0.004      0.061      -0.018    0.023     0.006
                                                                               [0.465]      [0.465]    [0.903]    [0.465]    [0.902]   [0.465]   [0.902]
                                                                               (0.271)     (0.068)∗    (0.914)    (0.136)    (0.658)   (0.107)   (0.711)




63
                                 Controls                                         3           3          3          3          3         3         3

                                 Observations                                     325        324        323        327        327       323       318
                                 H0 : Imitation(p)                               0.374      0.017∗∗    0.228      0.657      0.756     0.869     0.117
                                 H0 : Imitation, same sector (p)                 0.807      0.543      0.568      0.010∗∗    0.362     0.107     0.711
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has advertised in the past 6 months
                                 2: Whether the firm pays any purchases before delivery
                                 3: Whether the firm pays any purchases after delivery
                                 4: Whether the firm has any sales paid before delivery
                                 5: Whether the firm has any sales paid after delivery
                                 6: Whether the firm imports
                                 7: Whether the firm exports

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                                           Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
                                                                 Table 29: Diffusion results and sector: Innovation
                                                                                                  (1)                       (2)       (3)

                                 Sum of peers adopting                                           0.032                     0.010    -0.048
                                                                                                (0.246)                   (0.705)   (0.113)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting                                       0.014                    -0.013     0.004
                                                                                                (0.409)                   (0.373)   (0.670)

                                 Sum of peers adopting (same sector)                            -0.075                     0.032    -0.007
                                                                                                [0.417]                   [0.761]   [1.000]
                                                                                               (0.098)∗                   (0.432)   (0.910)

                                 Sum of peers not adopting (same sector)                        -0.006                     0.021     0.014
                                                                                                [1.000]                   [1.000]   [1.000]
                                                                                                (0.843)                   (0.568)   (0.348)




64
                                 Controls                                                         3                          3        3

                                 Observations                                                   324                         328      328
                                 H0 : Imitation(p)                                             0.106                       0.917    0.160
                                 H0 : Imitation, same sector (p)                               0.101                       0.376    0.911
                                 Outcome variables:
                                 1: Whether the firm has introduced new products in the past year
                                 2: Whether the firm has changed its production processes in the past year (e.g. layout)
                                 3: Whether the firm has changed its product delivery methods in the past year
                                 (Note: The baseline questions for these estimations referred to the last three financial years.)

                                 Coefficients show the estimated mean marginal effect.
                                 ‘[ ]’ show the ‘sharpened’ False Discovery Rate adjusted q-values.
                                 ‘( )’ show standard p-values, allowing for clustering by committee.
                                 Significance: ∗ : p < 0.1, ∗∗ : p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01.




Marcel Fafchamps & Simon Quinn
                                                                                                                                              Networks and manufacturing firms in Africa
