                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                SLACK TIME AND INNOVATION

                                            Ajay Agrawal
                                           Christian Catalini
                                            Avi Goldfarb

                                         Working Paper 21134
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21134


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




We thank Lee Fleming, Joshua Gans, Scott Stern, and seminar participants at the NBER "Changing
Financing Market for Innovation & Entrepreneurship Conference," the 2014 AEA Meetings, the 2014
REER Conference at Georgia Tech, Duke University, Johns Hopkins University, University of Maryland,
National University of Singapore, Singapore Management University, Harvard Business School, ZEW
Conference 2014, UC Berkeley, World Bank, MIT, and University of Toronto for comments. We thank
SSHRC and the Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the University of Toronto for financial
support. Errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21134.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ajay Agrawal, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Slack Time and Innovation
Ajay Agrawal, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb
NBER Working Paper No. 21134
April 2015
JEL No. J22,L26,O31

                                              ABSTRACT

The extant literature linking slack time to innovation focuses on how slack time facilitates creative
activities such as ideation, experimentation, and prototype development. We turn attention to how
slack time may enable activities that are less creative but still important for innovation, namely mundane,
execution-oriented tasks. First, we document the main effect: a sharp rise in innovative projects posted
on a major crowdfunding platform when colleges are on break. Next, we report timing and project
type evidence consistent with the causal interpretation that slack time drives innovation. Finally, we
present a series of results consistent with the mundane task mechanism but not with the traditional
creativity-related explanations. We do not rule out the possibility that creativity benefits from slack
time. Instead, we introduce the idea that mundane, execution-oriented tasks, such as those associated
with launching a crowdfunding campaign (e.g., administration, planning, promotion), are an important
input to innovation that may benefit significantly from slack time.


Ajay Agrawal                                         Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management                          Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto                                University of Toronto
105 St. George Street                                105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6                                  Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA                                               Canada
and NBER                                             and NBER
ajay.agrawal@rotman.utoronto.ca                      agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca

Christian Catalini
MIT
Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480
Cambridge, MA 02142
catalini@mit.edu
        “It’s no coincidence that Microsoft and Facebook both got started in January. At Harvard that

is (or was) Reading Period, when students have no classes to attend because they’re supposed to

be studying for finals.” - Paul Graham, Y-Combinator founder, quoted in “How to Get Startup

Ideas”



1        Introduction

Innovation, the engine of economic growth, is usually associated with creativity and clever insight.

We shine a light on another important input to innovation: mundane, execution-oriented tasks. In

particular, we report evidence consistent with the view that, at the margin, mundane tasks may

pose a non-trivial friction with respect to bringing creative solutions to market. Furthermore, slack

time may effectively address this friction.

        Slack time has previously been linked to innovation through the role it plays in facilitating cre-

ative activities, such as ideation, experimentation, and prototype development (Richtner, Ahlstrom,

and Goffin 2014, Menzel, Aaltio, and Ulijn 2007, Shah and Tripsas 2007, Greve 2007). For example,

Google’s slack time policy famously allows employees to devote 20% of their time to projects of

personal interest. “The 20 percent rule was a way of encouraging innovation” (Vise 2008) (p. 131).

As Google engineer Joe Beda describes, “This isn’t a matter of doing something in your spare time,

but more actively making time for it” (Vise 2008) (p. 139).1 3M and Wella are other well-known

innovative companies with similar slack time policies (Menzel, Aaltio, and Ulijn 2007). Nohria and

Gulati (1996) provide a review of the evidence on slack time and other slack resources and conclude

that there is an “inverse-U” relationship with performance and hypothesize that this results from

a trade-off between the benefits of experimentation and the costs of complacency. This ambiguity

about the returns to slack time may be one reason why many companies do not adopt a formal

slack time policy. Richtner, Ahlstrom, and Goffin (2014) provide a more recent review.

        We shift attention to the role slack time may play in enabling creators to perform tasks that
    1
    In his book on creativity (Lehrer, 2012), Jonah Lehrer notes: “The Google program is officially known as
Innovation Time Off. That program has led directly to the development of Gmail, Google’s successful email program,
and AdSense, a nine-billion-dollar-a-year platform that allows Internet publishers to run Google ads on their sites.
Marisa Mayer, Google’s [former] VP of search products and user experience, estimates that at least 50 percent of
new Google products begin as Innovation Time Off speculations.”


                                                         1
are likely viewed as mundane but are necessary for transforming an idea or invention into an

innovation that can be enjoyed by others. We report evidence indicating that a relatively short

amount of slack time can have a significant effect on the amount of innovation that is brought to

market. Furthermore, we present evidence that is consistent with the mundane task explanation

but not with other creativity-related explanations. We do not rule out the role that slack time likely

plays in facilitating creativity. Rather, we design our empirical work to identify the relationship

between slack time and execution-oriented tasks in the context of innovation in order to highlight

the importance of mundane tasks in innovation, the friction associated with mundane tasks in

bringing creative projects to market, and the role slack time may play in reducing that friction.

   We use as our empirical setting the creative projects posted on a crowdfunding website. Specif-

ically, we examine the location and timing (city-week) of all new projects posted during a five-year

period on Kickstarter, the leading rewards-based crowdfunding platform. Crowdfunding is the

practice of funding a project by raising small amounts of money from a large number of people

using an online digital platform. Pre-selling new products on a crowdfunding platform has become

an oft-used method for acquiring early-stage capital by technology startups and has also become

an important source of funding for projects in the arts (Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb 2013).

   Our empirical work focuses on examining how slack, or low-opportunity cost, time (Catalini

2013) influences innovative activity on a crowdfunding platform using college breaks as a measure

of slack time. We document a sharp rise in crowdfunding activity in the local region when colleges

are on break and control for differences across time using week fixed effects and differences across

locations using city fixed effects. Furthermore, we observe no pre-trend, either positive or negative,

in projects posted to the platform before students are on vacation. The lack of a positive pre-trend

suggests that the result is not driven by an omitted variable that is coincident with the timing of

school breaks in college towns. The lack of a negative pre-trend suggests that the projects posted

during the break are not simply shifted in time from the weeks leading up to the break but rather

represent innovations that otherwise would not have been posted.

   Providing additional support for the causal interpretation that slack time drives innovation,

we report evidence showing that the increase in projects posted is consistent with the expertise



                                                  2
of the students affected: when top engineering schools are on break, we see a positive effect on

technology projects but not art projects and vice versa when art and design schools are on break.

Furthermore, we report results suggesting that the increase in posting projects is driven by the

supply side (projects by creators) rather than by increased capital availability due to students

allocating funds while they are on break. We do this by documenting that the result does not hold

for projects started just before a break whose fundraising continues during the break and also by

showing that the result is not stronger in categories that are likely of particular interest to students

(e.g., video games).

   Next, we report three results that are consistent with the mundane task explanation but not with

the traditional creativity explanation. First, we examine a change in the policy for posting projects

in two out of the thirteen categories: Design and Technology. The policy change was implemented

by Kickstarter in response to a series of inexperienced creators who attracted significant capital for

their creations and then failed to deliver as a result of manufacturing and distribution problems due

to planning inadequacies that were often foreseeable to those with consumer product manufacturing

experience. Thus, the site increased the planning documentation required to post a project but

only in these two categories. We examine the effect of breaks before and after this change in policy.

We find that, after the policy change, which increased the effort required on mundane tasks in

Design and Technology, slack time has a disproportionate effect on the number of projects posted

in these two categories relative to the others.

   Second, we examine timing: when during breaks do we observe the largest increase in the

number of projects posted? If creators require slack time to perform creative tasks, such as ideation,

experimentation, or prototype development, then we expect to see a spike in the number of projects

posted in the later part of breaks or perhaps even after breaks are over. However, if creators already

have performed many of the creative tasks and the friction preventing them from posting their

creations is the mundane task of filling out the project registration form and other similar tasks

associated with launching a crowdfunding campaign, then the spike is likely to occur early in the

break. Indeed, we observe the greatest increase in the number of projects posted during the early

part of the breaks.



                                                   3
   Third, we examine variation in the length of time projects have been in development prior to

launching on the crowdfunding platform. If creators are using the slack time to experiment and

develop their projects, then they may have shorter development times than those who spread out

their development during evenings and weekends without the benefit of a solid block of time during

a holiday break. However, we find no evidence of the breaks disproportionally affecting projects

with shorter development times.

   The empirical research on innovation that employs data from crowdfunding is nascent but grow-

ing. Most papers focus on issues related to asymmetric information between creators and funders.

In a prior essay, we review much of the literature and discuss the incentives and disincentives

of crowdfunding from the points of view of entrepreneurs and investors (Agrawal, Catalini, and

Goldfarb 2013). In short, entrepreneurs gain quick access to non-dilutive capital and feedback from

potential customers. In exchange, they must disclose their ideas and manage the crowd. Financial

backers receive early access to products and a formalization of contracts for projects they might

otherwise have supported by donation. Similarly Belleflamme, Lambert, and Schwienbacher (2014)

emphasize asymmetric information in their review. Broadly, funders and creators are initially

overoptimistic about outcomes (Mollick 2014), though overall the crowd appears to select similar

projects to experts, at least in theater (Mollick and Nanda 2014). Perhaps the dominant finding

from this setting concerns the role of signaling: the propensity to fund increases with accumulated

capital. The crowd views accumulated capital as a signal, which may lead to herding (Agrawal,

Catalini, and Goldfarb 2015, Zhang and Liu 2012, Kuppuswamy and Bayus 2013). One key excep-

tion to this finding is Burtch, Ghose, and Wattal (2013), who show that public goods concerns may

counteract herding effects. Also related to information, Burtch, Ghose, and Wattal (2015) show

that privacy concerns play a role in funder decisions to contribute.

   We build on this extant empirical work, utilizing specific features of the empirical setting. First,

we exploit the fact that crowdfunding is a broad phenomenon that includes innovative activity

across a wide range of fields, including but not limited to technology. Second, we take advantage

of the rapid and frequent nature of posting projects that enables us to exploit variation across

city-weeks in order to explore the relationship between slack time, measured in days or weeks, and



                                                  4
innovation-related activities. Third, we exploit a policy change that only affects two out of thirteen

categories. Thus, crowdfunding affords us a vantage point to conduct research that would not be

possible using data traditionally employed for studying innovation, such as patents or copyrights.

   Ultimately, our contribution is to highlight the role that mundane, execution-oriented tasks play

in the creative endeavor of innovation. Our findings demonstrate that although creativity may be a

necessary input for innovation, it is not sufficient. Transforming creative ideas into useful products

requires many steps, such as marketing and finance, that themselves necessitate a series of mundane

tasks. We focus on a particular mundane task concerning the administrative activity associated

with registering a project on a crowdfunding platform and creating a complete project page (this

usually includes different rewards, pictures, a summary video, and additional information on the

project and creators). Our evidence suggests that although creators may be able to perform their

most important creative work during their “spare time” while they are at school or work, they

are more likely to overcome the friction presented by mundane tasks when they have a solid block

of slack time. In our case, holiday breaks from school provide this slack. This contribution links

research on creativity and innovation, the costs and benefits of entrepreneurship (Koellinger and

Thurik 2012, Hartog, Van Praag, and Van Der Sluis 2010, Åstebro, Chen, and Thompson 2011,

Åstebro and Thompson 2011), and organization design (Bourgeois 1981, Galbraith 1974).

   We proceed in Section 2 by describing our empirical setting and features of the dataset, which

we construct at the city-week level. Then, in Section 3, we describe our empirical strategy, which

is based on a simple linear model with fixed effects. Next, in Section 4, we present our results. We

begin with the main result that slack time is correlated with an increase in the number of projects

posted. Then, we present evidence consistent with the causal interpretation that slack time drives

an increase in posted projects. Finally, we present results that are consistent with the mundane

task explanation but less so with traditional creativity explanations. In Section 5, we discuss the

implications of our findings, describe the limitations of this study, and offer directions for future

research.




                                                  5
2        Data and Empirical Setting

Our empirical setting is Kickstarter, the world-leading reward-based crowdfunding platform. We

collect data for the 97,423 US-based projects that attempted to raise money on the platform between

April 2009 and July 2014. We have information on approximately $985M raised both by successful

(59.7% of the projects, 94% of the capital) and failed projects (40.3% of the projects, 6% of the

capital). The distribution of capital is highly skewed: the top 1% (10%) of projects accounts for

$378M ($695M), or 38% (70%), of the capital (Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb 2013).

        Our data contain project-level information that is publicly available on Kickstarter. This in-

cludes information on the time each project was posted, total funds raised, and descriptive infor-

mation about each project. We do not have comprehensive data on the timing of funding within

projects nor the location of the funders.

        We define success and failure relative to the funding goals of the campaign. Specifically, Kick-

starter requires projects to state a funding goal in advance. Creators that start projects that fail to

achieve their funding goal do not receive any money. Instead, the capital is returned to funders. We

label projects that achieve their funding goal as “successful” and ones that do not (and therefore

do not receive any funds) as “failed.” The overall success of projects, once funded, is not our focus

here and has been studied elsewhere (Mollick and Nanda 2014).

        The projects span 13 categories defined by Kickstarter (Art, Comics, Dance, Design, Fashion,

Film & Video, Food, Games, Music, Photography, Publishing, Technology, Theater), and 5,919 US

cities.

        We manually collect data on holiday breaks between 2009 and 2014 (summer break, spring

break, winter break, Thanksgiving, reading week) for the top 200 US colleges as defined by US

News & World Report.2 This information is publicly available through posted academic calendars.

We consider a city to have a school break in a given week if a top 200 college with a break is present

within five miles of the city center.

        We present descriptive statistics at the city-week level for our main sample in Table 1. During
    2
    Source: http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-universities/data (ac-
cessed September 2013).




                                                       6
our study period, the average city-week had 0.060 projects launched, with slightly more than half

(0.036) successfully reaching their funding goal and the remainder (0.024) failing to reach their

goal. In other words, in most city-weeks, no projects are launched. However, the distribution is

right-skewed with many zeros, such that some cities have projects posted in many weeks.

       In addition, the descriptive statistics show that the maximum number of successful projects

for any US city in a single week is 49 (Los Angeles, CA), whereas the maximum number of failed

projects is 40 (also Los Angeles). In a single week, cities are able to attract as much as $10.3M

in successful funds, with an average per city-week of $552 and a standard deviation of $21,990.

Approximately 4% of our observations are city-weeks where at least one of the top 200 colleges is

on holiday break, the majority of it being summer break weeks (2.2% of the sample), followed by

winter breaks (0.7% of the sample) and reading weeks (0.4% of the sample).

       In Table 2 (parts a and c), we present the Top 10 Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) by

total funding raised: results are generally unsurprising, with Boston and San Francisco leading in

technology and Los Angeles and New York leading in Film & Video.3 Not surprisingly, in all cases,

the top 10 regions are large metropolitan areas. However, once we turn to the funding per capita

results in Table 2 (parts b and d), the results are more revealing and suggest that colleges and

universities may disproportionately use crowdfunding platforms: Boulder (CO) appears both on

the Technology and the Film & Video top list, Provo, home of Brigham Young University, is first

in Technology, and several other college towns appear prominently in both lists.4

       In light of the prominence of college towns on Kickstarter, our empirical analysis exploits the

week-by-week variation in slack time in these towns. Next, we examine correlations between school
   3
     “CBSA is a collective term for both metro and micro areas. A metro area contains a core urban area population
of 50,000 or more and a micro area contains an urban core population of at least 10,000 (but less than 50,000). Each
metro or micro area consists of one or more counties and includes the counties containing the core urban area, as well
as any adjacent counties that have a high degree of social and economic integration (as measured by commuting to
work) with the urban core.” Source: http://www.census.gov/population/metro/. The full list of CBSAs is available
at: http://www.census.gov/population/metro/files/lists/2009/List1.txt. For most of the analysis that follows, we
use Kickstarter’s definition of cities rather the CBSA.
   4
     For example, in Technology: UC Santa Cruz, UCSF, UC Berkeley, Stanford University, Boston College, Boston
University, Brandeis University, Harvard University, MIT, Northeastern University, University of Massachusetts,
University of New Hampshire, East Carolina University, University of Vermont, University of Utah. In Film & Video:
University of Montana, Azusa Pacific University, Biola University, California Institute of Technology, Pepperdine
University, UC Irvine, UCLA, University of La Verne, University of Southern California, Cornell University, Montana
State University; San Diego State University, University of San Diego, UC San Diego, University of Colorado Boulder.




                                                          7
breaks and new projects on Kickstarter.



3    Empirical Strategy

Our econometric analysis is a straightforward framework at the city-week level. We focus on a

simple linear model with fixed effects to document the underlying correlations in a direct and easily

interpretable manner. We exploit variation across cities in the timing of holiday breaks at local

colleges and universities to estimate how the availability of free time for college students influences

the number of projects posted as well as the amount of funding they attract:



                               Yct = βHolidayBreakct + µc + ψt + ct

    where Yct is either the number of projects posted on the platform in city c during week t or

the total amount raised by the projects posted in city c during week t. Kickstarter identifies a

city for each project, based on the location of the project creators. We use these as a measure of

location. It provides a smaller geographic measure than a CBSA and a larger one than a Census

Place. The key advantage is that it does not involve location aggregation or disaggregation of the

core dependent variable. HolidayBreakct is a dummy equal to one if any of the colleges in the

focal city is on holiday in the focal week and zero otherwise. µc is a city fixed effect to control for

underlying differences across US cities that are consistent over time. ψt is a week fixed effect to

control for changes in the Kickstarter environment over time, and ct is an idiosyncratic error term.

The fixed effects mean that our analysis examines the change in the propensity to post projects

and attract funding (both successful and failed) over time for cities where we observe at least one

project. Because there are few city-level measures that change at the week level, we do not include

additional covariates in the regressions beyond city and week fixed effects. Unsurprisingly given city

and week fixed effects, results do not change when including controls such as weekly temperature

and annual CBSA-level demographics. Since nothing changes, we focus on the more parsimonious

specification. The fixed effects completely capture cities in which we never see activity, and thus we

remove these pairs from the analysis without any empirical consequences. In some specifications, we



                                                  8
interact the HolidayBreakct variable with time and market characteristics. Robust standard errors

are clustered at the city level. We measure projects posted and amount raised at the city-week

level.

    In some specifications, we decompose the effect of breaks by holiday type:


Yct = β1 ReadingW eekct +β2 Summerct +β3 Springct +β4 T hanksgivingct +β5 W interct +µc +ψt +ct


    where β1 to β5 are coefficients on indicator variables equal to one if any of the colleges in the

focal city is on holiday because of reading week, summer break, spring break, Thanksgiving, or

winter break, respectively. We have also performed the same set of analyses at the CBSA-week

level and obtain the same qualitative results.



4    Results

We build our main result in three steps. First, we document that crowdfunding activity increases

during holiday breaks, both in terms of the number of projects posted and also the amount of

funding raised (Section 4.1).

    Second, in Section 4.2, we provide evidence of a causal relationship from college breaks to

new crowdfunding projects by showing that the correlation between crowdfunding and college

breaks is sharply confined to the timing of breaks without positive or negative pre-trends and also

that technology projects increase in locations with technology schools and art projects increase in

locations with arts schools.

    Third, in Section 4.3, we provide evidence that is consistent with the mundane tasks explanation.

We first demonstrate that the result likely is not driven by a change in the supply of capital available

from students who might spend more on crowdfunding during breaks. We show this in two ways:

1) projects posted just before a break do not attract disproportionate funding during break weeks,

and 2) projects in the video game category, plausibly of particular interest to college students on

break, do not experience a disproportionate increase in funding during a break week. Next, we

exploit a change in the market design of the platform that increases the effort associated with


                                                   9
mundane tasks required to post a project in Technology and Design (but not in other categories)

to further support our interpretation. Then, we show that the increase in crowdfunding during

breaks is driven by projects launched early in the breaks, consistent with the explanation that

entrepreneurs use this time to focus on mundane, execution-oriented tasks associated with posting

projects on the platform rather than on ideation and product development. Finally, we show that

projects posted during break weeks have as long a lead time in development as projects posted

during non-break weeks, consistent with the interpretation that ideation and other creative tasks

likely are not driving the estimated slack time effect.


4.1      Crowdfunding and college holiday breaks

In Table 3, we present the main result of the paper: when college students are on holiday in a city,

more projects (Column 1) from that city are posted on Kickstarter and more funding (Columns 2

and 3) flows to that city, controlling for week fixed effects and city fixed effects.

       In Column 1, we show with 95% confidence that the number of crowdfunding campaigns

launched increases during holiday breaks. The estimated coefficient, 0.0294, is large relative to

the average number of campaigns per city-week, 0.0603 (Table 1, first row).

       In Column 3, where we use log(f unding + 1) as the dependent variable, we report a positive

and significant correlation between funding and holiday breaks. In Column 2, where we use funding

(not logged) as the dependent variable, the estimated coefficient on holiday breaks is also positive

and large relative to average values but is not significantly different from zero with 90% confidence.

This is a result of the highly skewed distribution of funding since the amount raised in most city-

weeks is zero or a nominal amount (mean value is $610) but is occasionally very high (up to $10

million).5
   5
    As with many other quasi-experimental regression papers (e.g., Athey and Stern (2002) and Simcoe and Wagues-
pack (2011)), the R-squared in the analysis in this table is low. This is not surprising given that city fixed effects
are differenced out rather than estimated and that there are many reasons why people post projects on Kickstarter
besides having time during college breaks. Key for our conclusions is that our coefficient estimates have statistical
power and magnitudes of economic importance.




                                                         10
4.2   Evidence for a causal interpretation of holiday breaks on Kickstarter projects

We provide two different pieces of evidence to support a causal interpretation of the results we

present in the previous section. First, we show that the timing of the increase in projects relative

to the timing of holiday breaks is consistent with a causal interpretation. Second, we show that

technology projects increase in places with strong engineering and science programs and that art

projects increase in places with strong arts schools, consistent with a causal interpretation.

   In terms of the timing, we explore the presence of a pre-trend in the data by introducing dummies

for the weeks before and after a holiday period in our main specification. As we illustrate in Figure

1, holiday breaks are correlated with a substantial spike in crowdfunding activity. However, there

is no increase in projects immediately before or after, ruling out a spurious correlation related to

seasonality.

   Furthermore, there is no decrease in activity immediately before or after the break, suggesting

that the observed increase in activity is not caused by shifting from immediately adjacent periods.

If slack time merely leads creators to shift when they post their project, then in the absence of

holiday weeks there would still be the same number of projects but project postings would occur

more evenly across all weeks, rather than disproportionately during breaks. Stated another way, if

slack time merely shifts projects in time, then an increase in projects posted during holiday weeks

would be coupled with a decrease in projects posted during non-holiday weeks. Furthermore, if

creators face a discount rate (they prefer receiving funding sooner rather than later), then weeks

that are adjacent to the breaks would have a sharper drop in postings than weeks that are farther

away. Thus, under the assumption of time discounting, if slack time shifts projects that would have

been posted anyway, then we would expect a particularly sharp decline in the weeks immediately

preceding and following the slack period. However, we do not see such a decline in Figure 1. Thus,

we interpret these data as implying that slack time generates new project postings.

   In Table 4, we exploit variation across types of universities and Kickstarter categories to examine

whether the spike in activity is consistent with the type of human capital involved. We do this

because although we exploit variation in slack time using university-level data, we measure activity

at the city level. Thus, demonstrating that the city level effect (e.g., more technical projects


                                                 11
posted on Kickstarter) is consistent with local university-level activity (e.g., holiday week for an

engineering school as opposed to an arts school) provides further evidence that is consistent with

our interpretation. In Columns 1 to 3, we only use projects in the arts and in Columns 4 to 6 we

focus on projects in technology. Holiday breaks at top art, design, film, and theater schools are

positively correlated with art projects, but not technology projects. Conversely, holiday breaks at

top engineering schools are positively correlated with technology but not art projects, consistent

with our expectation that technical orientation plays a key role in these types of projects.

   Combined, we interpret this evidence to suggest that slack time causes more projects to be

posted on Kickstarter.


4.3     The Mechanism: Mundane, Execution-Oriented Tasks

Next, we explore why slack time yields an increase in innovative projects. First, we present ev-

idence that is not consistent with the explanation that students spend more money supporting

crowdfunding projects when they are on break. Then, we present evidence that is consistent with

the mundane tasks explanation rather than the traditional creativity-related activities explanations.

We do not reject the thesis that slack time may also enhance creativity-related activities that drive

innovation, but rather we present evidence that suggests slack time also reduces the friction created

by mundane tasks that may otherwise hinder the development of some innovations.


4.3.1    Supply of capital from college students?

If holiday breaks provide college students with more time to browse through Kickstarter and fund

projects they are interested in, including those by local creators, then this will increase the supply

of capital available to Kickstarter projects in college towns. We have data on the location of posted

projects but not on the location of funders, so it is difficult to test this directly.

   Instead, we conduct two alternative tests. First, we examine the timing of funding associated

with projects posted in the week preceding a college break. We examine whether funding for those

projects increases during the break. For consistency, we specifically look at 8-14 days after posting.

If the slack time effect is due to increased funding by students on a break, perhaps because they



                                                   12
have more time to browse projects, then we expect to observe an increase in funding during break

weeks for projects posted just prior to the break. However, in Table 5, we report results indicating

that funding associated with projects started during a non-break week does not rise during break

weeks even though fundraising efforts continue during those weeks.

   Second, we examine funding in a category that is particularly likely to be affected by increased

student funding, especially in locations with strong engineering programs: video games. In Table

6, we report results indicating that funding for video games is not particularly affected by breaks,

even in places with top engineering schools. We also examine the games category and find that

there is no significant difference between engineering schools and other schools, and the overall

magnitude of the effect is not substantially different from the other categories.


4.3.2   Mundane, Execution-Oriented Tasks

Next, we present evidence that is consistent with the mundane task explanation for the slack time

effect on innovation. We focus on tasks associated with posting a project on Kickstarter. Posting

a project involves a variety of mundane tasks, even if the creator has fully developed their idea

and has a working prototype. Creators must prepare a detailed description of their idea and many

also illustrate their idea through a short video (2-3 minutes). This involves describing how the

creation works, the progress to date, and a project timeline. In addition, creators must estimate a

budget for completing their project and describe line items in the budget. Also, on reward-based

crowdfunding platforms such as Kickstarter, the creators must design a schedule of rewards that

are a function of the amount of money provided by the backer. The creators must also determine

a financial goal (how much they aim to raise), which is not an arbitrary number because if they

fail to raise that amount then they receive none of the money that they raised. However, they are

able to raise more than the amount specified. Creators must select the length of their fundraising

campaign (60 days maximum) and must develop a plan for promoting their project to backers,

which may include an email campaign to the network, individual follow-up emails, pitching to the

press, social media activity, and possibly hosting an offline event.

   We examine the role of mundane tasks by exploiting a change in the design of the platform rules



                                                 13
that increases the intensity of mundane tasks required for posting a project in two categories but

not the others. In response to a series of high-profile Design and Technology projects that raised

a significant amount of capital and then failed to deliver the promised products in the anticipated

amount of time (some delivered very late and others failed to deliver at all), Kickstarter changed

the requirements for posting projects in those two categories. One of the primary criticisms was

that in most of these cases the creators raised capital and promised backers a product without

any experience or preparation for production or distribution. Therefore, in May 2012 Kickstarter

added additional guidelines and requirements for Design and Technology projects. In a note on

how they revised their rules to address accountability concerns, they explain that they now require

“creators to provide information about their background and experience, a manufacturing plan (for

hardware projects), and a functional prototype. We made this change to ensure that creators have

done their research before launching and backers have sufficient information when deciding whether

to back these projects.”6 This policy change disproportionately increases the effort associated

with mundane tasks, such as describing the creator’s background and experience and preparing a

manufacturing plan, for projects in Design and Technology. In Table 7, we report results indicating

that after the policy change, holiday breaks are associated with a disproportional increase in the

number of projects posted in Design and Technology relative to all other categories.

      Next, we provide evidence that the increase we observe during breaks is not primarily driven by

time for ideation. Specifically, we examine whether the increase in projects posted occurs early or

late during breaks. If projects posted during breaks are at the ideation stage or not yet conceived

when the break starts, then we expect activity to peak later in the break, when projects are more

developed. In contrast, if projects are already well-developed before the break starts and instead

students use the time to perform the mundane tasks associated with executing their crowdfunding

campaign, then they are more likely to post them early during the break. In Table 8 (Columns 1

and 2), we report results that are more consistent with the idea that most of the increase in activity

takes place early in the break (we define early as the first 33% of a break): project postings on

Kickstarter are significantly more likely in the first days of a break.
  6
      https://www.kickstarter.com/blog/accountability-on-kickstarter (Accessed on March 12, 2015)




                                                        14
    Finally, we examine variation in the length of project development time. In Table 8 (Columns 3

and 4), we examine the share of projects with long development time (greater than 60 days) relative

to the total number of projects for which we could find development information. We manually code

development time by reading the project pages and identifying when the project creator started

working on a specific idea. The positive coefficient suggests that the increase in launching new

crowdfunding campaigns during school breaks is driven by relatively polished projects that start

before the break as opposed to newly born projects developed during the break. It is therefore

unlikely that creators increase their launching activity during the break due to more time for

ideation and product development.



5    Conclusion

We explore if and how the availability of slack time influences the level of innovation output on

a leading crowdfunding platform: when students are on break in a specific region, more projects

are posted (and funded) in the same geographic area. The spike in activity is strongly coincident

with breaks and follows the type of talent that is affected: when arts schools are on break, artistic

projects increase; when top engineering schools are on break, technology projects increase.

    Our results suggest that slack time may facilitate performing mundane, execution-oriented tasks

that otherwise inhibit innovations from advancing from prototypes to products. Perhaps this is

because creators are able to develop their creative ideas during short bursts of spare time, such

as during weekends and evenings, while they are at school or work. However, it is plausible that

mundane tasks require longer blocks of slack time because, unlike the creative tasks (e.g., creating

art for an artist or designing an invention for an engineer), they are unfamiliar or not as fun,

inspiring, or energizing as creative tasks. While we can only speculate on why slack time might

facilitate mundane tasks, we are on more solid ground when we advance the thesis that slack

time drives innovation, and one of the mechanisms through which this occurs is the facilitation

of mundane tasks. Indeed, to our knowledge, this is the first study to report empirical evidence

suggesting that slack time may play such an important role in innovation due to reducing frictions

associated with mundane, execution-oriented tasks as opposed to by facilitating creative activities.

                                                 15
   Although our results are consistent with the mundane tasks explanations, they do not rule

out other explanations. For example, one plausible alternative explanation is that breaks might

create a perception of a “fresh start.” Building on ideas related to mental accounting of notional

boundaries in time (Soman 2001, Thaler 1999), Dai, Milkman, and Riis (2014) show that temporal

landmarks such as the beginning of the year, birthdays, and holidays motivate people to pursue their

aspirations. While school breaks do represent temporal landmarks, a fresh start effect should also

be present at the beginning of terms. We see no increase in projects posted in the week following

a break (see Figure 1), and therefore we suspect that mundane tasks is a more likely explanation,

though the reasons are not mutually exclusive and could operate at the same time. Of course,

there might be other possible explanations, perhaps rooted in the psychology of procrastination.

Nevertheless, we emphasize the mundane tasks explanation because it seems most consistent with

our results.

   As with any project, our analysis has a number of limitations. First, with respect to the gener-

alizability of our findings, we document that slack time appears to facilitate mundane tasks. This

does not rule out the possibility that slack time also supports ideation and product development

that increases innovation outputs overall (in addition to the effect we measure where the output

occurs specifically during the break). Second, we cannot identify whether particular projects are

started by students, professors, or other members of the local community because such information

is usually not provided. Thus, our results are strongly suggestive of slack time, but we cannot

identify projects as having been posted because specific individuals (students) are on break. In

other words, our data do not afford a smoking gun. Third, we cannot pin down the exact rea-

son why school breaks facilitate mundane tasks. We believe it is likely due to lower opportunity

cost of time (Catalini 2013) and its effect on entrepreneurial experimentation (Kerr, Nanda, and

Rhodes-Kropf 2014), but other explanations cannot be ruled out.

   Notwithstanding these limitations, our results inform our understanding of how slack time

enhances innovation above and beyond the widely recognized creativity benefits. At the same time,

our results raise the question of why mundane, execution-oriented tasks create such a friction in

the innovation process and, furthermore, why slack time provides at least a partial antidote. We



                                                16
speculate above that this may be due to rational behavior driven by differences in the opportunity

cost of time (lower cost during slack time) and the benefits and costs associated with different

tasks that provide varying levels of consumption value based on their familiarity and the pleasure

creators derive from performing them. Alternatively, this may be due to less rational behavioral

biases such as those motivated by perceptions of a “fresh start.” Given the importance of innovation

to economic growth and competition and the evidence we report in this research linking slack time

to innovation, exploring the reason why slack time facilitates the performance of mundane tasks

associated with innovation has the potential to be a fruitful topic for future research.




                                                 17
References
Agrawal, A., C. Catalini, and A. Goldfarb (2013): Some Simple Economics of Crowdfunding,
 in Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 14 - Josh Lerner and Scott Stern editors. NBER,
 University of Chicago Press.
         (2015): “Crowdfunding: Geography, Social Networks, and the Timing of Investment
  Decisions -,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy (forthcoming).
Åstebro, T., J. Chen, and P. Thompson (2011): “Stars and misfits: Self-employment and
   labor market frictions,” Management Science, 57(11), 1999–2017.
Åstebro, T., and P. Thompson (2011): “Entrepreneurs, Jacks of all trades or Hobos?,” Research
   Policy, 40(5), 637–649.
Athey, S., and S. Stern (2002): “The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency Health
  Care Outcomes,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33(3), 399–432.
Belleflamme, P., T. Lambert, and A. Schwienbacher (2014): “Crowdfunding: Tapping the
  right crowd,” Journal of Business Venturing, 29(5), 585–609.
Bourgeois, L. I. (1981): “On the Measurement of Organizational Slack,” Academy of Manage-
 ment Review, 6(7), 29–39.
Burtch, G., A. Ghose, and S. Wattal (2013): “An Empirical Examination of the Antecedents
 and Consequences of Contribution Patterns in Crowd-Funded Markets,” Information Systems
 Research, 24(3), 499–519.
        (2015): “The Hidden Cost of Accommodating Crowdfunder Privacy Preferences: A Ran-
  domized Field Experiment,” Management Science (forthcoming).
Catalini, C. (2013): “Microgeography and the Direction of Inventive Activity,” SSRN Working
 Paper, http:papers.ssrn.comsol3 papers.cfm?abstract id=2126890.
Dai, H., K. L. Milkman, and J. Riis (2014): “The Fresh Start Effect: Temporal Landmarks
 Motivate Aspirational Behavior,” Management Science, 60(10), 2563–2582.
Galbraith, J. (1974): “Organization Design: An Information Processing View,” Interfaces, 4,
 28–36.
Greve, H. R. (2007): “Exploration and exploitation in product innovation,” Industrial and Cor-
 porate Change, 16(5), 945–975.
Hartog, J., M. Van Praag, and J. Van Der Sluis (2010): “If you are so smart, why aren’t
 you an entrepreneur? Returns to cognitive and social ability: Entrepreneurs versus employees,”
 Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 19(4), 947–989.
Kerr, W. R., R. Nanda, and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2014): “Entrepreneurship as Experimenta-
 tion,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25–48.
Koellinger, P., and R. Thurik (2012): “Entrepreneurship and the business cycle,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 94(4), 1143–1156.

                                              18
Kuppuswamy, V., and B. L. Bayus (2013):                   “Crowdfunding Creative Ideas:
 the Dynamics of Projects Backers in Kickstarter,”              SSRN Working Paper,
 http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2234765.

Menzel, H. C., I. Aaltio, and J. M. Ulijn (2007): “On the way to creativity: Engineers as
 intrapreneurs in organizations,” Technovation, 27, 732–743.

Mollick, E. R. (2014): “The Dynamics of Crowdfunding: An Exploratory Study,” Journal of
 Business Venturing, 29(1), 1–16.

Mollick, E. R., and R. Nanda (2014):                  “Wisdom or Madness? Compar-
 ing Crowds with Expert Evaluation in Funding the Arts,” SSRN Working Paper,
 http:papers.ssrn.comsol3 papers.cfm?abstract id=2443114.

Nohria, N., and R. Gulati (1996): “Is Slack Good or Bad for Innovation?,” Academy of Man-
 agement Journal, 39(5), 1245–1264.

Richtner, A., P. Ahlstrom, and K. Goffin (2014): “Squeezing R&D: A Study of Organi-
  zational Slack and Knowledge Creation in NPD, Using the SECI Model,” Journal of Product
  Innovation Management, 31(6), 2168–1290.

Shah, S. K., and M. Tripsas (2007): “The accidental entrepreneur: the emergent and collective
  process of user entrepreneurship,” Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal.

Simcoe, T., and D. Waguespack (2011): “Status, Quality and Attention: What’s in a (Missing)
  Name?,” Management Science, 57(2), 274–290.

Soman, D. (2001): “The mental accounting of sunk time costs: Why time is not like money,”
  Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 14(3), 169–185.

Thaler, R. (1999): “Mental accounting matters,” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12(3),
 183–206.

Vise, D. A. (2008): The Google Story. Delta Trade Paperbacks.

Zhang, J., and P. Liu (2012): “Rational Herding in Microloan Markets,” Management Science,
  58(5), 892–912.




                                             19
                           Table 1: Descriptives for the Main Sample

                                 Obs.      Mean           Std. Dev.     Min        Max           Total
City-Week level

Total Projects                1,615,887     0.0603             0.8159     0            75        97,423
-Total Successful Projects    1,615,887     0.0360             0.5409     0            49        58,172
-Total Failed Projects        1,615,887     0.0243             0.3260     0            40        39,251

Total Funding                 1,615,887     609.67          22,583.94     0   10,266,800    985,164,831
-Total Successful Funding     1,615,887     552.36          21,990.09     0   10,266,800    892,546,742
-Total Failed Funding         1,615,887      57.32           1,699.67     0      617,100     92,618,089

All Holiday Breaks            1,615,887     0.0362             0.1869     0             1
-Reading Week                 1,615,887     0.0038             0.0615     0             1
-Summer Break                 1,615,887     0.0224             0.1479     0             1
-Spring Break                 1,615,887     0.0035             0.0593     0             1
-Thanksgiving Break           1,615,887     0.0001             0.0086     0             1
-Winter Break                 1,615,887     0.0073             0.0850     0             1


The sample includes 5,919 cities and 273 weeks. 496 cities have one of the top 200 colleges nearby.
The average length of a reading week break is 2.6 days, of summer break is 107.2 days, of spring is 8.4
days, of Thanksgiving is 6.3 days, of winter break is 28 days.




                                                     20
                                    Table 2: Top 10 CBSAs by Total Funding Raised
                     (a) Technology Overall                               (b) Technology Per Capita

     1    Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH                   1    Provo-Orem, UT
     2    San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA                2    Boulder, CO
     3    Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA               3    San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
     4    San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA               4    Santa Cruz-Watsonville, CA
     5    New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA            5    San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA
     6    Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI          6    Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH
     7    San Diego-Carlsbad, CA                           7    Greenville, NC
     8    Austin-Round Rock, TX                            8    Burlington-South Burlington, VT
     9    Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA                      9    Salt Lake City, UT
     10   Provo-Orem, UT                                   10   Kalispell, MT




21
                    (c) Film & Video Overall                             (d) Film & Video Per Capita

     1    Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA               1    Missoula, MT
     2    New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA            2    Bennington, VT
     3    San Diego-Carlsbad, CA                           3    Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA
     4    San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward, CA                4    Ithaca, NY
     5    Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI               5    Taos, NM
     6    Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA                      6    Bozeman, MT
     7    Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH                   7    San Diego-Carlsbad, CA
     8    Austin-Round Rock, TX                            8    Jackson, WY-ID
     9    Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV     9    Clarksdale, MS
     10   Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD      10   Boulder, CO
                   Table 3: All Holiday Breaks

                        (1)             (2)           (3)
VARIABLES             Projects        Funding     Log Funding

All Holiday Breaks    0.0294**     515.6985        0.0728***
                      (0.0133)    (359.3996)        (0.0171)

City Fixed Effects      YES            YES            YES
Week Fixed Effects      YES            YES            YES

Observations        1,615,887 1,615,887             1,615,887
R-squared              0.008        0.001             0.017
Number of Cities       5,919        5,919             5,919
Robust standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses.
               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                 22
Figure 1: Estimated Coefficient for Weeks Before and After the Holiday Breaks. Dependent Variable
is the Number of Projects Created in the Focal City-Week. Regression Includes Week Fixed Effects
and City Fixed Effects. Error Bars Represent 95% Confidence Intervals Based on Robust Standard
Errors Clustered at the City-Week Level.




                                               23
                               Table 4: Projects by University Types

                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
VARIABLES                              Art         Art          Art        Tech        Tech       Tech

All Holiday Breaks                    0.0016      0.0010       0.0005     0.0001    0.0011*      0.0004
                                     (0.0012)    (0.0011)     (0.0012)   (0.0007)   (0.0006)    (0.0007)
Holiday at Top Engineering School     0.0096                   0.0044    0.0052*                0.0065**
                                     (0.0071)                 (0.0061)   (0.0029)               (0.0032)
Holiday at Top Art, Design,                     0.0130**      0.0108**               0.0005      -0.0027
Film, Theatre School                            (0.0062)      (0.0045)              (0.0022)    (0.0025)

City Fixed Effects                     YES        YES          YES         YES         YES        YES
Week Fixed Effects                     YES        YES          YES         YES         YES        YES

Observations                         1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887
R-squared                              0.002        0.002        0.002       0.002       0.002      0.002
Number of Cities                       5,919        5,919        5,919       5,919       5,919      5,919
      Robust standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                     Table 5: Funding Between Day 8 and Day 14 of a Campaign

                                                    (1)                        (2)
          VARIABLES                          Funding Days 8-14        Log Funding Days 8-14

          One Week Before the Break               -126.7508                  -0.0101
                                                 (525.5428)                 (0.0549)

          City Fixed Effects                        YES                       YES
          Week Fixed Effects                        YES                       YES

          Observations                       21,587                   43,102
          R-squared                          0.013                     0.067
          Number of Cities                   4,441                     5,808
              Robust standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses.
                      Covariate measured date the campaign launched.
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   24
                              Table 6: Projects in Video Games

                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)
    VARIABLES                                   Projects        Projects        Projects

    All Holiday Breaks                              0.0015       0.0014          0.0012
                                                   (0.0012)     (0.0011)        (0.0011)
    Holiday at Top Engineering School               0.0023                       0.0010
                                                   (0.0037)                     (0.0047)
    Holiday at Top Art, Design,                                  0.0032          0.0027
    Film, Theatre School                                        (0.0034)        (0.0044)

    City Fixed Effects                              YES             YES           YES
    Week Fixed Effects                              YES             YES           YES

    Observations                        1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887
    R-squared                              0.003        0.003       0.003
    Number of Cities                       5,919        5,919       5,919
        Robust standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses.
                       *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Table 7: Share of Projects and Funding in Design and Technology Before and After the Change

                                              (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)
   VARIABLES                                Share of       Share of    Share of     Share of
                                            Projects       Projects    Funding      Funding

   All Holiday Breaks                       0.0012**      -0.0022***   0.0015**    -0.0028***
                                            (0.0006)       (0.0006)    (0.0006)      (0.0007)
   All Holiday Breaks * After the Change                  0.0087***                 0.0113***
                                                           (0.0012)                  (0.0017)

   City Fixed Effects                         YES             YES         YES           YES
   Week Fixed                                 YES             YES         YES           YES

   Observations                            1,615,887 1,615,887 1,615,887            1,615,887
   R-squared                                 0.003        0.003        0.003          0.004
   Number of Cities                          5,919        5,919        5,919          5,919
              Robust standard errors clustered at the city level in parentheses
                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                              25
Table 8: Projects and Funding Early in the Break, and with Long Development Time

                        (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)
VARIABLES             Projects    Log Funding    Projects with    Funding with
                                                Long Dev. Time   Long Dev. Time

All Holiday Breaks      0.0173     0.0599***        0.0011**         2.7457
                       (0.0112)     (0.0166)        (0.0005)        (5.3684)
All Holiday Breaks    0.0488***    0.0519***
* Early                (0.0131)     (0.0178)

Observations          1,615,887    1,615,887        1,615,887       1,615,887
R-squared               0.008        0.017            0.001           0.000
Number of city code     5,919        5,919            5,919           5,919
                       Robust standard errors in parentheses
                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                        26
