NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO PRIVATE EQUITY FIRMS SAY THEY DO?
Paul Gompers
Steven N. Kaplan
Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Working Paper 21133
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21133

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

This research has been supported by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business School (Gompers)
and the Fama-Miller Center (Kaplan). We thank Brad Cornell, Harry DeAngelo, David Robinson and
seminar participants at the American Finance Association, Harvard Business School Accounting and
Control workshop, Harvard Business School Finance workshop, Hebrew University, London Business
School, Stanford, the University of North Carolina and the Wharton School for helpful comments.
Gompers and Kaplan have consulted to private equity general partners and limited partners. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Paul Gompers, Steven N. Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Do Private Equity Firms Say They Do?
Paul Gompers, Steven N. Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov
NBER Working Paper No. 21133
April 2015
JEL No. G24,G3,G31,G32
ABSTRACT
We survey 79 private equity investors with combined AUM of over $750B about their practices in
firm valuation, capital structure, governance, and value creation. Investors rely primarily on IRR and
multiples to evaluate investments. Their LPs focus more on absolute performance. Capital structure
choice is based equally on optimal trade-off and market timing considerations. PE investors anticipate
adding value to portfolio companies, with a greater focus on increasing growth than on reducing costs.
We also explore how the actions that PE managers say they take group into specific firm strategies
and how those strategies are related to firm founder characteristics.

Paul Gompers
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu
Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

Vladimir Mukharlyamov
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
mukharly@fas.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
The private equity (buyout) 1 industry has grown markedly in the last twenty years and
academic research has increasingly focused on the effects of private equity. What has been less
explored are the specific analyses and actions taken by private equity (PE) fund managers.
This paper seeks to fill that gap. In a survey of 79 private equity firms managing more than
$750 billion in capital, we provide granular information on PE managers’ practices in
determining capital structure, valuing transactions, sourcing deals, governance and operational
engineering. We also explore how the actions that private equity managers say they take group
into specific firm strategies and how those strategies are related to firm founder characteristics.
Recent academic research has provided accumulating evidence that private equity
investors have performed well relative to reasonable benchmarks. At the private equity fund
level, Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014), Higson and Stucke (2013), Robinson and Sensoy
(2013) and Ang et al. (2013) all find that private equity funds have outperformed public equity
markets net of fees over the last three decades. The outperformance versus the S&P 500 in
Harris et al. is on the order of 20% over the life of a fund and roughly 4% per year.

Consistent

with that net of fee performance, Axelson, Sorensen, and Strömberg (2013) find outperformance
of over 8% per year gross of fees.
At the private equity portfolio company level, Davis et al. (2014) find significant
increases in productivity in a large sample of U.S. buyouts from the 1980s to early 2000s. Cohn
and Towery (2013) find significant increases in operating performance in a large sample of U.S.
buyouts of private firms. Kaplan (1989) finds significant increases in public to private deals in
the 1980s. Cohn et al. (2014) and Guo et al. (2011) find modest increases in operating
performance for public to private buyouts in the 1990s and early 2000s, although Guo et al. find
large increases in company values.

1

We classify private equity as buyout or growth equity investments in mature companies. Private equity
as we define it in this paper is distinct from and does not include venture capital investments.
1

From Gompers and Lerner (1999), Metrick and Yasuda (2010), and Chung et al. (2012),
we also know that the compensation of the partners at the private equity funds creates strong
incentives to generate high returns, both directly and through the ability to raise subsequent
funds. Strong performance for some funds has led to very high compensation for those
investors.
The high-powered incentives combined with the largely positive empirical results are
consistent with PE investors taking actions that are value increasing or maximizing. Kaplan
and Strömberg (2009) classify three types of value increasing actions—financial engineering,
governance engineering, and operational engineering. These value-increasing actions are not
necessarily mutually exclusive, but it is likely that certain firms emphasize some of the actions
more than others.
In financial engineering, PE investors provide strong equity incentives to the
management teams of their portfolio companies. At the same time, leverage puts pressure on
managers not to waste money. In governance engineering, PE investors control the boards of
their portfolio companies and are more actively involved in governance than public company
directors and public shareholders. In operational engineering, PE firms develop industry and
operating expertise that they bring to bear to add value to their portfolio companies.
Despite the growth in private equity and that evidence, only a few papers have studied
the actions private equity investors actually take. Early papers by Baker and Wruck (1989)
and Baker (1992) explored value creation in individual cases. More recently, Acharya et al.
(2013) study portfolio company performance and relate that performance to PE firm and
partner characteristics. There is still much that is unknown. In particular, no paper examines
detailed levers of value creation across financial, governance, and operational engineering.
In this paper, we further explore what PE investors actually do by reporting the results
of a survey of private equity investing practices. The paper has two parts. First, we identify
and tabulate the key decisions that private equity investors make. The range of decisions is

2

significantly more detailed than has been examined in the prior literature. In particular, our
survey is structured around examining decisions that support financial, governance, or
operational engineering. Second, we attempt to categorize distinct strategies that private equity
firms employ.
Our approach is to survey 79 private equity (PE) investors (with a total of over $750
billion of private equity assets under management as of the end of 2012). We obtain complete
answers from 64 of these firms (representing over $600 billion of private equity assets under
management). The sample represents private equity firms across a spectrum of investment
strategies, size, industry specialization, and geographic focus. We ask the PE investors
questions about financial engineering—how they value companies, think about portfolio
company capital structures, and management incentives; governance engineering—how they
think about governance and monitoring; and operational engineering—how they think about
value creation, both before closing the transaction and after the transaction. We also ask
questions about the organization of the private equity firms themselves.
Despite the prominent role that discounted cash flow valuation methods play in
academic finance courses, few PE investors use discounted cash flow or net present value
techniques to evaluate investments. Rather, they rely on internal rates of return and multiples
of invested capital.

This contrasts with the results in Graham and Harvey (2001) who find

that CFOs use net present values as often as internal rates of return. Furthermore, few PE
investors explicitly use the capital asset price model (CAPM) to determine a cost of capital.
Instead, PE investors typically target a 22% internal rate of return on their investments on
average (with the vast majority of target rates of return between 20 and 25%), a return that
appears to be above a CAPM-based rate. We offer several potential explanations for this
seemingly ad hoc approach to investment analysis.
We also asked the PE investors how their limited partners (LPs) evaluate the
performance of the private equity investors. Surprisingly, the PE investors believe that their

3

LPs are most focused on absolute performance rather than relative performance or alphas. This
is also puzzling given that private equity investments are equity investments, some of which had
been publicly-traded prior to a leveraged buyout. Such investments carry significant equity
risk, suggesting that equity-based benchmarks like public market equivalents (PMEs) are
appropriate.
Our results on capital structure are more consistent with academic theory and teaching.
In choosing the capital structures for their portfolio companies, PE investors appear to rely
equally on factors that are consistent with capital structure trade-off theories and those that are
consistent with market timing. The market timing result is consistent with the results in
Axelson, Jenkinson et al. (2013), henceforth AJSW (2013), although the capital structure tradeoff theory result is not. These results are, however, somewhat different from those in Graham
and Harvey (2001) who find that CFOs focus on financial flexibility.
Financial and governance engineering also appear to be important. In terms of portfolio
company management, PE investors expect to provide strong equity incentives to their
management teams and believe those incentives are very important. They regularly replace top
management, both before and after they invest. And they structure smaller boards of directors
with a mix of insiders, PE investors and outsiders. These results are consistent with research on
value enhancing governance structures that have been identified in other settings.
Finally, PE investors say they place a heavy emphasis on adding value to their portfolio
companies, both before and after they invest. The sources of that added value, in order of
importance, are increasing revenue, improving incentives and governance, facilitating a highvalue exit or sale, making additional acquisitions, replacing management and reducing costs.
On average, they commit meaningful resources to add value, although there is a great deal of
variation in how they do so.
We take the responses to the various questions about individual decisions and analyze
how various decisions are “related” to each other by employing cluster analysis and factor

4

analysis. Essentially, we use cluster analysis to explore whether private equity firms follow
particular strategies. We find that the answers to our survey cluster into categories that are
related to financial engineering, governance engineering, and operational engineering—the levers
of value creation highlighted in Kaplan and Strömberg (2009).
We then consider how those strategies are related to firm founder characteristics. Firms
whose founders have a financial background tend to focus more on financial engineering, while
those with a previous background in private equity and, to a lesser extent, operations, tend to
focus more on operational engineering.
In what follows, we assume the PE investor responses are accurate and interpret the
survey accordingly. The PE investors filled out the survey with the assurance that they would
not be identified and that their responses would be aggregated so they could not be identified.
Accordingly, no individual firm has any incentive to report overly positive or otherwise
inaccurate responses. Doing so will not benefit any one individual firm directly. We recognize,
however, it is possible that some PE investors might report overly positively on some questions
in the hope that it will cast the PE industry in a better light. We discuss how such behavior
might affect our results.

2. Related Literature
This paper is related to several strands in the literature. Our survey allows us to
evaluate whether and how different corporate finance theories are applied in practice by
investors with extremely high incentives to perform and who also have the highest level of
education from top business schools. In particular, there are large academic literatures on firm
valuation, capital structure and governance. Do what private equity investors say they do
conform to what researchers think “should be done”? Second, our paper explores how these
financial decisions are related to firm characteristics.

5

Research on capital structure has spawned large numbers of papers that seek to explain
how firms set their debt and equity structures. Three primary theories receive prominence in
the literature. The trade-off theory of Myers (1977) predicts that the amount of debt that a
firm raises is a balance between the value creation of interest tax shields and the cost of
financial distress. It is optimal for firms to raise additional debt until the marginal tax shield
benefit of the additional dollar of debt equals the expected cost of financial distress. The tradeoff theory corresponds to what most introductory finance courses teach about debt policy. The
pecking order theory (Myers, 1984) predicts that firms prefer to raise as much safe debt as
possible. Once safe debt is exhausted, firms raise risky debt then equity to fund projects.
Finally, Baker and Wurgler (2002) propose a theory of capital structure that depends on firm
managers timing markets based upon the mispricing of debt or equity. When interest rates are
perceived to be particularly low relative to fundamentals, firms increase borrowing and when
equity markets are overvalued firms would tend to raise more equity. We seek to assess how
much of private equity firm managers’ leverage decisions are governed by each of these theories.
Governance engineering has been another major area of research in corporate finance.
Jensen and Meckling (1976) were among the first scholars to note that agency conflicts exist
between managers (who typically own small fractions to equity in the firms that they manage)
and outside shareholders who may by quite fragmented. Governance engineering involves
creating a better alignment of incentives between managers and shareholders or providing better
oversight that can limit empire building and opportunistic behavior. Gompers, Ishii, and
Metrick (2003) demonstrate that broad measures of corporate governance are related to public
company performance and valuation.

Jensen and Murphy (1990) create a framework to

measure the incentive effects of equity ownership for firm managers. Kaplan (1989) examines
management ownership changes in a sample of leveraged buyouts from the 1980s and finds that
ownership substantially increases on average.

6

Incentive compensation has been a particularly important area of governance research.
Jensen (1986) argues that managers of publicly traded firms typically own too little equity to
make them sensitive to maximizing shareholder value. Private equity managers who are aware
of these issues will seek to align incentives through increases in managerial equity ownership.
Boards of directors are often viewed as an important governance tool to monitor
managers on behalf of shareholders. Fama and Jensen (1983) discuss the role of boards and how
boards should function. Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) examine the determinants of board
structure and argue that board structure tends to be endogenously determined to minimize
conflicts with shareholders. Coles, Daniels, and Naveen (2008) examine how board size is
related to both firm characteristics and then firm performance. In general, the literature argues
that small boards dominated by outsiders perform better. We examine board strategy issues for
private equity investors.
We also examine specific strategies around improvement in operating performance.
Many private equity firms market to their investors and potential portfolio companies their
ability to increase value by improving operating performance. Kaplan (1989) was the first to
find growth in operating performance after firms undergo a leveraged buyout. Kaplan and
Strömberg (2009) summarize subsequent research that largely confirms that private equity

investments are associated with improvements in operating performance or productivity. While
little research has identified the key operating levers that private equity managers pull to
improve performance, several papers have examined the effects of private equity on the
operational performance of the companies they own. More recently, Davis et al. (2014) use U.S.
Census data to study a large sample of U.S. buyouts and finds that they are associated with an
improvement in productivity. Cohn and Towery (2013) use income tax data to study a large
sample of U.S. buyouts and find improvements in operating margins. The exception to these
positive results are public to private transactions. Cohn et al. (2014) and Guo et al. (2011) find
modest, but insignificant increases in operating margins in U.S. public to private transactions.

7

In doing these analyses, we view this paper as a complement to the survey papers of
Graham and Harvey, beginning with Graham and Harvey (2001). 2 Graham and Harvey survey
chief financial officers to understand how they make capital budgeting, capital structure and
other decisions. They compare their survey findings of practice to the recommendations or
insights from different academic theories. In this paper, we do the same. We view this survey
as particularly interesting because private equity investors have been so successful (both in
terms of generating attractive returns for investors and compensation for their managers), have
strong incentives to maximize shareholder value, and, because of those incentives and
compensation, very likely attract talented individuals. As we show below, it also is the case
that a large percentage of private equity investors have been trained at prominent business
schools. In recent years, positions in private equity firms have been among the most coveted for
graduating MBA students.

A Pitchbook 2013 survey showed that a small number of elite

business schools accounted for the vast majority of new hires in private equity. As such, we
would expect that private equity investors’ practices would approximate what financial
economists believe is theoretically (and empirically) value maximizing.
Finally, our paper is complementary to a recent survey by Da Rin and Phalippou (2014)
who survey a large sample of PE limited partners. Their survey includes questions on the
criteria PE limited partners use in choosing PE investments. Da Rin and Phalippou (2014),
however, have relatively little to say about the internal decision-making and strategies of the
general partner.

3. Sample and Design

3.1. Design
We created the survey to determine what PE investors say that they do. We also
attempted to design the survey with the intent of comparing what those investors do relative to
2

See also Brav et al. (2005) and Graham et al. (2005).
8

what is taught at business schools. We initially tested the survey on three PE investors in the
summer of 2011. We revised the survey to reflect some ambiguities in our questions and to add
some additional questions. The final survey includes 92 questions and is available on the
internet at Paul Gompers’ website.

3.2. Delivery and Response
We began to distribute the survey to PE investors in the fall of 2011. We distributed it
to investors where one of the co-authors knew or was introduced to a senior investment
professional. We continued to identify potential PE investors in 2012. We received our last
survey response in the winter of 2013. The vast majority of survey responses, therefore, were
received in 2012.
We contacted a total of 136 PE firms. We sent survey links to 106 of these who
expressed an interest in the survey. Of these, 79 filled out some part of the survey and 64
completely filled out the survey. The response rate of roughly 50% is much higher than the
response rate for other surveys. Graham and Harvey (2001) obtain a response rate of 8.9% for
CFOs while Da Rin and Phalippou (2014) obtain a response rate of 13.8% for PE limited
partners.

3.3. Private Equity Firm Characteristics
Table 1 provides some summary statistics for the firms of the PE investors who
responded to the survey. We obtained assets under management (AUM), performance of the
most recent primary fund (if available), and age of each private equity firm in the sample as of
December 2012 from Preqin. Information on firms not covered by Preqin is taken from firm
websites and media articles.

9

The table shows that there is a large variation in the size of the firms as measured by
assets under management (AUM). The mean AUM is just under $10 billion. A quarter of the
firms have AUM under $750 million while a quarter have AUM above $11 billion.
Our overall sample of 79 firms includes firms with a total of over $750 billion in AUM.
Our sample of 64 firms that completed the entire survey includes firms with a total of over $600
billion in AUM. In particular, we have solid coverage of the largest PE firms. Each year,
Private Equity International (PEI) Media ranks the top PE firms globally by AUM. Our (fully
completed) sample includes eleven of the top twenty-five in PEI’s 2012 list. Given this, our
results are reflective of a meaningful fraction of the PE industry.
The table also indicates that Preqin has performance data for the most recent fund for
58 of the sample PE firms. The average fund in the sample has an IRR that is 2.7% above
Preqin’s benchmark IRR for the same vintage year. The median fund is 0.9% above. This
suggests that our sample is largely representative of the PE fund universe, at least in terms of
performance. If anything, we may have a small bias towards better performers. We do not
believe any bias towards slightly better performing PE firms would influence our results in any
way. If anything, our sample of firms would be expected to employ better practices than other
PE firms and as such their actions should conform more closely to what finance research and
courses prescribe.
Despite the apparent representativeness of the sample and the relatively high response
rate, we recognize that the sample is potentially selected. This is unavoidable given our
requirement that we have an introduction to a senior person and given that PE firms have
limited disclosure requirements. Given the large total AUM our sample PE firms control, the
survey represents a meaningful fraction of the PE industry.
Table 2 presents the distribution of enterprise values of the portfolio companies in which
the PE firms invest. The sample has good representation of many different PE firm enterprise
values and covers the broad spectrum of PE investing. The table suggests that almost one-sixth

10

of portfolio company investments by the sample PE firms have enterprise values exceeding $1
billion while almost 12% have enterprise values below $25 million.
Table 3 confirms that the private equity investors in our sample are primarily buyout
and growth equity investors, not venture capital investors. Over 90% of the PE investors invest
in buyouts while almost 75% invest in growth equity. These add up to more than one because
many PE investors invest in both buyouts and growth equity. A minority of the sample
investors, particularly the older and larger ones, also invest in distressed investments and PIPEs
(private investments in public equities).
Finally, consistent with our survey delivery method, table 4 indicates that over three
quarters of the surveys were completed by a senior PE executive—one with the title general
partner, managing partner or managing director. As such, we feel that the responses are very
likely indicative of firm practices employed within the PE organizations broadly.
We also used the PE firm websites to collect the names and educations of all of the
partner level executives at our sample PE firms. We used the titles partner, managing partner,
managing director, senior managing director, founder, CEO, chairman, head, and principal. We
identified 767 such individuals. Of these, almost two-thirds either have an MBA or a JD—435
or 57% of these have an MBA while 54 or 7% have a law degree. Of those with an MBA, 167
(38%) are from Harvard, 52 are from Chicago Booth (12%), 39 are from Stanford (9%), 32 are
from Wharton (7%) and 23 (5%) are from Columbia. These figures indicate that the top
executives at these firms are highly educated and a very large fraction of them have degrees
from what would be considered the top graduate schools. Once again, we believe that given the
educational background of the sample, our PE firms would likely employ industry best practices

11

in their investment process. At the same time, it is possible that we have oversampled Harvard
and Chicago alums while undersampling Wharton alums. 3

4. Financial Engineering

4.1. Valuation / Capital Budgeting
In this section, we consider how PE investors value the companies in which they invest
or, equivalently, evaluate the attractiveness of those investments. A substantial corporate
finance literature has developed around capital budgeting. Firms decide which projects to
undertake based upon a variety of investment rules. Much of the early finance research
established that optimal decision making for firms should be based on net present value
analyses. 4 Finance theory is clear that estimating expected future cash flows from an
investment, then using a discount rate that is derived from an explicit asset pricing model (e.g.,
CAPM or Fama-French three factor model) leads to better investment decisions when compared
to alternatives like internal rate of return (IRR) or payback analysis (e.g., multiple on invested
capital (MOIC).) The theory, therefore, predicts or suggests that private equity investors
should be more likely to use discounted cash flow methods. Our results allow us to compare
how investment decision-making criteria at PE firms compares to the framework articulated by
finance theory.

4.1.1. Valuation / Evaluation Methods
The survey asks the PE investors to identify different methods they use to evaluate the
overall attractiveness of a deal. We asked two different questions. First, we asked which
metrics they use, giving them the choice of gross internal rate of return (IRR), multiple of

3

The Pitchbook database finds that HBS alums make up 26%; Wharton alums, 11%; and Chicago alums,
7% of all PE fimr professionals. “Harvard, 4 Other Schools, Make Up Most MBAs at PE & VC Firms,”
http://blog.pitchbook.com/harvard-4-other-schools-make-up-most-mbas-at-pe-vc-firms/
4
For example, see Brealey, Myers, and Allen (2011).
12

invested capital (MOIC), adjusted present value (APV) discounted cash flow (DCF), weighted
average costs of capital (WACC) DCF, comparable company EBITDA multiples and free cash
flow return to equity. Table 5a reports the results. The vast majority of the PE investors rely
on gross IRR and MOIC. Over 70% also incorporate comparable company multiples. In
contrast, relatively few PE investors use DCF methods. In sum, fewer than 20% use APV or
WACC-based DCF methods to evaluate investments. Second, we also asked the PE investors to
rank their reliance on the different methods. Again, as Table 5b indicates, IRR (in particular)
and multiple approaches are the overwhelming favorites while net and adjusted present value
approaches lag far behind.
We also directly asked private equity managers how they calculate their WACC. Only
eighteen (or 27%) of the PE investors describe performing a calculation that can be generously
considered to approximate a traditional, CAPM-based approach. At the same time, 27 said
they did not use WACC and another 10 said “not applicable,” indicating, that they, too, do not
use WACC. Overall, then, at least 55% of the PE investors appear not to use WACC at all.
These results indicate that PE investors do not frequently use net present value or DCF
techniques. This contrasts markedly with the results in Graham and Harvey (2001) for CFOs.
In that paper, they find that CFOs rely on net present value techniques roughly as frequently as
IRR; and large company CFOs, in particular, rely heavily on the CAPM to determine their cost
of capital. Our results for PE investors also contrast with the methods taught in MBA finance
courses at all top business schools as well as typical valuation analyses seen in investment
banker fairness opinions for mergers and acquisitions. CAPM-based discounted cash flow
analyses are the primary method taught and used in those settings. It also is clear that in their
IRR calculation, the PE investors evaluate cash flows to leveraged equity. Arguably, this, too,
contrasts with the usual academic advice in MBA finance courses to evaluate and discount cash
flows to an all-equity firm.

13

4.1.2. Years of Forecasts
In evaluating any investment, investors typically forecast the cash flows of that
investment over some period of time. We asked the PE investors to tell us the time horizon of
the investment cash flows they evaluate. Figure 1 indicates that the great majority of PE
investors – almost 96% of our sample – use a five year forecast horizon. At the end of the five
years, they typically calculate a terminal or exit value. This indicates that PE investors do not
find it productive or valuable to forecast cash flows for more than five years.
Graham and Harvey (2001) do not appear to have asked this question so we cannot
compare our results to theirs. While we did not explicitly ask why PE firms use five years as
the predominant forecasting horizon, most PE firms expect to hold their investments for
approximately five years. As such, forecasting cash flows over five years approximates the PE
firm’s time horizon. Several investors have told us that using a standard time period, like five
years, allows the PE firms to compare different investments on an equal footing. That, of
course, explains why each firm would use a standard horizon, but not why almost all firms
would use the same five-year horizon.

4.1.3. Discount of Management Forecasts
When PE investors evaluate an investment, they usually begin with a set of
management forecasts. It seems natural to assume that the PE investors might view those
forecasts as optimistic. Accordingly, we asked the PE investors whether they typically adjusted
management’s forecasts. We asked them to measure this as a fraction of EBITDA – earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization – a measure of pre-tax cash flow.
Table 6 shows that it is, indeed, typical for PE investors to discount management
forecasts. For the 44 PE investors who answered this question explicitly, the median and
average discount is 20%. Another 11 of the PE investors who did not provide a number
indicated that the discount varied with the circumstances of individual deals.

14

4.1.4. Exit Value or Terminal Value
In order to evaluate the economics of an investment, the PE investors need to estimate a
value for their investment (or, equivalently the portfolio company) at the expected time of exit.
As noted above, this is virtually always five years into the investment. There are (at least)
three possible ways to do this valuation: (1) using the (discounted) value of a growing
perpetuity of the final year cash flow in a CAPM-framework; (2) using the value of comparable
or similar public companies; and (3) using the value of acquisitions or transactions involving
comparable or similar companies.
Table 7a indicates that PE investors are much more likely to use comparable methods—
both publicly traded companies and transactions—than discounted cash flow methods. Fewer
than 30% of the PE investors use a growing perpetuity methodology. The percentage increases
for larger PE investors, but remains below 35%. The other category is dominated by eleven
firms (or 16%) who indicate that they use the entry multiple—the EBITDA multiple the PE
investor paid for the company—to calculate the exit multiple.
Table 7b explores how the PE investors choose the comparable companies they use.
Industry and firm size are the most important criteria they match on with growth, margins, and
geography next in importance. Setting the exit multiple equal to the entry multiple also is
consistent with matching on firm industry and size. Firm riskiness ranks seventh among the
different criteria. Again, PE investors appear to be skeptical of using measures of risk that have
strong foundations in academic finance.

4.1.5. IRR and MOIC Targets
As the previous sections indicate, PE investors do not explicitly use DCF / CAPMbased methods. Given their emphasis on IRR and MOIC, however, it is important to know

15

what IRR and MOIC PE investors target and whether those targets bear any relation to
CAPM-related returns.

4.1.5.1. IRR Targets
Table 8a indicates that PE investors (say) they target median IRRs of 25%. Smaller PE
firms and those with global investment operations tend to target higher IRRs. A rough
calculation suggests that this target exceeds a CAPM-based rate. In 2012, long-term Treasury
bond rates did not exceed 4%. Axelson, Sorensen, and Strömberg (2013) estimate an average
portfolio company equity beta of 2.3. Assuming an equity risk premium of 6%, these suggest a
CAPM-based discount rate of less than 18%.
The fact that PE investors target returns exceed CAPM-based returns is not surprising.
PE investors pay their fees out of gross IRRs. PE limited partners (LPs) receive their returns
net of those fees. In other words, in order to generate a competitive CAPM-based return net of
fees, PE investors must target a greater return gross of fees. Similarly, many PE firms argue
that they generate returns in excess of the underlying riskiness of the portfolio. In order to earn
positive excess returns, the PE firms would need to target returns that are higher than the
return implied by the CAPM risk of the investment.
We also asked two different questions to determine whether PE investors adjusted their
target IRR to reflect different risks in different deals. These are presented in tables 8b and 8c.
Table 8b indicates that over 85% of PE investors adjust their target IRRs for firm riskiness.
While most PE investors explicitly do not use a CAPM-based approach, this adjustment is
potentially somewhat consistent with one. Unfortunately, the survey did not explicitly define
firm risk. As a result, we cannot distinguish the extent to which firm risk refers to systematic
or unsystematic risk.

16

At the same time, table 8b indicates that fewer than half of the PE investors adjust their
target IRRs for deal leverage. This suggests that the more than half of the PE investors who do
not make such an adjustment explicitly do not take a CAPM-based approach.
Table 8c reports the fraction of deals that PE investors adjust cash flows or the IRR to
reflect different risks. These risks can be divided into macroeconomic or systematic risks
(unexpected inflation, interest rate, term structure, business cycle, and foreign exchange) and
firm-specific risks (distress, size, market-to-book, momentum and illiquidity). The results
indicate that PE investors are somewhat sensitive to macroeconomic risks, particularly GDP or
business cycle risk where PE investors make some adjustment in roughly half of their deals. This
is consistent with PE investors taking market or equity risk into account. This is also is
suggestive of PE investors having time varying hurdle rates. Firm-specific adjustments appear
less important, although there are a variety of firm-specific factors that at least some of the PE
firms use to adjust their target hurdle rates.

4.1.5.2. MOIC Targets
Table 9 indicates that PE investors (say) they target median MOICs of 2.5 times their
investment. At a five-year time horizon, this implies a gross IRR of approximately 20%. The
mean MOIC of 2.85 times implies a gross IRR of 23%. The MOIC targets, therefore, imply
slightly lower gross IRRs than reported gross IRR targets. Smaller and younger private equity
firms generally tend to have higher MOIC targets.

4.1.6. Net of Fee Targets (Marketed to LPs)
The previous sections describe the targets private equity investors use to evaluate their
investments. We also asked them how their limited partners (LPs) evaluate the performance of
the private equity investors.

Benchmarking of private equity returns has seen significant

evolution in recent years both from an academic and from a data vendor perspective.

17

Table 10 reports the benchmark that the PE investors report is most important for their
LPs. Surprisingly, almost two-thirds of the PE investors report that an absolute measure of
performance—net IRR and net MOIC—is most important. In fewer than 8% of the cases do the
PE investors believe that LPs view performance relative to public markets as the most
important performance benchmark. This is surprising given the large attention paid to alphas
and relative performance in public market investments like mutual funds and hedge funds. An
additional 27% believe the performance relative to other PE investors is most important.

The

only difference among private equity firms appears to be that older private equity firms’
investors evaluate net IRR relative to fund vintage year more frequently and younger private
equity firms’ investors look to cash-on-cash multiples. Overall, the focus on absolute
performance is notable and surprising given the intense focus on relative performance or alphas
for public market investments.
Table 11 reports the net IRR that the PE investors market to their LPs. The median
net IRR is between 20% and 25%. Consistent with the PE investors’ gross IRR targets, this
would correspond to a gross IRR of between 25% and 30%. And as with the gross IRR targets,
these net IRR targets seem to exceed what one would expect in a CAPM-based framework.

4.1.7. Discussion
These somewhat surprising valuation results raise several potential alternative
explanations. First, it is possible that because private equity is viewed by many limited
partners (and marketed as such by some general partners) as an absolute return investment,
nominal hurdle rates are more meaningful than discounted cash flow valuation based upon
CAPM discount rates. Because underlying portfolio companies were typically only periodically
revalued (if at all), private equity fund returns are not risk-adjusted by limited partners in a
traditional sense. Alternatively, private equity investors may be skeptical of asset pricing

18

models that seek to measure risk. As such, far more of their energy is focused on estimating
reasonable cash flows.
Our analysis of the factors that affect private equity firm hurdle rates also indicates a
deviation from what is typically recommended in finance research and teaching. It suggests that
while PE investors do not use a CAPM-based framework, they do use what appears to be an adhoc multi-factor framework. Some of the underlying ad hoc factors appear related to systematic
risk and others relate to non-systematic risk, i.e., it appears that many private equity firms care
about the total risk of the investment when determining the hurdle rates. This would be
consistent with the lack of risk-adjusting investment returns on the part of limited partners. If
that is the case, then private equity managers would care about adjusting the hurdle rates for
both types of risk. Similarly, the diversity of criteria factored into a PE firm’s gross IRR target
means that unlike a CAPM-based discount rate which would be the same across different
private equity firms, PE firm hurdle rates are likely to vary significantly for similar investments
and are likely to be PE firm, time period, and portfolio company specific.
Our results concerning exit multiples being based on comparable companies suggests
that PE investors are somewhat skeptical of CAPM-based methods for valuing companies
relative to the use of multiples-based approaches. This is at odds with methods taught in basic
finance courses in which terminal / exit values are calculated using growing perpetuity formulas
with comparable companies methods possibly used as a check on the CAPM-based approach.
The IRR analysis also embeds the “action plan” of the private equity firm. Typical
holding periods for investments are centered around five years (the typical projection length)
and exit values are determined by industry multiples (what they hope to sell the company for at
exit.) As such, the effort put into the typical IRR model helps private equity firms manage
their portfolio more than DCF does. In essence, the framework of investment evaluation may
be tied to the investment fund structure that imposes limited holding periods and less
transparency on underlying valuation movements, i.e., systematic risk.

19

4.2. Capital Structure
4.2.1. Results
As Graham and Harvey (2001) among others note, it is a longstanding question in
corporate finance as to whether firms have a target capital structure that is determined by a
trade-off between the costs and benefits of taking on debt. Among the most taught factors that
finance educators argue should influence optimal debt levels is the trade-off theory in which
managers set debt levels to balance the tax of interest deductibility and disciplining of
management with the expected costs of financial distress. The costs of distress include the
inability to invest in valuable future projects, retain customers or retain employees because of
cash constraints or questions about long-term viability. In their survey, Graham and Harvey
find some support for the trade-off theory (as well as some support for pecking order theories).
They also find that CFOs place their greatest focus on retaining financial flexibility and a good
credit rating.
AJSW (2013) contrast the trade-off theory of capital structure with a market-timing
view. In their view, the trade-off theory implies that industry factors play an important role in
optimal capital structure because industries vary in cash flow volatility—affecting the
probability of distress and agency costs—as well as investment opportunities and tangibility—
affecting the costs of distress. They argue that this implies that buyout firm leverage should be
related to the leverage of public companies in the same industry. In the market timing view, in
contrast, leverage and capital structure respond to economy-wide debt market conditions.
When interest rates are “low,” firms tend to raise more debt. When equity prices are “high,”
firms raise capital by issuing more equity. For a large sample of buyouts, they do not find any
support for the trade-off theories. Buyout capital structures are not related to capital structures
of similar public companies. Instead, consistent with market-timing, leverage is highly related
to economy-wide debt market conditions.

20

In our survey, we asked the PE investors how they determine the initial capital structure
of their portfolio companies. We included both trade-off and market-timing related factors.
Table 12 reports the typical capital structure that PE investors target at closing. They target a
median debt-to-total capital of 60% and a median debt-to-EBITDA ratio of 4.0 times. Some
observers will view these ratios as surprisingly low. They are much lower than the ratios that
were common in the 1980s. They also are somewhat lower than the median ratios of 70% and
5.2 times, respectively, in AJSW (2013).
There are two likely reasons that explain why these survey ratios are lower. First, we
conducted our survey in 2012, a year in which debt ratios and debt availability were lower than
the historical average. Second, a number of the investors in our survey invest in growth equity
as well as buyouts. As their name suggests, growth equity investments are likely to use less
leverage than buyouts.
We also find that larger and older private equity investors tend to target more levered
capital structures. This is perhaps not surprising given that larger private equity firms target
investments in larger companies that can sustain greater leverage.
The survey asks what factors the PE investors consider in determining capital structure.
The trade-off theories suggest a role for firm industry, tax benefits, default risk and the ability
to generate operating improvements / reduce agency costs. The Tables 13a and 13b present the
key results. Table 13a reports whether the PE investors consider a particular factor while table
13b reports the rankings of those factors. Both tables 13a and 13b suggest that the trade-off
theory and market timing are equally important. Almost all of the PE investors consider both
industry factors and current interest rates in determining capital structure. These two rank well
above the others in importance. Roughly two-thirds of the PE investors explicitly think about
the trade-off between tax benefits and default risk while the same percentage also say they raise
as much debt as the market will bear. These factors tie for third in importance. Just under
40% consider the ability of debt to force operational improvements in the manner suggested by

21

Jensen (1989).

Finally, only six firms, or less than 10%, mention financial flexibility as an

important determinant of capital structure. This contrasts sharply with the strong emphasis
on financial flexibility among CFOs in Graham and Harvey (2001).

4.2.2. Discussion
Our market timing result is very consistent with the result in AJSW (2013). The finding
that PE investors do consider trade-off related factors is not. The question is how can the PE
investor and AJSW results be reconciled? One possible explanation is that it is very difficult for
outside observers like AJSW to measure optimal capital structure. It is unlikely that all public
companies in the same industry have the same optimal capital structure and it also is unlikely
that all public companies are optimizing. In addition, the companies that PE investors select to
invest in are likely to be those that were not optimizing and for whom there is room for
improvement. Both of these factors will introduce noise into the tests conducted by AJSW.
The fact that most private equity firms do not consider financial flexibility when setting
capital structure is potentially explained by the private equity firm’s ability to inject capital in
the future. Because most private equity firms “own” the company and have access to inside
information, there is no asymmetric information that would create an equity financing
constraint. The private equity firms typically have existing funds with undrawn capital and can
always invest additional equity. In fact, we often see such follow-on equity investments in
situations where portfolio companies make roll-up acquisitions. In these settings, the typical
concern about financial flexibility that were identified in Graham and Harvey (2001) would be
less of a concern.
Overall, then, the survey indicates that PE investors consider both trade-off theories and
market timing. This is arguably favorable both to the traditional instruction at business schools
and to the more recent advances in behavioral finance.

22

4.3. Incentives
Management incentives are supposedly an important piece of financial engineering.
Table 14 is consistent with this. It confirms previous work by Kaplan (1989), Kaplan and
Strömberg (2009) and Acharya et al. (2013) that PE investors provide strong incentives to

portfolio company management. On average, PE investors allocate 17% of company equity to
management and employees. The CEO obtains an average of 8%. The percentages are slightly
lower, at 15% and 6%, respectively, for the larger PE investors who invest in larger companies.
This is significantly higher than equity ownership of senior management in public companies.
For example, Page (2011) finds that the average CEO of a public company between 1993 and
2007 held 3.58% of the company’s equity and the median CEO held only 1.57%.

5. Governance Engineering
In this section, we consider PE investors’ attitudes towards corporate governance. We
ask two types of questions. First, we consider the structure of the boards of directors of their
portfolio companies. Second, we consider their attitudes towards monitoring, hiring, and firing
top management.
Table 15a confirms previous work in showing that PE investors prefer small boards of
directors with over 90% including between 5 and 7 members. Larger private equity firms tend
to have portfolio companies with larger boards. Table 15b indicates that PE investors will take
roughly 3 of the board seats while allocating one or two to management and one or two to
outsiders who are not affiliated with the PE firms. Again, the results for board composition are
consistent with previous work and with conventional wisdom.
Table 16 indicates that PE investors are actively involved in advising their companies in
the great majority of their deals. In fact, the median PE investor claims to be actively involved
in all of his or her deals. Again, it would be surprising if we found otherwise.

23

Tables 17 and 18 explore how active the PE investors are in recruiting senior
management teams in their portfolio companies. Table 17 indicates that the majority of PE
investors, almost 70%, invest in the existing management team. They do not recruit their own
senior management team before the investment. This is consistent with the notion that many
private equity firms want to be seen as remaining “friendly” when pursuing transactions.
Management is often critical to successfully executing transactions.
At the same time, however, a meaningful fraction of PE investors, 31%, do recruit their
own senior management teams before investing. This suggests that different PE investors have
very different investment strategies. It also suggests that the PE investors who bring in their
own team do not place a great deal of weight on the value of incumbency.
After the investment, roughly 50% of the PE investors end up recruiting their own
senior management team. This is consistent with some of the PE investors becoming more
actively involved in the governance of their companies after the investment. When we combine
the PE investors who recruit their own teams before, after, or both before and after investing,
we find that almost 58% of the PE investors recruit their own senior teams. Again, this
suggests that the PE investors are actively involved in monitoring and governing their portfolio
companies.
Although it is not possible to ascribe any causality at this point, the cross-sectional
results suggest that the PE investors who recruit their own teams have experienced better past
investment performance. Similarly, larger and global private equity firms are more likely to
recruit their own management teams at some point.

6. Operational Engineering / Value Creation
In this section, we attempt to explore the ways in which the PE investors attempt to
create value for their investments and add value to their portfolio companies.

24

6.1. Deal Sourcing
PE investors claim that an important determinant of value creation is the ability to find
or source deals that are proprietary in some sense. Accordingly, we asked several questions
concerning deal sourcing. Table 19 reports the deal funnel experience of our PE investors. For
every hundred opportunities, considered, the average PE investor deeply investigates fewer than
24, signs an agreement with fewer than 14 and closes on only 6. This suggests that PE investors
devote considerable resources to evaluating transactions despite the fact that they will
ultimately invest in only a very few. When we compare the deal funnel at different types of
private equity firms, larger and older private equity firms pass a greater fraction of their deals
through to the next stage. There are two possibilities that can explain this result. First, larger
and older private equity firms may just have higher quality initial deal sourcing and hence do
not need to weed out as many deals at all stages. Alternatively, the larger fund sizes may
reduce the stringency of the deal funnel.
Table 20 considers the source and proprietary nature of the deals that the PE investor
actually closed. According to the PE investors, almost 36% of their closed deals are
“proactively self-generated,” 7.4% are provided by management and 8.6% come from their
executive network. These arguably have the potential to be proprietary. In contrast, 33% are
investment banking generated, 8.6% come from deal brokers and 4.3% come from other PE
firms. These are unlikely to be proprietary. Smaller and younger private equity firms generally
tend to source more proprietary deals. This likely reflects smaller target deal sizes. Firms that
invest in large and mega deals are less likely to be able to generate proprietary deals given that
their targets are probably more likely to be sold in an auction process. Finally, younger private
equity firms tend to utilize their executive networks more frequently.
When asked to summarize these sources, the PE investors considered almost 48% of
their closed deals to be proprietary in some way. Unfortunately, we have no way of evaluating

25

exactly what proprietary means nor can we validate the extent to which the deals truly are
proprietary or advantaged.
Nevertheless, we think these results indicate that the PE investors explicitly consider the
extent to which their potential investments are proprietary, and attempt to invest in deals that
are.

6.2. Deal Selection
In order to better understand how PE investors select and differentiate among
investments, we asked them to rank the factors they considered in choosing their investments.
Table 21 reports these results. The most important factor in choosing an investment is the
business model / competitive position of the company. The management team, the PE
investor’s ability to add value and the valuation are the three next most important factors and
are roughly of equal importance. The industry or market of the company and the fit with the
PE investor’s fund are of least importance.
Two of these results are notable. First, the PE investors put somewhat more weight on
the business than on the management team. This result is highly consistent with the work of
Kaplan, Sensoy, and Strömberg (2009) that shows that at least within the venture capital world,
the business strategies of firms remain far more stable (and hence are more important) than the
stability of management. Second, the importance of the ability to add value suggests that PE
investors take operational engineering and adding value seriously. This also suggests that
different private equity firms are likely to target and value investments differently. Private
equity firms often have particular industry experience and focus. A successful track record in a
particular industry is likely to lead to greater investment focus on a particular sector.
The survey asked the selection question in another way by asking what drivers of return
PE investors bet on in making investments. Table 22a reports the percentage of PE investors

26

who view a return driver as important while table 22b reports the ranking of those return
drivers.
Growth in the value of the underlying business is mentioned as a return driver by 100%
of the PE investors and is the highest ranked return driver. Operational improvements are close
behind, ranked second and mentioned by 97% of the PE investors. Leverage and industry-level
multiple arbitrage—selling at a higher multiple than buying—are mentioned by 76% and 65%,
but rank well-behind growth and operational improvements. These results suggest that PE
investors invest with the expectation or hope of growing the value of the business and improving
operations. Leverage as well as buying low and selling high are viewed as less important.
Once again, these views may be a reflection of the current private equity environment.
Historical leverage ratios (both during the financial boom as well as in the 1980s) were
substantially higher than they are today for the typical private equity deal. Also, the sheer
growth in the number of private equity firms and capital under management means that there is
more competition for deals and, hence, less ability to buy companies at a cheap price.

6.3. Value Creation
Given the emphasis on growing the value of the business, our next questions asked the
PE investors to identify the sources of that value creation. We asked them to distinguish
between expected sources of value creation identified before the deal is closed, pre-deal, and
actual sources of value creation, post-deal or after the investment is made.

6.3.1. Pre-investment
Table 23 lists the pre-investment sources of value creation. There are a large number of
sources of value for each deal. Hence, the total expected sources of value add up to well over
100% indicating that PE investors rely on several sources of value creation.

The most

frequently mentioned source of value is increasing revenue, identified by PE investors as being

27

important in over 70% of their deals.

Smaller private equity firms identified increasing revenue

more often than larger private equity investors. This is not surprising given that there may be
more room to increase revenues for the smaller deals targeted by smaller private equity
investors. Follow-on acquisitions are also important in more than 50% of their deals. Reducing
costs is identified as being important in only 36% of their deals. Introducing shared services—
where the PE investors help their several portfolio companies aggregate demand for services or
supplies to improve their bargaining power with suppliers—is also related to reduced costs and
is important in 16% of the deals.
Both increasing sales and reducing costs would fit under operational engineering. If
these answers are accurate (something we discuss in section 7), growth is more important than
reducing costs, suggesting a shift in emphasis from the cost cutting and agency cost reduction in
the 1980s as emphasized in Jensen (1989). It’s possible that the presence of merger and
acquisition activity has led many firms to be more efficient on the cost side, i.e., there may be
less corporate waste today than in the past (Kaplan, 1997).
Private equity investors also expect to create value in roughly one-third of their
investments by redefining or changing the company’s strategy / business model. In roughly
one-third of their investments, they expect to create value by changing the CEO or CFO and by
changing other members of the senior management team. All of these also would fit under the
rubric of operational engineering. Presumably these actions, if successful, would lead to greater
growth, reduced costs or both. Private equity investors also expect to create value by
improving incentives (61%) and improving corporate governance (47%). These would fit under
the categories of financial and governance engineering discussed in the previous section.
In slightly under half of their investments, private equity investors expect they are able
to buy at attractive prices, both absolutely (44.3%) and relative to the industry (46.6%). In
roughly half of their investments, they also expect they can facilitate a high value exit. This
suggests that private equity investors believe they create a meaningful amount of value by being

28

able to buy low and sell high. For smaller and younger private equity firms, the ability to
engage in “multiple expansion” is higher. This may reflect the greater frequency of proprietary
deals for these types of private equity firms and the potential to complete transactions at lower
valuations. Among practitioners and limited partners, this would usually be considered a type
of financial engineering, particularly buying low. From an academic perspective, this is difficult
to characterize. It is potentially consistent with taking advantage of asymmetric information,
superior bargaining ability, market timing and an efficient allocation of resources (i.e., selling to
the right buyer).
We can say that, overall, the answers indicate that PE investors expect to create value
pre-investment from a combination of financial, governance and operational engineering.
Different private equity firms typically express different value drivers. Private equity firms
appear to engage in differentiated investment strategies with different sources of expected value
creation.
We also asked the PE investors who in their organization is involved in identifying the
(pre-investment) sources of value creation. Table 24 indicates that deal team members—i.e.,
the financial partners—are involved in virtually every deal. Perhaps the more interesting result
is that operating partners—i.e., those primarily with operating rather than financial
experience—are involved in identifying value sources in 45% of the deals. In addition to relying
on operating partners, Table 24 indicates that the PE investors involve outside consultants in
almost 37% of their deals. Smaller and younger private equity firms are less likely to engage
outside consultants in their transactions. Overall then, table 24 suggests that the PE investors
have made a meaningful investment in operational engineering although that investment is
highly variable across firms.

29

6.3.2. Post-investment
Table 25 lists post-investment sources of value creation. The third column reports the
difference in the mean result for pre- and post-investment for each variable. The same sources
identified as important pre-investment remain important post-investment except that many of
them increase in importance.
Increased revenue remains important in roughly 70% of the deals. Reduced costs
increase in importance, rising to 47% of deals, but remain below increased growth. The use of
shared services, redefining the strategy, changing the CEO or CFO, changing other members of
the senior management team also increase by 6% to 14% relative to the pre-deal expected
sources of value. If anything, then, operational engineering sources of value appear to be more
important post-investment than they are identified as or expected to be pre-investment.
Improving incentives and improving corporate governance also remain important sources of
value, increasing by 4% and 5%, respectively, relative to pre-investment expectations.
Facilitating a high-value exit also becomes somewhat more important with almost 60%
of the PE investors citing this as a post-investment source of value. This may reflect the
historical perspective of private equity firms that were able to take more proprietary deals
public or sell at a higher valuation.
Post-investment, then, the PE investors continue to claim they create value from a
combination of financial, governance and operational engineering. Overall, the post-investment
sources of value they realize are somewhat greater than the sources of value identified pre-deal.
We again asked the PE investors who in their organization is involved in identifying the
(post-investment) sources of value creation.

Table 26 indicates that the participants are similar

to those involved pre-investment. Deal team members are involved in virtually every deal.
Operating partners are involved in identifying value sources in 51% of the deals, slightly higher
than the 45% pre-deal, while consultants are involved in 27%, somewhat less than the 37% of
pre-deal.

30

6.4. Exit
Our final questions relating to value creation concern the exit strategy of PE investors.
Table 27 indicates that PE investors expect to exit roughly one-half of their deals through a sale
to a strategic buyer, i.e., to an operating company in a similar or related industry. In almost
30% of deals, they expect to sell to a financial buyer, i.e., to another private equity investor. In
fewer than 20% of deals, do PE investors expect to exit through an IPO. These percentages
are consistent with, in fact almost identical to, the exit results in Strömberg (2008) that 53% of
deals with known exits are to strategic buyers, 30% are to financial buyers and 17% are through
IPOs. Not surprisingly, there is a significant difference between larger and smaller PE investors.
Larger PE investors expect to exit through an IPO more than 26% of the time while smaller PE
investors expect to do so less than 11% of the time. For the largest deals, it is less likely that
there are many strategic buyers large enough to sell to.
Tables 28a and 28b report, respectively, the presence and the ranking of factors that PE
investors consider in deciding when to exit. In particular, we are interested in whether private
equity firms believe that they can time the exit markets (either IPO or M&A markets) or if
exits are driven by firm-specific performance. Achieving the expected operational plan and
capital market conditions are the most important and are ranked roughly equally.

They are

important for more than 90% of the PE investors. As with capital structure decisions, this
suggests that PE investors put roughly equal weight on fundamentals and on market timing.
Management’s opinion, competitive considerations and hitting a return target are the next most
important considerations and are ranked roughly equally. They are considered by more than
75% of the PE investors. Considering management’s opinion is consistent with a cooperative /
advisory relationship between PE investors and management. The requirement to hit a return
target is potentially suggestive of an agency problem between the PE investors and their limited
partners in which the private equity firm’s limited partners cannot adjust investment

31

performance for risk and, hence, the private equity managers maintain nominal return
thresholds.

7. Private Equity Firm Organization
Up until this point, the survey questions have asked the PE investors to describe what
they do with respect to their portfolio company investments. In this section, we report the
answers to questions about the organization of the PE firms themselves with the idea of
shedding additional light on how they operate and attempt to create value. Historically, private
equity firms were small organizations. Over the past fifteen years, private equity firms have
grown substantially. In this section, we seek to understand how this growth translates into
organizational choices.
In Table 29, we report how the PE firms are organized. The notable result here is that
only 37% of the PE investors are organized as generalists. This is very different from the
organization of the PE firms in the 1980s when most firms and most individual PE investors
were largely generalists. At the same time, more than 50% of the firms are organized by
industry. Organization by industry likely carries three advantages – PE investors who specialize
in an industry are more likely to be able to find an opportunity in that industry, to be able to
evaluate the opportunity when it appears, and to understand whether and how it is possible to
add value to that opportunity.
In Table 30, we report the percentage of investment professionals in different
specializations. A majority of employees in our sample firms are deal professionals. An
additional 20% also can be considered deal related because they are involved in deal sourcing
and deal execution, bringing to almost 75% the percentage of employees who are deal oriented.
At the same time, 8.7% of employees are operating professionals, 1.2% are consulting
professionals, 5.7% are shared service professionals and 0.4% are HR professionals for a total of
16% who can be considered exclusively concerned with operational engineering. While this

32

percentage is much lower than the percentage of employees that are deal oriented, it does
indicate that meaningful employee resources are devoted to value creation.
Table 31 considers the extent to which PE investors make use of other advisors to help
with deal sourcing and with value creation. Almost 50% of the PE investors utilize senior
advisors, a CEO council, or its equivalent. In general, these advisors provide non-financial
advice on businesses. Almost 40% of the PE investors have an advisory board of such advisors.
When we put these together, almost 66% of the PE investors have an advisory board or utilize
senior advisors. The PE investors describe these advisors or executives as helping with deal
flow, assisting with investment due diligence, providing industry-specific information, serving on
boards post-investment, as well as advising on operating and managerial issues post-investment.
Consistent with the earlier evidence on operational engineering, this suggests that many of the
PE investors have made meaningful investments in obtaining operating advice.
Almost 32% of the PE investors hire strategy consultants to help with operating plans.
When we combine these with the senior advisors and CEO councils, we find that 72% of the PE
investors employ an advisory board, CEO council or strategy consultants. Many employ a
combination of these. Again, this suggests that many of the PE investors have made
meaningful investments in obtaining operating advice. This is perhaps not surprising given the
growth and increased competitiveness within the industry and the expected sources of returns.

8. Concerns
In our analyses, we have assumed that the PE investor responses are accurate and
interpret the survey accordingly. The PE investors filled out the survey with the assurance that
they would not be identified and that their responses would be aggregated so they could not be
identified. Accordingly, no individual firm has any incentive to report overly positive or
otherwise inaccurate responses. Doing so will not benefit any one individual firm directly. We
recognize, however, it is possible that some PE investors might report overly positively on some

33

questions in the hope that it will cast the PE industry in a more positive light. In this section,
we discuss where we think those incentives and behaviors might affect our results.
Any reporting biases should have a minimal effect on how PE investors report the
methods they use to value companies. Whether a PE investor uses net present value or IRR
seems uncontroversial. The determinants of target IRR also seem uncontroversial. One area in
valuation where there might be some incentive to overstate is on target IRR. PE investors may
want their limited partners to believe they are targeting higher IRRs than is really the case.
The countervailing factor is that if the target IRR is overstated, limited partners ultimately will
be disappointed and the ability to continue to raise new (and potentially larger) funds may be
reduced.
We also think it unlikely that the PE investors gave biased answers to the questions on
capital structure. If anything, one might expect them to understate the extent to which they
time the market and use as much leverage as they can. Inconsistent with this, most of the PE
investors claim that debt availability and current interest rates are important considerations.
It also seems unlikely that PE investors have an incentive to give biased answers to the
questions concerning incentives and boards. Alternatively, one might argue that they have an
incentive to downplay the extent to which they replace incumbent management. To the extent
that PE investors need to partner with incumbent management, it would not be in their interest
to report that they frequently replace incumbents. Inconsistent with this incentive, the majority
of PE investors report that they bring in their own top management at some point.
The section where there is potentially an incentive to be overly positive is the section on
value creation. To the extent the PE investors want their LPs to believe that they have access
to “proprietary” deals, PE investors may have an incentive to overstate the extent to which
their deals are proprietary. Consistent with this, our PE investors do say that roughly 50% of
their investments are proprietary in some way. As mentioned above, we do not have any way
to evaluate the extent to which this is true. At the same time, however, proprietary deal

34

sourcing suggests that PE investors are able to buy low. One might expect PE investors to
have an incentive not to say they can buy low because it does not reflect operating value
creation on the part of the PE investors. In fact, the PE investors do identify buying low and
selling high as an important source of value.
To the extent that PE investors want to be known for growing their investments (and
creating jobs) rather than reducing costs (and cutting jobs), they may have an incentive to
overstate the extent to which they rely on growth and understate cost cutting.

The result that

PE investors identify increasing revenue as the most important source of value both pre- and
post-investment is potentially consistent with this. On the other hand, the fact that PE
investors identify reducing costs as more important post-investment than pre-investment is less
consistent with understating cost cutting. Again, a countervailing force here is limited partners
expect to see growth and look for that value creation.
Overall, then, while the PE investors may have some incentives to shade their survey
answers in some areas, particularly regarding deal sourcing and growth, the answers they
provided do not give us strong reasons to believe that they acted consistently on those
incentives.

9. Firm Types
The previous sections of this paper examined private equity investor practices in
financial, governance and operational engineering. The analyses consider each practice
separately. In this section, we examine the extent to which certain practices are correlated
across GPs. In doing so, we attempt to measure whether we can classify different groups of GPs
as having different strategies. Our approach is to use the grouping of answers for a given private
equity firm to extract “types” through cluster and factor analyses. We then examine how these
“types” map into our notion of operational, financial, and governance engineering. Finally, we

35

look for variation in firm founder backgrounds and how the types identified above are influenced
by the career histories of the individuals which started the various private equity organizations.

9.1. Variables
In this section, we create a variety of variables that help identify GP practices using
measures that embody financial, governance and operational engineering. In order to capture
difference in investment selection methods, we create a variable that equals one if the GP’s
primary deal evaluation measure is IRR. We create a measure of proprietary deal sourcing that
sums the fraction of deals that GPs say are self-generated, inbound from management and from
their executive network.
We create four capital structure / financial engineering variables that help us
characterize the various private equity firms. CSTIME, a variable that measures market
timing behavior, is calculated as the sum of the rankings GPs give to timing factors—“as much
as debt as the market will allow” and “current interest rates and how much the company can
pay”—as important determinants of capital structure. Similarly, CSTRADE explores marketing
timing behavior and is sum of a private equity firm’s rankings for “maximize trade-off between
tax benefits and risk of default” and “industry that the firm operates in” —as important
determinants of capital structure. We also create two variables that measure the overall
targeted debt levels that the private equity firms say the typically employ. DTCAP is simply
the typical debt to total capital ratio that the private equity manager states they seek while
DTEB measures the typical debt to EBITDA ratio.
Two variables measure management change that private equity managers engage in both
before and after the investment. First, we define a variable RECRUITB that equals one if the
GP typically recruits its own senior management team before investing. Second, we define a
variable RECRUITBA that equals one if the GP recruits its own senior management team
before or after investing.

36

The next set of variables is associated with sources of value that private equity firms say
they identify or look to provide. COSTRED measures the fraction of deals for which the GP
expects prospective cost reductions prior to the investment to be an important source of value.
REVGROW measures the fraction of deals for which the GP expects prospective revenue
growth prior to the investment to be an important source of value. CHCEO is the fraction of
deals for which the GP expects that changing the CEO will be an important source of value
prior to the investment. BUYLO is a measure of the general partners’ belief that they can
create value prospectively by purchasing a company at a low price. The variable is calculated
as the sum of the fraction of deals a GP expects that buying low, buying low relative to the
industry, or facilitating a high-value exit will be important sources of value. OPPART is simply
the fraction of deals that involve operating partners.
We also create variables that measure the factors that GPs find most important in an
investment decision. INVBUS is the sum of the ranks given to the business model and the
industry in an investment decision. INVMGMT is the rank given to the management team.
INVADDV is the rank given to the ability to add value.
Related to these, we create variables that measure the return drivers that GPs bet on.
GROWTH equals one if the GP’s top ranking is growth in the value of the business. OPIMP
equals one if the GP’s top ranking is operating improvements. MULTARB equals one if the
GP’s top ranking is industry level multiple arbitrage.
Some univariate correlations are worth noting (although they are not reported in a
table). High debt to total capital and to high debt to EBITDA are positively correlated with
capital structure timing, cost reductions and multiple arbitrage while negatively correlated with
proprietary deals, revenue growth, and investing in management. Investing in adding value is
positively correlated with operating improvements, cost reductions, operating partners, and
changing CEOs, but negatively correlated with investing in management. Recruiting a CEO
beforehand is correlated with proprietary deals, revenue growth, and buying low / selling high.

37

Finally, proprietary deals use less debt, less market timing, less cost reduction, and more
growth.

9.2. Cluster Analysis
We first use cluster analysis to divide the firms into groups that allow us to explore how
different firm characteristics co-vary. Cluster analysis groups answers in such a way that the
private equity firms within a given cluster are more similar to each other than they are to
private equity firms in other clusters. We use partition clustering which divides “the
observations into a distinct number of non-overlapping groups” (kmeans in Stata). We restrict
the sample to the 58 firms with complete data responses. We report our results with three
clusters. The results are qualitatively similar with four or five clusters.
Table 32 reports the results. The second cluster is characterized in terms of our notions
of operational, financial, and governance engineering. The firms in this cluster are more likely
to say they choose capital structure using trade-off considerations, are more likely to recruit an
outside CEO / change the CEO, are more likely to focus on operating improvements including
cost reductions and revenue growth, and are more likely to use operating partners. Many of
these differences are statistically significant (in univariate tests) between clusters 1 and 2. In
sum, cluster 2 firms seem to say that they focus more heavily on implementing operating
improvements and bringing in new management.
Cluster 1 includes firms that say they engage in the most financial engineering and least
operational engineering. They are less likely to use capital structure tradeoffs, less likely to
mention adding value, operating improvements, cost reductions and operating partners, and are
more likely to buy low and sell high. The firms in this cluster also tend to be smaller than those
in the other two clusters. Firms in the first cluster also tend to give their management teams a
larger equity stake in the business. The third cluster is intermediate between the first two on
financial and operational engineering.

38

9.3. Factor Analysis
As an alternative to cluster analysis, we use factor analysis to extract the main
dimensions of variation in the characteristics of our sample firms. In factor analysis, one seeks
to identify correlations among observed variables in terms of underlying unobserved factors of a
smaller dimension. Essentially, factor analysis models the observed variables as a function of
the unobserved factors.
Table 33 reports the factor loadings. The first three factors explain almost two-thirds of
the variance in the data and have natural interpretations. The first factor has positive loadings
on debt levels, operating improvements, cost reductions, operating partners and adding value
and negative loadings on growth, revenue growth, proprietary deal and investing in the business.
As with the cluster analysis, this suggests that some firms focus on operating improvements
while others focus on buying good businesses where they have some proprietary sourcing
advantage.

The second factor has its highest positive loadings on changing the CEO, recruiting

a CEO before the deal closes while having negative loadings on investing in management and
operating improvements. This suggests a strong tendency for firms to differ in the extent to
which they invest in new management versus incumbent. The third factor has high positive
loadings on debt levels, capital structure timing and assets under management while having
negative loadings on adding value and operating improvements. This suggests a factor that is
operating improvements versus financial engineering.
Both the cluster analysis and the factor analysis appear to divide firms into those that
have a focus on operating improvements versus financial engineering and those that have a focus
on investing in new management versus the incumbent. These results provide one expected and
one unexpected result. First, we do not find it surprising that private equity firms pursue
strategies that are largely based on financial engineering and others pursue strategies based on
operational engineering. In the next section, we explore whether these differences result from

39

variation in the career history of the private equity firm founders. The different firm strategies
towards incumbent management, however, are surprising. The importance of people and
incentive alignment has been well established within the private equity industry. What has not
been explored are the distinctive approaches to solving these people issues. Future research
should explore the effectiveness of these various approaches.

10. Founder Types and Firm Types.
In this section, we consider whether PE firm strategies are related to the characteristics
of the founding general partners. We classify the founding general partners of each of the PE
firms in our sample. In our sample of firms, we gathered information on the identity of firm
founders from the private firms’ web pages or news articles. Education and career histories were
then gathered from the same sources or via LinkedIn.
A founding general partner is classified as “financial” if the GP worked in investment
banking, commercial banking, investment management, or had previously been a chief financial
officer. We “Operational” GPs are those founders that had prior work history in consulting,
operations, or general management. Finally, we classify a founding general partners has having
a “private equity” background if the GP came from another PE or venture capital firm prior to
founding this one. For each firm, we calculate the average background of the firm by simply
classifying the fraction of founders with each type of career history. We then perform a cluster
analysis on those three variables (fraction of each career history) and classify 27 firms as having
a finance background, 25 firms as having an operational background, and 9 firms as having a
private equity background.
In Table 34 we explore how these types relate to specific strategies. Private equity firms
founded by financial general partners appear more likely to favor financial engineering and
investing with current management. Private equity firms that have founders with private
equity experience appear to be the most strongly engaged in operational engineering. They are

40

more likely to invest with the intention of adding value, to invest in the business, to look for
operating improvements, to change the CEO after the deal, and to reduce costs. Firms founded
by general partners with operational backgrounds have investment strategies that fall in
between the other two groups.
These results, while preliminary, do seem to indicate that career histories of firm
founders have persistent effects on private equity firm strategy. This result is similar to the
work of Bertrand and Schoar (2003) that demonstrate persistent effects of senior management in
organizations they lead in terms of firm strategy. The strategies identified for private equity
firms clearly aligns with the firm founders careers. While these results are rather preliminary,
future research should explore whether investments that align with the “strength” of the firm
founders do better or worse in the long-run than do investments that deviate from these
“strengths.”

11. Conclusion
Over the past decade, academic finance has explored the impact of PE firms in a number
of areas by examining sometimes limited sets of data. In this paper, we attempt to highlight
the impact of PE investors utilizing different data. We report what PE investors say they do
by tabulating the results of a survey of PE investing practices. Because PE investors are highly
educated, have strong incentives to maximize value, and have been very successful, it seems
likely that their practices also have been successful. In particular, we are interested in how
many of their responses correlate with what academic finance knows and what it teaches. Do
private equity investors do what the academy says are “best practices?”
We find that very few investors use DCF or net present value techniques to evaluate
investments, contrary to what one might expect. Rather, they rely on internal rates of return
and multiples of invested capital. This contrasts with the results in Graham and Harvey
(2001) who find that CFOs use net present values as often as internal rates of return.

41

The

result also conflicts with the focus on net present value in most business school finance courses.
Furthermore, few PE investors use the capital asset price model to determine a cost of capital.
Instead, PE investors typically target a return on their investments well above a CAPM-based
rate. Target IRRs also seem to be adjusted by different PE firms utilizing different factors.
Hence, it seems likely that PE firms will have different target IRRs for the same deals.
The fact that they do not use DCF techniques is interesting. It may indicate that IRR
and MOIC techniques are sufficiently robust or effective that DCF techniques are not necessary.
Alternatively, it may indicate some practical deficiency with DCF techniques, especially in the
private equity setting where fund structures limit investment horizons and there is considerable
asymmetric information between general and limited partners. These settings may make
managing via IRR-based investment decisions better.
The fact that PE investors target returns that exceed CAPM-based returns is consistent
with their believing that they add meaningful value to their investments and that they need to
do so in order to generate their compensation. As the industry becomes more competitive, it
will be interesting to see if target hurdle rates come down.
We also find that PE investors believe that absolute, not relative performance is most
important to their LP investors. The focus on absolute performance is notable given the intense
focus on relative performance or alphas for public market investments. There are two possible
explanations for this. First, LPs, particularly pension funds, may focus on absolute returns
because their liabilities are absolute. Alternatively, the chief investment officers of the LPs
choose a private equity allocation based on relative performance, but the professionals who
make the investment decisions care about absolute performance or performance relative to other
PE firms. We believe that the advent of greater dissemination of risk-based performance
benchmarks like PMEs is likely to affect the view of limited partners and potentially trickle
back down to the private equity general partners.

42

In choosing the capital structures for their portfolio companies, PE investors appear to
rely equally on factors that are consistent with capital structure trade-off theories and those
that are consistent with market timing. Again, these results are somewhat different from those
for the CFOs in Graham and Harvey (2001). The market timing result is consistent with the
results in the finding in AJSW (2013). This result is arguably favorable both to the traditional
instruction at business schools and to the more recent advances in behavioral finance.
PE investors expect to provide strong equity incentives to their management teams and
believe those incentives are very important. They also structure smaller board of investors with
a mix of insiders, PE investors and outsiders.
Finally, PE investors say they place a heavy emphasis on adding value to their portfolio
companies, both before and after they invest. The sources of that added value, in order of
importance, are increasing revenue, improving incentives and governance, facilitating a highvalue exit or sale, making additional acquisitions, replacing management and reducing costs.
Consistent with adding operational value, the PE investors make meaningful investments in
employees and advisors who provide advice and help in implementing operating improvements.
While we recognize that it is possible that some PE investors might report overly
positively on some questions in the hope that it will cast the PE industry in a more positive
light, particularly in some aspects of deal sourcing and value creation, the answers they
provided do not give us strong reasons to believe that they have a meaningful impact on our
findings and conclusions.
We finish with exploratory analyses to consider how financial, governance and
operational engineering practices covary within PE firms. The analyses suggest that different
firms take very different strategies. For example, some focus much more heavily on operational
engineering while others rely heavily on replacing incumbent management. These investment
strategies are strongly influenced by the career histories of the private equity firm founders. It

43

will be interesting (and, with these data, possible) to see which of these strategies, if any,
exhibit superior performance in the future.

44

References
Acharya, V., Gottschalg, O., Hahn, M., Kehoe, C., 2013. Corporate governance and value creation:
evidence from private equity. Review of Financial Studies 26, 368–402.
Ang, A., Chen, B., Goetzmann, W., Phalippou, L., 2013. Estimating private equity returns from limited
partner cash flows. Unpublished working paper. Columbia University.
Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Strömberg, P., Weisbach, M., 2013. Borrow cheap, buy high? The
determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts. Journal of Finance 68, 2223–2267.
Axelson, U., Sorensen, M., Strömberg, P., 2013. The alpha and beta of buyout deals. Unpublished
working paper. LSE.
Baker, G., 1992. Beatrice: a study in the creation and destruction of value. Journal of Finance 47, 1081–
1119.
Baker, G., Wruck, K., 1989. Organizational changes and value creation in leveraged buyouts: the case of
the O.M. Scott & Sons Company. Journal of Financial Economics 25, 163–190.
Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2002. Market timing and capital structure. Journal of Finance 57, 1–32.
Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on firm policies. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.
Brav, A., Graham, J., Harvey, C., Michaely, M., 2005. Payout policy in the 21st century. Journal of
Financial Economics 77, 483–527.
Brealey, R., Myers, S., Allen, F., 2013. Principles of Corporate Finance. McGraw Hill, New York.
Chung J., Sensoy B., Stern L., Weisbach M., 2012. Pay for performance from future fund flows: the case
of private equity. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3259–3304.
Cohn J., Mills, L., Towery, E., 2014. The evolution of capital structure and operating performance after
leveraged buyouts: evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns. Journal of Financial Economics 111, 469–
494.
Cohn J., Towery, E., 2013. The determinants and consequences of private equity buyouts of private firms:
evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns. Unpublished working paper. University of Texas.
Coles, J., Daniel, N., Naveen, L., 2008. Boards: does one size fit all? Journal of Financial Economics 87,
329–356.
Da Rin, M., Phalippou, L., 2014. There is something special about large investors: evidence from a survey
of private equity limited partners. Unpublished working paper. University of Oxford.
Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., Miranda, J., 2014. Private Equity, Jobs,
and Productivity. American Economic Review 104, 3956–3990.

45

Fama, E., Jensen, M., 1983. Separation of ownership and control. Journal of Law and Economics 26, 301–
325.
Gompers, P., Ishii, J., Metrick, A., 2003. Corporate governance and equity prices. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118, 107–156.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1999. An analysis of compensation in the US venture capital partnership. Journal
of Financial Economics 51, 3–44.
Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the field.
Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187–243.
Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E., Song, W., 2011. Do buyouts (still) create value? Journal of Finance 66, 479–511.
Harris, R., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S., 2014. Private equity performance: what do we know? Journal of
Finance 69, 1851–1882.
Hermalin, B., Weisbach, M., 1998. Endogenously chosen boards of directors and their monitoring of the
CEO. American Economic Review 88, 96–118.
Higson, C., Stucke, R., 2012. The performance of private equity. Unpublished working paper. London
Business School.
Jensen, M., 1986. Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. American Economic
Review 76, 323–329.
Jensen, M., 1989. Eclipse of the public corporation. Harvard Business Review 67, 61–74.
Jensen, M., Meckling, W., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs, and ownership
structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.
Jensen, M., Murphy, K., 1990. Performance pay and top-management incentives. Journal of Political
Economy 98, 225–264.
Kaplan, S., 1989. The effects of management buyouts on operating and value. Journal of Financial
Economics 24, 217–254.
Kaplan, S., 1997. The evolution of US corporate governance: we are all Henry Kravis now. Journal of
Private Equity 1, 7–14.
Kaplan, S., Sensoy, B., Strömberg, P., 2009. Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse? Evidence
from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies. Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.
Kaplan, S., Strömberg, P., 2009. Leveraged buyouts and private equity. Journal of Economic Perspectives
23, 121–146.
Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., 2010. The economics of private equity funds. Review of Financial Studies 23,
2303–2341.
Myers, S., 1977. Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics 5, 145–175.

46

Myers, S., 1984. The capital structure puzzle. Journal of Finance 39, 575–592.
Page, B., 2011. CEO ownership and firm value: evidence from a structural estimation. Unpublished
working Paper, University of Rochester.
Robinson, D., Sensoy, B., 2013. Do private equity fund managers earn their fees? Compensation,
ownership, and cash flow performance. Review of Financial Studies 26, 2760–2797.
Strömberg, P., 2008. The new demography of private equity. In: Globalization of Alternative Investment
Working Papers Volume 1, The Global Economic Impact of Private Equity Report 2008, World Economic
Forum, pp. 3-26.

47

Table 1: PE Firm Respondents
Assets under management (AUM), performance of most recent fund (if available), and age of each private
equity firm in the sample as of December 2012 from Preqin. Information on firms not covered by Preqin
is taken from firm websites and in the media. We also use the results of the current survey to determine
office locations of firms in the sample.
Variable

N

Mean

25th Perc.

Median

75th Perc.

St. Dev.

AUM ($m)

79

9,548.6

750.0

3,400.0

11,000.0

15,021.1

IRR over Benchmark (%)

58

2.7

-3.9

0.9

6.9

11.8

Multiple (x)

58

1.3

1.2

1.3

1.5

0.3

Age (years)

79

19.5

12.0

19.0

26.0

10.5

Firms with
Office(s) only in the US

44

Office(s) outside the US

35

Table 2: Enterprise Value
Enterprise Value of portfolio companies of private equity investors. Question is “what fraction of the
companies you invest in have the Total Enterprise Value within the following ranges?” Sample divided by
high or low AUM, IRR of most recent fund, age of PE investor, and whether PE investor has a global
presence.
Mean Median

AUM
Low
High

IRR
Low
High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

< US$25m

11.8

0.0

19.0

5.5

***

4.4

9.4

6.2

16.1 **

16.2

6.3

US$25m - US$100m

26.3

10.0

44.4

10.4 ***

16.8

23.5

20.1

31.0

33.4

17.5 **

US$100m - US$500m

28.7

22.0

28.6

28.8

29.3

31.9

31.4

26.6

27.6

30.1

US$500m - $1b

16.8

10.0

5.2

27.0 ***

22.0

19.8

19.4

14.9

12.7

21.9 **

> US$1b

16.4

0.0

2.8

28.3 ***

27.4

15.3

22.9

11.4 **

10.2

24.1 **

79

79

37

29

29

34

Number of responses

42

45

44

**

35

Table 3: Type of Investments
Types of investments considered by PE investors.
Mean

AUM
Low
High

IRR
Low
High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

LBOs

90.1

82.9

97.2 **

92.3

96.2

93.9

86.8

92.7

86.7

Growth equity

73.2

74.3

72.2

65.4

73.1

69.7

76.3

73.2

73.3

Distress

29.6

17.1

41.7 **

26.9

34.6

30.3

28.9

19.5

43.3 **

PIPEs

32.4

20.0

44.4 **

38.5

38.5

45.5

21.1 **

31.7

33.3

Other

8.5

8.6

8.3

3.8

7.7

9.1

7.9

7.3

10.0

Number of responses

71

35

36

26

26

33

38

41

30

48

Table 4: PE Individual Respondents
Title of individual filling out survey.
Mean

AUM
Low
High

IRR
Low
High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

General Partner / Director

25.3

21.6

28.6

31.0

31.0

32.4

20.0

25.0

25.7

Managing Partner

22.8

35.1

11.9 **

13.8

20.7

20.6

24.4

29.5

14.3

Managing Director

29.1

18.9

38.1

37.9

20.7

26.5

31.1

22.7

37.1

CFO

3.8

5.4

2.4

3.4

6.9

2.9

4.4

6.8

0.0

Other

19.0

18.9

19.0

13.8

20.7

17.6

20.0

15.9

22.9

79

37

42

29

29

34

45

44

35

Number of responses

Table 5a: Deal Evaluation Metrics
The percentage of deals PE investors use different methods to evaluate an investment.
Mean

AUM
Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Gross IRR

92.7

100.0

88.5

97.0

99.9

96.9

100.0

86.4 **

94.2

90.5

Multiple of invested capital

94.8

100.0

92.1

97.7

99.1

93.3

96.1

93.7

95.5

93.8

Adjusted Present Value (APV) DCF

9.3

0.0

7.1

11.5

9.3

7.3

3.9

13.9

10.5

7.6

WACC-based DCF

10.9

0.0

9.3

12.5

5.5

15.2

8.9

12.5

9.4

12.9

Comparable company EBITDA multiples

71.7

100.0

71.4

72.1

63.0

90.7 **

75.9

68.1

76.7

64.8

Free cash flow return to equity

43.8

33.0

29.7

58.3 *** 45.2

43.7

44.4

43.2

40.7

48.1

Other

13.8

0.0

10.3

17.4

7.0

21.7

12.1

15.3

8.3

21.4

67

67

34

33

25

23

31

36

39

28

Number of responses

Table 5b: Deal Evaluation Methods
The average ranking of different methods PE investors use to evaluate an investment, where 10 is the
highest and 1 is the lowest.
Mean

AUM
Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Accounting Rate of Return

0.6

0.0

0.9

0.2

0.7

0.7

0.5

0.7

0.6

0.5

Adjusted Present Value

0.9

0.0

0.6

1.2

0.6

0.8

0.5

1.3

0.8

1.0

Discounted Payback Period

1.7

0.0

1.7

1.6

1.3

1.3

1.3

1.9

1.9

1.3

Earnings Multiple Approach

6.1

8.0

6.0

6.1

5.5

6.2

5.4

6.7

6.1

6.1

Hurdle Rate

3.6

0.0

3.7

3.5

4.4

2.0 **

3.4

3.8

3.7

3.5

Internal Rate of Return

9.2

10.0

9.0

9.4

9.8

9.1

9.5

9.0

8.9

9.6

Net Present Value

2.8

0.0

2.1

3.4

3.7

2.0

2.5

3.0

2.4

3.3

Payback Period

2.4

0.0

2.4

2.4

2.1

2.1

2.5

2.3

2.8

1.7

Profitability Index

0.9

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.3

0.3

1.5 **

0.5

1.4

Other

2.1

0.0

2.5

1.6

2.2

2.8

2.3

1.9

1.9

2.3

Number of responses

67

67

34

33

25

23

31

36

39

28

49

Table 6: Discount to Management EBITDA Forecasts
The discount PE investors normally take to management’s EBITDA in their pro forma models.
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.2

44

27

17

15

14

20

24

29

15

Mean

Median

Discount to management’s EBITDA

0.2

Number of responses

44

Offices
Local Global

Table 7a: Terminal Value Calculation
The fraction of deals PE investors you use to calculate the exit value or terminal value of the model.
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

100.0

75.3

87.7

81.3

88.6

87.3

76.3

78.2

85.8

71.4

99.0

67.8

75.0

73.2

80.3

79.5

64.4

76.1

64.8

DCF-based growing perpetuity

27.3

10.0

20.5

34.3

28.1

16.4

26.6

27.9

21.0

36.0

Other

25.6

0.0

33.5

17.4

20.7

31.1

22.8

27.9

28.7

21.3

67

67

34

33

25

23

31

36

39

28

Mean

Median

Comparable companies

81.4

Comparable transactions

Number of responses

Table 7b: Comparable Company Selection
Determinants of selection of comparable companies for multiples valuation and/or exit value?
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Industry

96.9

96.9

97.0

95.8

100.0

100.0

94.1

94.6

100.0

Riskiness

49.2

34.4

63.6 **

54.2

56.5

45.2

52.9

48.6

50.0

Size

84.6

87.5

81.8

87.5

87.0

90.3

79.4

86.5

82.1

Growth

73.8

75.0

72.7

79.2

69.6

77.4

70.6

75.7

71.4

Margins

66.2

59.4

72.7

83.3

65.2

67.7

64.7

62.2

71.4

Capital intensity

52.3

31.3

72.7 ***

62.5

52.2

51.6

52.9

51.4

53.6

Geography

56.9

43.8

69.7 **

58.3

69.6

67.7

47.1

48.6

67.9

Other

4.6

6.3

3.0

4.2

8.7

3.2

5.9

8.1

0.0

Do not use comparables

3.1

3.1

3.0

4.2

0.0

0.0

5.9

5.4

0.0

Number of responses

65

32

33

24

23

31

34

37

28

50

Table 8a: IRR
The target value of gross IRR used by PE investors.

Gross IRR Target
Number of responses

AUM
Low
High

Mean

Median

27.0

25.0

30.0

24.1

62

62

31

31

**

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

24.5

24.9

24.8

29.3

25.7

28.9

24

22

31

31

36

26

Table 8b: IRR Determinants
The variables that PE investors use to adjust their gross IRR target.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Firm’s riskiness

86.2

84.4

87.9

91.7

91.3

90.3

82.4

91.9

78.6

Leverage

47.7

40.6

54.5

58.3

52.2

51.6

44.1

54.1

39.3

Historical return expectations of LPs

30.8

40.6

21.2

20.8

30.4

22.6

38.2

37.8

21.4

Other

9.2

6.3

12.1

8.3

17.4

16.1

2.9

10.8

7.1

N/A

4.6

6.3

3.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

8.8

2.7

7.1

Number of responses

65

32

33

24

23

31

34

37

28

Table 8c: IRR Determinants / Adjustments
The fraction of deals that PE investors adjust cash flows or the IRR to reflect different risks.
Mean

AUM
Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Risk of Unexpected Inflation

17.7

0.0

8.2

26.9 **

26.0

13.9

21.2

14.5

12.2

25.0

Interest Rate Risk

25.5

2.0

22.6

28.3

33.5

26.5

26.3

24.8

26.3

24.5

Term Structure Risk

18.5

0.0

16.6

20.3

14.9

26.9

22.9

14.4

13.5

25.0

GDP or Business Cycle Risk

55.0

50.0

47.8

61.9

63.6

55.7

59.4

51.0

54.2

56.0

Commodity Price Risk

28.8

21.0

22.8

34.7

35.5

27.1

30.6

27.2

28.0

29.9

Foreign Exchange Risk

20.2

10.0

15.7

24.5

25.6

16.6

23.5

17.1

12.9

29.8 ***

Distress risk

13.0

0.0

8.7

17.2

13.8

11.9

17.2

9.1

9.0

18.2

Size

28.6

10.0

31.8

25.5

25.1

25.5

22.9

33.8

31.1

25.3

Market-to-Book ratio

7.5

0.0

5.3

9.6

9.3

5.6

7.4

7.6

6.6

8.6

Momentum

11.8

0.0

9.6

13.9

17.0

10.3

18.9

5.4 **

12.9

10.4

Illiquidity

20.3

0.0

22.2

18.5

19.8

6.8

15.2

25.0

15.8

26.3

Other

1.4

0.0

2.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

2.6

2.4

0.0

Number of responses

65

65

32

33

24

23

31

34

37

28

Table 9: MOIC
The target value of gross MOIC used by PE investors.
Mean
Multiple
Number of responses

AUM
Median Low High

2.85

2.50

3.16

62

62

31

2.54 **
31

51

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

2.51

2.56

2.50

2.98

2.67

24

21

28

36

26

3.14 **
34

Table 10: Benchmark for LPs
The most important benchmark for the limited partners (LPs) investing in the private equity investors.
Net indicates net of all fees.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Net IRR

25.4

29.0

21.9

27.3 21.7

26.7

24.2

22.2

29.6

Net IRR vs. S&P

7.9

6.5

9.4

9.1

4.3

10.0

6.1

8.3

7.4

Net IRR with respect to fund vintage year

27.0

19.4

34.4

27.3 43.5

40.0

15.2 ** 33.3

18.5

Net Multiple / Cash-on-Cash

38.1

45.2

31.3

31.8 30.4

20.0

54.5 *** 33.3

44.4

IRR of other GPs

1.6

0.0

3.1

4.5

0.0

3.3

0.0

2.8

0.0

Number of responses

63

31

32

22

23

30

33

36

27

Table 11: Net IRR marketed to LPs.
The typical IRR that private equity investors market to their LPs.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

0 - 5%

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

5 - 10%

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10 - 15%

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

15 - 20%

15.6

18.8

12.5

13.0

13.0

23.3

8.8

18.9

11.1

20 - 25%

50.0

40.6

59.4

65.2

47.8

53.3

47.1

45.9

55.6

25 - 30%

23.4

25.0

21.9

21.7

30.4

20.0

26.5

24.3

22.2

> 30%

10.9

15.6

6.3

0.0

8.7

3.3

17.6

10.8

11.1

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Number of responses

Table 12: Capital Structure at Closing
The typical capital structure at closing for private equity portfolio companies measures as debt-to-totalcapital and debt-to-EBITDA.
Mean

AUM
Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Debt-to-Capital Ratio

55.7%

60.0% 54.3% 57.2%

56.6% 56.9%

55.0% 56.4%

55.0% 56.8%

Number of responses

62

62

31

31

22

23

30

32

37

25

Debt-to-EBITDA Ratio

3.9

4.0

3.6

4.2 **

4.1

4.2

4.2

3.6 **

3.8

4.1

Number of responses

60

60

31

29

22

21

29

31

36

24

52

Table 13a: Capital Structure Factors Considered Important
Factors that PE investors consider in determining how much debt to raise for a transaction.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Ability of debt to force operational improvements

39.1

31.3 46.9

39.1 30.4

33.3 44.1

29.7 51.9

As much as market will allow

65.6

65.6 65.6

65.2 69.6

73.3 58.8

62.2 70.4

Current interest rates and how much the company can pay

95.3

93.8 96.9

95.7 95.7

96.7 94.1

97.3 92.6

Industry that the firm operates in

96.9

93.8 100.0

95.7 95.7

93.3 100.0

97.3 96.3

Maximize trade-off between tax benefits and risk of default

67.2

59.4 75.0

65.2 78.3

66.7 67.6

64.9 70.4

Other

35.9

40.6 31.3

17.4 52.2 **

36.7 35.3

43.2 25.9

Number of responses

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Table 13b: Capital Structure Factors Ranked
Rank of factors that PE investors consider important in determining how much debt to raise for a
transaction where a higher number means it is a more important factor.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
LocalGlobal

Ability of debt to force operational improvements

1.3

0.0

1.1

1.6

1.0

1.2

1.1

1.5

0.9

1.9 **

As much as market will allow

2.5

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.7

2.8

2.3

2.5

2.6

Current interest rates and how much the company can pay

5.0

5.0

4.7

5.3

5.1

4.9

5.0

4.9

4.9

5.0

Industry that the firm operates in

4.5

5.0

4.4

4.5

4.7

4.0

4.3

4.6

4.5

4.4

Maximize trade-off between tax benefits and risk of default

2.5

3.0

2.4

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.5

2.6

2.5

2.5

Other

1.8

0.0

2.1

1.4

0.8

2.7 ** 1.8

1.8

2.1

1.3

Number of responses

64

64

32

32

23

23

34

37

27

30

Table 14:
The typical equity ownership of private equity investors, the CEO, and top management.
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

85.0

74.9

84.3 **

82.7

83.6

82.9

76.6

81.2

77.3

5.0

10.0

6.0

7.1

6.1

7.8

8.2

6.9

9.5

7.2

7.0

8.1

6.3 **

7.1

6.9

7.0

7.3

7.6

6.6

1.8

0.0

1.1

2.4

3.0

0.9

1.7

1.8

1.3

2.5

Other

3.5

0.0

6.0

1.1 **

0.1

2.6

0.6

6.1 **

3.0

4.3

Number of responses

64

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Mean

Median

PE investors

79.6

CEO

8.0

Top 10 Management (excluding CEO)
Other employees

53

Table 15a: Board of Directors Size
Desired size of board of directors of private equity investors.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

3 or less

3.1

3.1

3.1

8.7

0.0

3.3

2.9

0.0

7.4

4

1.6

3.1

0.0

0.0

4.3

0.0

2.9

2.7

0.0

5

32.8

40.6

25.0

21.7

30.4

23.3

41.2

37.8

25.9

6

10.9

12.5

9.4

21.7

8.7

20.0

2.9

10.8

11.1

7

46.9

37.5

56.3

39.1

52.2

46.7

47.1

**

43.2

51.9

8

3.1

0.0

6.3

8.7

0.0

3.3

2.9

2.7

3.7

9

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10

1.6

3.1

0.0

0.0

4.3

3.3

0.0

2.7

0.0

11 or more

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Number of responses

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Table 15b: Board of Directors Composition
Desired composition of board of directors of private equity investors.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

Inside directors

1.6

1.0

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.5

1.5

1.6

1.5

1.7

PE directors

2.8

3.0

2.7

2.9

2.8

2.9

2.8

2.7

2.7

2.8

Outside directors

1.7

2.0

1.6

1.9

1.9

1.7

1.9

1.6

1.8

1.6

Other

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Number of responses

64

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Table 16: Private Equity Involvement in Portfolio Companies
The fraction of deals in which the private equity investors become involved in the management of
portfolio companies, i.e., actively advising the company on strategic choices.
AUM
Mean Median Low High
% of deals
Number of responses

IRR
Low High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

87.5

100.0

84.8

90.1

81.3

90.2

85.2

89.5

83.0

93.6

64

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

54

Table 17: Private Equity Recruitment of Management Teams
Percentage of private equity investors who recruit their own senior management teams before investing,
after investing, and before or after investing.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Before Investing
Yes

31.3

31.3

31.3

26.1

39.1

30.0

32.4

29.7

33.3

No

68.8

68.8

68.8

73.9

60.9

70.0

67.6

70.3

66.7

Yes

50.0

40.6

59.4

43.5

52.2

50.0

50.0

37.8

66.7 **

No

50.0

59.4

40.6

56.5

47.8

50.0

50.0

62.2

33.3 **

Yes

57.8

53.1

62.5

47.8

63.4

56.7

58.1

48.6

70.4

No

42.2

46.9

37.5

52.2

36.6

43.3

41.9

51.4

29.6

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

After Investing

Before or After Investing

Number of responses

Table 18: Private Equity Replacement of CEOs After Investing
The percentage of deals in which the private equity investor replaces the CEO after the investment is
made.
AUM
Mean Median Low High
% of deals with the CEO swapped out
Number of responses

33.3

30.0

64

64

30.3 36.3
32

32

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

27.9

37.3

27.7

38.2

32.0

35.0

23

23

30

34

37

27

Table 19: Deal Funnel
Percentage of opportunities considered by PE investors reaching different stages.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

All considered opportunities

100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

Review with partner group / investment committee

61.8

50.0

56.9 66.6

65.8 61.3

63.0 60.8

56.5

Meet management

52.8

40.0

38.1 67.0 *** 58.5 53.2

62.2 44.5 *** 42.0

67.5 ***

Limited due diligence

49.1

40.0

35.2 62.6 *** 56.7 46.5

59.1 40.4 *** 42.5

58.1 **

69.2

Deep due diligence

23.7

20.0

16.3 30.9 *** 29.0 21.2

29.5 18.7 *** 19.1

30.0 ***

Offer term sheet / negotiate detailed terms

22.5

19.0

14.4 30.3 *** 25.7 22.9

27.1 18.5

16.2

31.1 ***

Sign LOI

13.6

8.0

9.1 17.9 *** 15.2 11.0

14.5 12.8

8.0

21.2 ***

Close

6.1

4.0

4.0

8.1 *** 7.0

5.4

7.3

5.0 **

4.1

8.8 ***

Number of responses

71

71

35

36

26

33

38

41

30

55

26

Table 20: Deal Sources
Percentage of PE investor closed deals identified from different sources and percentage of closed deals PE
investors consider proprietary
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

30.0

37.7

33.5

39.3

35.5

35.8 35.4

35.3

35.9

25.0

30.5

36.0

33.0

37.0

38.2 29.1

33.0

33.7

Mean

Median

Proactively self-generated

35.6

Investment bank generated

33.3

Inbound from management

7.4

5.0

5.8

8.9

6.1

9.0

7.4

7.3

7.2

7.6

Other PE firm

4.3

0.0

5.4

3.3

4.1

2.2

4.1

4.5

5.0

3.5

Deal brokers

8.6

0.0

9.5

7.7

6.8

7.1

8.4

8.7

8.7

8.5

Executive network

8.6

5.0

8.3

9.0

8.8

8.5

4.6

12.1 ***

9.1

8.0

LPs / Investors

1.7

0.0

2.5

0.9

0.6

0.7

0.4

2.7

1.2

2.3

Conferences

0.6

0.0

0.3

0.9

1.0

0.3

1.1

0.3

0.5

0.8

Other

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.0

% of closed deals considered proprietary

47.9

50.0

54.0

41.9 ** 48.0

43.9

41.5 53.4

47.6

48.3

71

71

35

41

30

Number of responses

36

26

26

33

38

Table 21: Deal Selection
Ranking of factors considered by PE investors in choosing investments (with higher numbers more
important).
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

3.0

3.6

3.6

3.9

3.5

3.5

3.7

3.5

3.8

4.6

5.0

4.5

4.7

4.5

4.5

4.4

4.7

4.6

4.5

Fit with Fund

2.3

2.0

2.7

1.9

2.0

2.2

2.2

2.4

2.5

2.0

Industry / Market

3.2

3.0

3.4

3.0

3.3

3.0

3.3

3.1

3.5

2.8

Management team

3.8

4.0

3.7

4.0

3.9

4.0

4.1

3.6

3.8

3.8

Valuation

3.5

3.0

3.2

3.8

3.4

3.8

3.5

3.5

3.0

4.1 ***

Number of responses

65

65

32

33

24

23

31

34

37

28

Mean

Median

Ability to add value

3.6

Business model / Competitive position

Offices
Local Global

Table 22a: Return driver importance
The percentage of PE investors mention return drivers that they bet on in making investments.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Growth in the value of the underlying business

100.0

100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

100.0 100.0

Industry-level multiple arbitrage

64.8

74.3

55.6

50.0 65.4

66.7 63.2

61.0

70.0

Leverage

76.1

68.6

83.3

65.4 88.5 ** 81.8 71.1

73.2

80.0

Operational improvements

97.2

94.3

100.0

100.0 96.2

100.0 94.7

95.1

100.0

Refinancing

36.6

28.6

44.4

34.6 42.3

45.5 28.9

29.3

46.7

Other

26.8

28.6

25.0

23.1 19.2

21.2 31.6

31.7

20.0

71

35

36

41

30

Number of responses

56

26

26

33

38

Offices
Local Global

Table 22b: Return driver ranking
The return drivers that PE investors bet on in making investments ranked in order of importance (from
high to low).
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Growth in the value of the underlying business

5.7

6.0

5.8

5.7

5.9

5.5 ** 5.7

5.7

5.8

5.6

Industry-level multiple arbitrage

2.4

3.0

2.8

2.1

1.9

2.4

2.3

2.6

2.1

2.9

Leverage

2.6

3.0

2.4

2.8

2.3

3.2

3.0

2.2 **

2.5

2.7

Operational improvements

4.6

5.0

4.5

4.7

4.9

4.6

4.7

4.5

4.5

4.7

Refinancing

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.3

0.9

1.3

1.2

0.9

0.9

1.2

Other

1.1

0.0

1.2

1.0

0.7

0.8

0.8

1.3

1.3

0.8

Number of responses

71

71

35

36

26

26

33

38

41

30

Table 23: Pre-Investment (expected) sources of value creation
The percentage of deals that PE investors identify having the following pre-deal sources of value.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Reduce costs in general

35.6

27.5

35.8

35.5

37.1 37.3

39.9

32.0

31.0

41.8

Improve IT / Information Systems

26.1

20.0

30.8

21.6

22.0 23.3

23.9

28.0

26.7

25.3

Introduce shared services

15.6

2.5

16.4

14.9

11.6 18.3

16.9

14.6

14.9

16.6

Increase revenue / improve demand factors

70.3

80.0

77.5

63.5 ** 75.0 63.5

67.0

73.2

70.6

70.0

Redefine the current business model or strategy

33.8

29.5

27.8

39.5

43.0 29.8

32.1

35.3

32.8

35.2

Change CEO or CFO

30.6

27.5

33.4

28.0

29.2 32.9

30.9

30.4

29.3

32.4

Change senior management team other than
CEO and CFO

33.4

30.0

37.3

29.7

32.5 33.1

27.9

38.1

35.4

30.8

Improve corporate governance

47.0

37.0

52.4

41.9

40.1 45.5

39.4

53.5

47.3

46.6

Improve incentives

61.1

73.5

60.7

61.5

58.3 67.0

65.5

57.4

59.0

63.9

Follow-on acquisitions

51.1

50.0

53.9

48.4

52.0 46.9

51.0

51.2

53.2

48.3

Strategic investor

15.6

10.0

16.4

14.8

12.3 14.0

14.4

16.5

15.1

16.2

Facilitate a high-value exit

50.0

43.5

61.0

39.6 ** 45.6 42.0

40.4

58.1 **

53.5

45.4

Purchase at an attractive price (buy low)

44.3

43.0

49.2

39.6

38.2 43.3

40.9

47.1

44.9

43.5

Purchase at an attractive price relative to the
industry

46.6

50.0

54.5

39.2 ** 38.7 47.3

42.9

49.8

50.1

42.0

Other

9.8

0.0

9.4

10.2

0.0 14.3 **

9.4

10.1

12.4

6.4

Number of responses

74

74

36

38

27

34

40

42

32

27

Table 24: Pre-Investment Value Creators
Percentage of deals that each of the following groups actively participates in identifying pre-deal value.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Old

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

Deal team

97.7

100.0

96.9

98.4

97.7

99.2

98.4

97.0

97.9

97.4

Operating partners

45.3

40.5

44.9

45.7

46.9

46.3

40.5

49.4

41.6

50.2

Outside consultants

36.8

26.5

27.9

45.1 **

35.0

45.3

42.1

32.2

35.0

39.0

Other

7.2

0.0

8.9

5.5

5.1

5.2

4.1

9.8

8.8

5.0

Number of responses

74

74

36

38

27

27

34

40

42

32

57

Table 25: Post-Investment (expected) sources of value creation
The percentage of deals that PE investors identify having the following post-deal sources of value and
difference from pre-deal sources of value.
AUM

IRR

Age

Offices

Low High

Low High

Old Young

Local Global

Mean

Median

∆ from
Pre

Reduce costs in general

47.4

48.5

11.7

46.1

48.5

46.5 51.2

52.1 43.3

40.2

56.8 **

Improve IT / Information Systems

33.5

28.0

7.4

36.4

30.6

29.7 35.3

31.0 35.5

32.8

34.3

Introduce shares services

21.9

10.0

6.3

18.5

25.2

21.9 24.0

23.9 20.3

18.8

26.1

69.5

71.0

–0.8

73.9

65.3

70.7 68.8

67.2 71.4

69.4

69.6

40.1

40.0

6.3

34.2

45.7 ** 52.1 35.0 ** 39.3 40.8

39.7

40.7

Change CEO or CFO

42.9

40.0

12.3

40.5

45.3

46.3 43.8

44.1 42.0

40.6

46.0

Change senior management team
other than CEO and CFO

47.1

50.0

13.7

46.2

48.0

44.1 52.6

46.7 47.4

48.2

45.7

Improve corporate governance

52.1

50.0

5.1

56.2

48.2

51.0 52.1

49.9 54.0

53.6

50.1

Improve incentives

65.1

71.5

3.9

58.3

71.5

70.3 72.3

72.3 59.0

60.5

71.1

Make follow-on acquisitions

48.1

50.0

–3.0

45.1

50.8

47.8 46.7

50.4 46.1

50.7

44.6

Bring on a strategic investor

13.5

10.0

2.1

14.5

12.5

14.1 10.1

13.3 13.6

15.4

10.9

Facilitate a high-value exit

58.8

60.0

8.8

62.7

55.0

55.6 53.6

55.9 61.2

62.8

53.5

Other

7.1

0.0

7.1

8.3

5.9

0.0 7.1

5.6

8.3

9.1

4.3

Improve IT / Information Systems

74

74

36

38

27

34

40

42

32

Increase revenue / improve demand
factors
Redefine the current business model
or strategy

27

Table 26: Post-Investment Value Creators
Percentage of deals that each of the following groups actively participates in identifying post-deal value.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Deal team

93.3

100.0

90.6

95.9

93.7

95.6

93.5

93.2

92.1

94.9

Operating partners

51.1

50.0

46.8

55.1

56.2

48.5

45.7

55.6

43.6

60.9

Outside consultants

27.1

21.0

22.0

31.9

26.2

34.0

29.3

25.2

25.2

29.5

Other

8.6

0.0

13.0

4.3

3.7

7.9

5.6

11.1

9.2

7.7

Number of responses

74

74

36

38

27

27

34

40

42

32

Table 27: Types of Exit
The fraction of deals the PE investors target for different types of exit.
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

IPO

18.8

11.7

10.9

26.4 ***

23.7

18.9

20.6

17.2

12.1

27.7 ***

Strategic sale

51.0

50.0

57.3

44.8 **

46.3

51.4

44.2

56.7 **

57.5

42.3 ***

Financial sale

29.5

30.0

31.8

27.3

29.6

28.1

33.6

26.0

30.4

28.3

Other

0.7

0.0

0.0

1.5

0.5

1.6

1.6

0.0

0.0

1.7

Number of responses

63

63

31

32

22

23

29

34

36

27

58

Table 28a: Exit Timing (Importance)
The factors PE investors consider in deciding on the timing of exit.
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Achieve operational plan set out to achieve

92.2

90.6 93.8

95.7 91.3

90.0

91.9

Capital market conditions

96.9

96.9 96.9

100.0 95.7

100.0 94.1

94.6 100.0

Competitive considerations

76.6

75.0 78.1

69.6 78.3

80.0

73.5

83.8

66.7

Hit IRR or ROI target

79.7

71.9 87.5

91.3 82.6

76.7

82.4

75.7

85.2

LPs pressure to return capital

56.3

46.9 65.6

56.5 56.5

43.3

67.6

48.6

66.7

Management’s opinion

85.9

81.3 90.6

87.0 82.6

86.7

85.3

86.5

85.2

Other

14.1

15.6 12.5

13.0 13.0

13.3

14.7

10.8

18.5

30

34

37

27

Number of responses

64

32

32

23

23

94.1

92.6

Table 28b: Exit Timing (Rank)
The factors PE investors consider in deciding on the timing of exit by rank (where higher rank is more
important).
AUM
Mean Median Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Achieve operational plan set out to achieve

5.5

6.0

5.4

5.5

5.8

5.3

5.3

5.6

5.5

5.4

Capital market conditions

5.3

5.5

5.4

5.2

5.3

5.3

5.4

5.2

5.0

5.7

Competitive considerations

3.5

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.2

3.1

3.4

3.5

3.9

2.9

Hit IRR or ROI target

4.0

4.0

3.9

4.2

4.2

4.6

3.8

4.3

3.9

4.3

LPs pressure to return capital

1.8

1.5

1.5

2.0

1.9

1.8

1.4

2.1

1.6

1.9

Management’s opinion

3.7

4.0

3.4

4.1

3.8

3.7

4.3

3.2 **

3.8

3.7

Other

0.7

0.0

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.7

0.5

0.9

Number of responses

64

64

32

32

23

23

30

34

37

27

Table 29:
How is the firm organized?
Mean

AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Age
Old Young

Offices
Local Global

Industry

54.4

54.1

54.8

65.5

55.2

64.7

46.7

54.5

54.3

Criteria

11.4

10.8

11.9

13.8

3.4

11.8

11.1

6.8

17.1

Product

16.5

5.4

26.2 **

17.2

17.2

29.4

6.7 ***

2.3

34.3 ***

Generalist

36.7

40.5

33.3

27.6

34.5

26.5

44.4

43.2

28.6

Other

6.3

2.7

9.5

10.3

6.9

8.8

4.4

2.3

11.4

Number of responses

79

37

42

29

29

34

45

44

35

59

Table 30: PE Firm Organization
The percentage of investment professionals in different specializations.
AUM

IRR

Age

Mean

Median

Low

High

Low

High

Deal professionals

54.2

50.0

57.7

51.2

55.1

59.2

Deal sourcing

8.9

1.3

11.5

6.5

9.8

3.5

Deal execution

9.6

0.0

10.0

9.2

10.4

Operating professionals

8.7

4.3

8.9

8.4

Consulting professionals

1.2

0.0

1.1

Shared services professionals

5.7

0.0

3.3

Fundraising professionals

3.2

1.2

1.6

4.6

HR professionals for portfolio
companies

0.4

0.0

0.4

Capital markets professionals

1.8

0.0

Other

6.5

Number of responses

79

Offices
Globa
l

Old

Young

Local

59.3

50.4

58.7

48.6

6.0

11.1

9.8

7.7

4.4

5.8

12.4 **

11.5

7.2

9.8

6.4

7.2

9.8

7.0

10.7

1.2

0.8

0.7

0.9

1.3

1.2

1.1

7.8

5.3

7.9

6.2

5.4

3.1

8.9 **

4.0

2.6

2.9

3.4

1.7

5.1 ***

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.5

0.2

0.6

0.9

2.5

1.0

2.7

2.9

0.9

0.3

3.6 **

0.0

4.7

8.1

3.6

12.4

8.6

4.9

6.7

6.3

79

37

42

29

29

34

45

44

35

***

**

Table 31: Operational Engineering Assistance
Percentage of private equity investors who utilize a non-limited partner advisory board, senior advisors or
a CEO council, or hire strategy consultants.
AUM
Low High

IRR
Low High

Old

38.0

32.4

42.9

27.6

48.3

38.2

37.8

47.7

25.7 **

48.1

35.1

59.5 **

51.7

62.1

52.9

44.4

47.7

48.6

31.6

18.9

42.9 **

41.4

34.5

41.2

24.4

27.3

37.1

79

37

29

29

34

45

44

35

Mean
Non-LP Advisory Board or Group of
Advisors
Senior Advisors / CEO council of
equivalent
Hire strategy consultants to help
with operating plans
Number of responses

42

Age
Young

Offices
Local Global

Table 32: Cluster Analysis

Cluster 1

0.54

3.64

7.87

3.48

7.83

4.04

3.04

0.30

0.50

0.91

0.04 25.17

73.04 31.39

181.48

7.2

13.3

3.2

Median

0.60

3.50

9.00

3.00

8.00

4.00

3.00

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00 20.00

80.00 29.00

175.00

2.1

6.0

3.0

Cluster 2

Mean

0.59

3.95

7.69

5.00

7.38

3.75

4.00

0.44

0.46

0.63

0.25 55.38

82.19 40.06

190.38

9.1

91.6

2.7

Median

0.60

4.00

8.00

5.00

7.50

3.50

4.00

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00 55.50

87.50 40.50

190.00

1.8

100.0

3.0

Mean

0.54

4.11

7.32

3.58

8.47

3.79

3.79

0.26

0.53

0.84

0.16 31.42

66.16 30.00

68.74

12.3

55.1

2.6

Median

0.60

4.00

8.00

4.00

8.00

4.00

4.00

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00 20.00

70.00 26.00

70.00

8.0

60.0

2.5

Mean

0.55

3.88

7.64

3.93

7.91

3.88

3.55

0.33

0.50

0.81

0.14 35.55

73.31 33.33

147.00

9.4

48.6

2.9

Median

0.60

4.00

8.00

4.00

8.00

4.00

3.00

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00 25.00

80.00 30.00

150.00

2.7

39.5

2.5

All

Mean

Cluster 3

Debt/
Debt/
Prop
Op. Cost. Rev. Ch. BuyLow
Op.
CS CS Trade Invest in Invest in Invest in
Target
Capital EBITDA Time
Business Mngmt Add. Val. RecruitB Deal Growth Imp. Red. Growth CEO SellHigh AUM Partner Multiple
Off

N = 23

N = 16

N = 19

N = 58

60

Table 33: Factor Analysis
Principal factors, unrotated
58 observations, 11 retained factors, 143 parameters
Factor
Eigenvalue
Difference
Proportion
Cumulative
Factor1
2.56948
0.60272
0.2659
0.2659
Factor2
1.96676
0.21586
0.2035
0.4695
Factor3
1.75090
0.49645
0.1812
0.6507
Factor4
1.25445
0.19096
0.1298
0.7805
Factor5
1.06349
0.30866
0.1101
0.8905
Factor6
0.75484
0.24734
0.0781
0.9687
Factor7
0.50749
0.03925
0.0525
1.0212
Factor8
0.46825
0.20500
0.0485
1.0696
Factor9
0.26325
0.08955
0.0272
1.0969
Factor10
0.17370
0.11930
0.0180
1.1149
Factor11
0.05440
0.05634
0.0056
1.1205
Factor12
-0.00195
0.07961
-0.0002
1.1203
Factor13
-0.08156
0.05998
-0.0084
1.1118
Factor14
-0.14154
0.00799
-0.0146
1.0972
Factor15
-0.14953
0.06657
-0.0155
1.0817
Factor16
-0.21610
0.05967
-0.0224
1.0594
Factor17
-0.27577
0.02201
-0.0285
1.0308
Factor18
-0.29778
.
-0.0308
1.0000
LR test: independent vs. saturated: chi2(153) = 376.57 Prob>chi2 =
0.0000

Variable

Factor1

Factor2

Factor3

Factor4

Factor5

dtcap

0.5621

-0.0327

dteb

0.5035

-0.041

cstime

0.1665

cstrade

0.1097

invbus
invmgmt

Factor8

Factor9

0.4938

0.0708

-0.2085

-0.256

0.6676

-0.0047

-0.1817

0.0605

0.0875

-0.058

0.1012

0.18

-0.0299

0.1657

-0.105

0.0536

-0.2789

0.3737

0.2625

0.2806

-0.1203

-0.2155

0.1247

0.0784

-0.179

0.0423

-0.1426

0.149

-0.0639

0.1176

0.2779

-0.0466

0.3801

-0.0094

-0.2527

0.1049

0.0168

0.362

-0.2061

-0.2732

0.152

-0.1401

-0.5344

-0.1266

0.1563

0.1689

0.0189

-0.0297

0.5712

0.1638

0.0861

0.044

0.1126

0.1131

invaddv

0.5915

0.093

-0.2394

-0.3619

-0.1367

0.1696

-0.2389

-0.112

0.0312

0.1034

recruitb

0.1495

0.5952

0.1109

0.2706

0.1373

0.0994

-0.2537

0.0958

0.1866

0.0291

propdeal

-0.3721

0.445

growth

-0.6203

0.3045

-0.1385

0.2428

-0.0297

0.3292

-0.0414

0.1944

-0.0821

0.1714

0.4265

-0.4185

-0.1212

-0.0479

-0.1315

0.0062

0.095

-0.0139

opimp

0.5183

-0.3698

-0.5246

0.3405

-0.0026

0.0244

-0.1451

0.2026

0.0041

-0.0026

costred

0.5507

0.1235

0.0199

-0.366

0.1529

-0.1378

0.1513

0.174

-0.0065

-0.0304

revgrow

-0.0509

0.5792

-0.1024

-0.1207

0.188

-0.2658

0.1383

0.2521

-0.0248

-0.0651

chceo

0.3892

0.6732

-0.211

-0.0282

-0.0566

-0.0677

-0.1126

-0.2329

0.0131

-0.1147

buylowsellhi

0.0983

0.345

0.016

0.2469

0.3541

-0.245

-0.0012

0.0297

-0.0745

0.1097

multarb

0.2566

0.2428

0.1569

0.3298

0.2231

0.1216

0.2837

-0.291

-0.1381

-0.017

oppart

0.3305

0.0754

-0.2566

-0.3633

-0.0318

0.1694

0.2094

0.2271

-0.0102

-0.0237

aum

0.2185

0.1442

0.4313

0.0482

-0.032

0.5167

0.0534

0.058

-0.0343

-0.1425

61

Factor6

Factor7

Factor10

Table 34: Relation of Founder and Firm Characteristics
Mean - All
aum

Finance

Operations

Other PE

9.5

10.3

11.1

4.7

1993.5

1992.7

1994.5

1994.2

0.56

0.52

0.58

0.57

cstime

7.47

7.33

7.76

7.00

cstrade

3.86

3.26

4.64

3.22

invbus

7.77

7.44

8.20

8.56

invmgmt

3.82

4.26

3.56

2.89

invaddv

3.63

3.37

3.52

4.22

recruitb

0.31

0.30

0.32

0.22

propdeal

0.51

0.54

0.46

0.47

growth

0.80

0.78

0.80

0.78

opimp

0.13

0.11

0.12

0.22

costred

35.6

25.0

38.1

42.3

revgrow

70.3

66.6

70.5

80.6

chceo

30.6

26.3

30.4

48.8

buylowsellhi

140.9

155.4

150.2

125.0

79

27

25

9

year_founded
dtcap

Number of responses

62

Figure 1: Years of Forecasts Used by PE Investors
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
1 year

2 years 3 years 4 years 5 years 6 years 7 years 8 years 9 years 10 years
or more

63

