NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GUIDE TO TARGET ZONES

Jacob A. Frenkel

Morris Goldstein

Working Paper No. 2113

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1986

This paper was prepared while Professor Frenkel was a consultant to
the Research Department of the IMF. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2113
December 1986

A Guide to Target Zones

ABSTRACT

This paper identifies key issues surrounding the advisability and
practicality of adopting "target zones" for the exchange rates of major
currencies.
Four fundamental questions concerning the definition of and the
rationale for target zones are addressed: first, what is generally
meant by a "target zone" approach to exchange rate management and how
can "hard" and "soft" versions of this approach be defined; second,
what are the perceived deficiencies in the existing exchange rate system
of managed floating which motivate the call for the adoption of target
zones; third, how might target zones remedy these deficiencies; and
fourth, what factors are behind much of the skepticism over and
opposition to target zones?
In addition, the paper deals with a series of operational questions
of a more technical nature that weigh heavily on the practicality of
implementing a target zone approach. The issues discussed include the
following: how would the target zones be calculated; what currencies
would be included in the system of target zones; how wide should the
target zones be and how frequently should they be revised; and what
policy instruments would be employed to keep actual exchange rates
within the target zones, and with what consequences for other policy
objectives?

The purpose of the paper is not to make the case either for or
against the adoption of target zones. Rather, the intention is to
raise and discuss factors that should be considered in any serious
discussion of the topic.

Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, XL. 60637
(312)962—8253

Morris Goldstein
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St., N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20431
(202)623—7678

Introduction
This paper identifies key issues surrounding the advisability and
practicality of adopting "target zones' for the exchange rates of major
currencies. 1

At present there are wide differences of view on the subject of

target zones. This reflects at least three factors: first, different
assessments of the performance of the existing exchange rate system of
managed floating; second, different evaluations of whether a system of
target zones could remedy the perceived weaknesses of the existing
system; and third, different conceptions of the preferred form of
target zones.

The purpose of this paper is not to make the case either for or

against the adoption of target zones. Indeed, we have tried to avoid
expressing our own view on this central issue. Rather, the intention
is to raise and discuss factors that should be considered in any serious

examination of the topic. As such, the paper not only outlines potential
strengths and weaknesses of various versions of the target zone approach
but also confronts operational questions thai would have to be faced if
the target zone approach to exchange rate management were adopted.

The paper is organized as follows. Section I addresses four fundamental questions concerning the definition of and the rationale for

target zones: first, what is generally meant by a target zone approach
to exchange rate management and how can "hard" and "soft" versions of
this approach be defined; second, what are the perceived deficiencies in
the existing exchange rate system which motivate the call for the adoption

—2—
of target zones; third, how might target zones remedy these deficiencies;
and fourth, what factors are behind much of the skepticism over and
opposition to target zones?
Section II deals with a series of operational questions and issues

of a more technical and specific nature that weigh heavily on the practi-

cality of implementing a target zone approach. The issues discussed are
the following: how would the target zones be calculated; what currencies
would be included in the system of target zones; how wide should the
target zones be and how frequently should they be revised; and what

policy instruments would be employed to keep actual exchange rates within
the target zones, and with what consequences for other policy objectives?
A brief postcript appears as Section III of the paper.
Finally, three caveats relevant to the nature and scope of this

study should be mentioned. First, there should be no presumption that
advocates of target zones see this as the only proposal for improving

exchange rate stability. Indeed, most advocates of target zones would
also rely on stronger surveillance of a broader nature to help reach

that objective. Second, since the paper does not attempt to compare
the target—zone proposal to other proposals for improving exchange rate
stability, there should likewise be no presumption that the strengths

and weaknesses outlined here are more or less significant than those

associated with other proposals. 2 Third, since many of the precise
operational features of a system of target zones remain largely
conjectural (e.g., which currencies would be included, how target zones

—3—
would be calculated, etc.), the views expressed on these operational
features should be seen more as aids to discusssion and debate than as
definite conclusions.

1.

The Meaning and Rationale for Target Zones

1.1: What

are

target zones?

Target zones mean different things to different people. Perhaps
the easiest way to think of them is as a hybrid exchange rate system that
combines some of the attributes and characteristics of both pegged and
flexible exchange rate systems. 3

A. Row does a system of target zones differ from other exchange
regimes?
Target zones differ from a pure system of clean floating in that the
authorities are permitted (and indeed are likely) to intervene in the
exchange market, and, more generally, are encouraged "to take a view" on

the desirable level of the exchange rate. Target zones differ from the
present system of managed floating in at least two principal respects: 4
(i) the authorities establish a target zone for the exchange rate
for some future period; and (ii) the authorities are expected to keep

more of an "eye" on the exchange rate in the conduct of monetary policy
so as to keep

the

actual exchange rate within the target zone. 5

Compared to the adjustable peg system, target zones need not entail a
formal commitment to intervene in all circumstances in the exchange
market to keep actual rates within the zone.

Indeed, the only concrete

intervention guideline that is typically mentioned is that the authorities refrain from "destabilizing intervention," that is, buying their

4—
own

currency

when it is above the top of the zone and selling it below

the bottom of the zone. This specific guideline was also included in
the Fund's 1974 "Guidelines for the Management of Floating Kxchange

Rates." 6 Finally, target zones differ from a pure system of rigidly
fixed exchange rates in that, in addition to the lack of a formal intervention obligation, the zones themselves are to be occasionally reviewed
and changed if deemed necessary.

B. Flow can "hard" and "soft" versions of target zones be defined?
In general, various versions of target zones can be distinguished
by reference to the following four characteristics:

(1) width of the target zone (outside of which the exchange rate
is viewed as "out of line"),

(ii) the frequency of changes in the target zones,
(iii)

the

degree of publicity given to the zones; in this context,

one nay distinguish between public announcement of the target zones and
confidential disclosure in official circles (for purposes of exchange rate
surveillance, intervention, multilateral policy coordination, and consultation),
that is, "loud zones" versus "quiet zones," and

(iv) the degree of commitment to keeping exchange rates within
the zone.

Obviously, these characteristics define a spectrum of possible

approaches to target zones. At one end, a "hard" version of target
zones night entail a monetary policy that is heavily geared to

maintaining the exchange rate within the narrow, infrequently

revised,

and publicly announced zone. At the other end of the spectrum, lies

—5—.

a "soft" version of target zones that might be characterized by a
monetary policy paying only limited attention to the level of the
exchange rate; and by zones that are wide, frequently revised, and

kept confidential. The hard and soft poles, in turn, may serve as
useful benchmarks for the analysis and evaluation of intermediate
versions of target zones.
The hard version of target zones shares some of the attributes of
the existing European Monetary System (EMS).

In particular, hard target

zones can be considered a close relative of the EMS's fixed but adjustable

rates with narrow margins and a "divergence indicator.' However, unlike
the EMS, hard target zones do not entail a formal commitment for exchange
rate intervention; nor need there he an analogue to the credit facilities

of the EMS. The soft version of target zones differs from existing
Fund surveillance procedures (e.g., the requirement for reporting real
exchange rate changes in excess of 10 percent to the Executive Board)
in that the former introduces a more explicit and formal framework for
defining the appropriate pattern of exchange rates and for establishing
the links between exchange rates and macroeconomic policies. 7
1.2: What considerations underlie the call for the adoption of target
zones?
Proponents of target zones proceed from two basic perceptions:
first, that the present system of managed floating has exhibited serious
deficiencies; and second, that the adoption of a system of target zones

could remedy at least some of these deficiencies. Mtong the alleged
deficiencies, the most attention has been paid to the following
considerations:

—6—
A. Exchange rates have been highly volatile and unpredictable
Whether measured in real or nominal terms, bilateral or effective
terms, the short—run variability of exchange-rates over the period of

managed floating has been high——indeed, significantly higher than during

the previous Bretton Woods system. In addition, most exchange rate changes
have been unpredictable (as suggesEed by market indicators like forward

exchange rates). While high short—term volatility and unpredictability
of exchange rates is usually deemed to be less serious than longer—term

"misalignnents; this volatility is still regarded as costly because it
generates uncertainty, and hence leads to lower levels of investment and

trade. Further, developing countries are alleged to be especially
hurt by this volatility because they do not have well—developed financial
markets (particularly forward cover arrangements).

B. Exchange rates of major currencies have been subject to large
and persistent misalignments
A second complaint against the present system is that exchange
rates of major currencies have been subject to large and persistent

"misalignments" over the past dozen years. Such misalignments are
commonly measured by cumulative departures from purchasing power parity,
or by the sheer magnitude of changes in real exchange rates
or by departures from more comprehensive concepts of the

themselves,

equilibrium"

real exchange rate (e.g., the exchange rate that yields a cyclically
adjusted current account balance equal to normal net private capital

flows). Not surprisingly, charges of misalignment were particularly
pronounced over the period 1981—85. A representative estimate of misalignment is provided by Williamson (1985). lIe estimated that by the

—7—

end of 1984 the extent of misalignment in the real effective exchange
rate was 39 percent (overvaluation) for the U.S. dollar and 19 percent

(undervaluation) for the Japanese yen. Such misalignments are, in turn,
deemed costly because they have an adverse impact on resource allocation,
induce adjustment costs (including unemployment), distort optimal levels

of capital formation, and encourage protectionism.

C. Under the existing exchange rate system, macroeconomic policies
in major industrial countries have been undisciplined and
ordinated
Perhaps the chief criticism by the proponents of target zones
is that the existing system of floating exchange rates lacks an effective
mechanism for ensuring policy discipline and coordination. 8

As support-

ing evidence, the critics cite, inter alia, the doubling of industrial—
country average inflation rates as between 1963—72 and 1973—85, and the
tripling of the ratio of industrial countries' government fiscal deficits

to GNP over the same period. On lack of coordination, they point to the
frequent conflicts among the major industrial countries on both the stance
and mix of macroeconomic policies, as well as on the need for structural

reform. Also, despite the efforts made at coordination, critics emphasize
the absence of binding agreements during the floating—rate period on
either rates of monetary expansion or exchange rate norms. Undisciplined
and uncoordinated policies, in turn, are said to be costly because such
behavior is incompatible with financial stability and sustainable growth,
and also because such policies are the main driving force behind both
short—term volatility and longer—term misalignment of exchange rates.

—8—
D. TMF surveillance under the existing exchange rate system has been
largely ineffective in respect of major industrial countries,
resulting in asymmetry in the international adjustment mechanism
Yet a fourth alleged weakness of the existing system is that Fund
surveillance has not been sufficiently effective in respect of the very
tndustrial countries whose policies have the most significant "spillover
effects' on the world economy, thereby producing, among other things, an

asymmetric distribution in the burden of adjustment. As evidence for this
position, the critics cite the magnitude and persistence of current account
imbalances in the United States and Japan, especially over the past three

years. The seeming inability of surveillance to bring about a correction
of the structural U.S. budget deficit is regarded as another striking

example of this lack of symmetry. Further, it is argued that an Inappropriate mix of macroeconomic policies in the major industrial countries
during the early l9SOs resulted in high real interest rates and in sluggish

economic activity. A consequence of this was that developing countries
faced (during 1981—83) a sharp increase in debt service requirements,
a significant decline in export earnings, a compression of their imports,

and unusually slow growth. Thus, so it is argued, adverse spillover
effects from poor policies in industrial countries were substantial,
and the burden of adjustment fell disproportionately on the developing
countries.

1.3: How would the introduction of target zones for the major currencies
remedy these four perceived deficiencies of the existing exchange
rate system?
A central argument advanced by proponents of target zones (see, for
example, Roosa (1984)) is that their introduction would restore some of

—9—
the useful characteristics of the Bretton Woods system without being
subject to the flaws that led to the collapse of that system.

A. Restoring an anchor for medium—term exchange rate expectations
Tt is often argued that one reason why exchange rates have been

o volatile under the present exchange rate system is that market participants lack an 'anchor' for medium—term expectations about exchange rates.
In such an environment, new information, rumors, or announcements can lead

to large revisions of expectations about the future which in turn induce

"large" changes in current exchange rates. Furthennore, under some
circumstances, such events may set the stage for the emergence of bandwagon" effects and speculative "bubbles" that can dominate the evolution
of the exchange rate and divorce it increasingly from "fundamentals".
It is claimed that target zones will reduce exchange rate volatility

and misalignment on two counts. First, the obligation (albeit an informal
one) or the intention to keep the exchange rate within the zone provides
market participants with useful information about the likely conduct of

future macroeconomic policies, especially monetary policy. The easier it
is to nake an informed judgment about the future course of policies, the
less one can expect the erroneous extrapolation of short—tern events and
the more forgiving will be the market of short—term deviations of policy.
Second, the publication of target zones provides market participants
with Information on the authorities' collective estimate of future equi-

librium exchange rates. Therefore, it is said to reduce the risk that
market participants use the "wrong model" in translating (even perfectly
foreseen) future policy changes into forecasts of future exchange rates.

— 10 —

B.

Restoring discipline and coordination to the conduct of
economic policies
Target zones are said to restore discipline to macroeconomic

policymaking for two reasons. First, if exchange rates are maintained
within the target zones, then macroeconomic policies, again particularly

monetary policy, are disciplined by the exchange rate constraint. Second,
even if the authorities opt to alter the target zone rather than their
policies, they would still be obliged both to negotiate a new zone and

to explain why a new zone is appropriate. These obligations themselves
are said to introduce stronger peer pressure into policy formation.
Turning to the coordination of policies, the following points are

noteworthy. First, the very fact that a system of target zones has to be
negotiated and must display mutual consistency of cross exchange rates is

said to enhance the degree of international policy coordination. Under a
system of target zones, so it is argued, the exchange rate implications
of alternative stances and mixes of policies would be directly confronted,
thereby ending the undesirable current practice whereby exchange rates

emerge as a "residual of other policy actions of individual countries.
Also, the requirement that target zones be negotiated and mutually agreed
is said to reduce the risk of competitive devaluations.
And to the extent that target zones do restore discipline and
coordination to the conduct of macroeconomic policy, they will reduce
misalignment and volatility of exchange rates.

— 11 —

C.

Increasing the effectiveness of IMF surveillance and reducing
the asymmetry in the adjustment process
Proponents of target zones argue that the need to negotiate,

to ensure consistency, and to revise the zones could provide a natural

focal point for multilateral Fund surveillance. Just as important, such
surveillance procedures when applied to target zones will be aimed at
the policies of the najor industrial countries that, in turn, are likely

to constitute the membership of the target zone system. It is alleged
therefore that target zones will remove the Achilles heel of the present
surveillance procedures, namely, the inability to effect a meaningful

change in policies of large industrial countries. Since the asymmetry
of adjustment is said to depend critically on policy behavior in industrial
countries, more effective surveillance of them would also produce more
symmetrical adjustment.

the remedial properties of a target zone approach would obviously

depend on the particular version adopted. The "harder" versions, by
virtue of being closer images of the Bretton Woods regime, clearly offer

a stronger dose of external pressure on domestic policy. But, as is
discussed in subsequent sections, the alleged benefits associated with
the harder versions may also entail higher costs.

Proponents of the "softer" versions of the target zone approach
argue that their adoption would enhance the surveillance process for at

least three reasons. First, even if the zones were wide and were frequently
revised, they would exert some disciplinary force on the most flagrant and

persistent cases of inappropriate policies. Thus, while soft target zones

— 12 —

may not do much to catch niisalignments on the order of 10 percent or less,
they will, so their supporters argue, catch the 20—40 percent real exchange

rate misaligmBents that do most damage to the system. Second, even if the
zones were not announced to the public, they still are likely to provoke
helpful discussion and analysis of policy interdependence among officials

of participating members. Also, such "quiet' zones provide another channel
for peer pressure against inappropriate policies. Third, since the Fund1s
current practices in any case involve evaluating the appropriateness
of members' exchange rates, supporters argue that even unpublished zones
may prove useful in generating a more concrete framework for evaluating
exchange rate implications of alternative macroeconomic policies.

D. Escaping the same fate as the Bretton Woods system
Supporters of target zones acknowledge that many of the factors
associated with the collapse of Bretton Woods have not gone away (e.g.,
high international mobility of capital, larger financial resources for
private speculators than for central banks, existence of large and
suddenly changing interest rate differentials across countries, etc.).
Nevertheless, they contend that a system of target zones can survive

pressure from "hot money" flows. They argue that so long as policy
adjustments are made when necessary or so long as the target zones are
revised frequently to reflect inflation differentials and needs for real
exchange rate adjustment, expectations of large and discontinuous exchange
rate adjustments that provide the motive for speculative attacks will

seldom arise. Tn their view, the viability of the EMS provides testimony

— 13 —

that

it is possible to operate an adjustable peg system in the 1980s

provided that there is sufficient political commitment, active exchange
market intervention policies, and a presumptive indicator for adjustment.
Since a target zone system shares many of these characteristics, it too
is viable. 9
1.4: What factors are behind much of the skepticism about and opposition
to target zones?
Opposition to the adoption of target zones stems from a more sanguine
appraisal of the performance of the existing system, doubts about the
capacity of target zones to remedy alleged deficiencies, and concerns

that target zones would introduce new problems. Each of these elements
is discussed in turn.

A. Has the existing system failed?
Exchange rate volatility. While the short—run volatility of
both nominal and real exchange rates has indeed been high during the
period of managed floating, this begs the question of whether that

volatility was •excessive." In this connection, opponents of target
zones raise two

points.

First, the period since 1973 has witnessed great turbulence in the
world economy and great uncertainty about the future course of economic

and political events. In this environment, all asset prices, not only
exchange rates, have shown high volatility. In fact, exchange rate
changes have been smaller than changes in prices of other assets (e.g.,
national stock market prices, changes in short-tertfl interest rates,

changes in commodity prices). As such, conclusions about the excessive
nature of exchange rate fluctuations depend upon the specific yardstick
selected.

— 14 —

Second, they note that there is an intrinsic difference between
asset prices on the one hand and wages and goods prices on the other

hand. The former are auction prices that

depend heavily on expectations

about the future whereas the latter are more sticky in the short run,
reflecting in large part contractual arrangements made in the past.
Thus, wages and prices of national output may not serve as a proper
yardstick for assessing exchange rate volatility. Indeed, some would
say that it is precisely because wages and prices are so slow to adjust
to current and expected economic conditions that it is desirable to allow
for "excessive" adjustment in exchange rates.
As regards the unpredictable nature of exchange rate changes under
the present system, opponents of target zones note that the foreign
exchange market is one in which risk can be covered

relatively easily

(via access to forward markets, options markets, etc.). For this reason,
it is argued that

it

may be preferable to concentrate the disturbances in

this market rather than transfer them to other markets, such as labor
markets, where dealing with them would be more difficult.
Turning to the cost of short—run volatility of exchange

rates,

opponents point to the sporadic nature of the evidence linking

exchange

rate volatility to the volume of international trade and investment. 10
They also argue that it is doubtful that the system of pegged rates
could have survived in the turbulent environment of the
without severe limits on trade and capital movements
many countries. 11

past 15 years

being imposed by

Such restrictions on trade and capital flows, in

— 15 —

turn,

could well have been more costly for the world economy than the

short—run volatility of exchange rates experienced under the present
system.

Exchange rate misalignment. Almost all observers, even many
staunch opponents of target zones, agree that there have been serious
misalignnertts of major currency exchange rates during the past few years,

particularly as regards the sharp real appreciation of the U.S. dollar.
Opponents of target zones suggest however that in evaluating both the
extent and the cost of such misalignments several factors ought to be
recognized.

Changes in real economic conditions requiring adjustments in the
relative prices of different national outputs occur all the time
(continuing intercountry differences in growth of labor productivity, permanent changes in the terms of trade, intercountry shifts
in both the marginal productivity of capital and the propensity to

save, etc.). Under a system of pegged rates, relative price adjustments are achieved through the slow changes of national price levels and

through occasional changes of parity. Under floating rates, adjustments
in the relative price of different national

outputs occur rapidly and in

anticipation of changes in economic conditions rather than after the

need for adjustment has become apparent. In the absence of an explicit
specification of relative costs, there is no general presumption that
slow adjustment of relative prices is preferable

to rapid adjustment,

or that price adjustments should not occur in anticipation of events

requiring such adjustments. Hence, what nay seem to be misalignments
may in part represent equilibrating changes.

— 16 —

Critics

of target zones argue that one should not overlook the

fact that significant misalignment of major currency exchange rates
also occurred during the Bretton Woods period, especially in its later

years. In this connection, they caution that misalignment of real
exchange rates can derive from too little nominal exchange rate flexi-

bility as well as from too much. The frequency of misaligned real
exchange rates in countries with "pegged" exchange arrangements, where
there is often a reluctance to alter nominal rates in the face of
large inflation differentials, should stand as a warning to the dangers
involved.

The size of estimated misalignments in major currency exchange
rates is, according to defenders of the present system, highly uncertain.
To take but one example, calculations of misalignment done by Williamson
(1985) and others are strongly affected by the assumption that 'normal'

net capital flows are zero for the United States. This assumption is
important because the equilibrium exchange rate is defined in such calculations as the exchange rate that would produce a current account balance
equal to the assumed normal net private capital flow. But a country
that is a "normal" net capital exporter under one set of macroeconomic
policies, tax considerations, and political events abroad may become a

natural importer under others. In this connection, a judgment that
normal net private capital flows for the United States were, say, a
$30 billion annual inflow (to reflect high expected profitability,
relatively low domestic savings, and safe—haven considerations) rather
than zero would reduce the estimated misalignment considerably;

12

— 17 —

yet

the theoretical reasons for preferring the latter

estimate to the

former are, so the critics argue, debatable at best.
Defenders of the present system argue that explanations

that

attribute long—term misalignment to a speculative bubble are highly

questionable. They point out that the (narrow) theoretical models that
are frequently used to generate a speculative bubble in the exchange
rate (i.e., a fully expected continuous price change not justified by
fundamentals) also imply that such a bubble could prevail for only a
short period of time——certainly not for five years or so.

Discipline and coordination. Defenders of the current exchange
rate system question the allegation that it exerts less discipline than
regimes with greater fixity of exchange rates.

As a theoretical matter,

it is pointed out that changes in exchanges rates are
are transmitted promptly into domestic prices.

highly visible and

As a result, the conse-

quences of undisciplined macroeconomic policies are readily apparent. In
contrast, undisciplined policies under

fixed exchange rates show up only in

reserve changes, and then usually become public only after a significant

delay. Therefore, it is argued, the supposed superior disciplining force
of a fixed rate regime is not obvious. Furthermore, as an empirical
matter, the 1979—86 policy experience in industrial countries can be
viewed as evidence that anti—inflationary discipline can be restored

without fixed exchange rates. Indeed, the deceleration in growth rates
of narrow and broad money that took place in the face of high unemployment
in most of the major industrial countries in 1979—82 coincided with
relatively high variability of both nominal and real exchange rates.

— 18 —

As for coordination, defenders of the
present system note that

there have been some successful

coordination efforts during the past

decade. In this context, they mention the U.S. dollar support package
of November 1, 1978, agreements on short—tenn exchange rate
management

policies (e.g., intermittent joint countering of disorderly market
conditions) ,

the agreements of the Bonn economic summit of 1978, and

the Group of Five agreement (of

September 22, 1985) in New York on

foreign exchange intervention and other policies. 13
In addition, it can be argued that the optimal degree of coordi-

nation is less than complete. For

example, the perception of independent

monetary policy may be necessary in some countries for

sustaining confidence

that monetary policy will not be inflationary in the long run (particularly

if not all potential partners in a target zone system have a track record
of consistently sound monetary policy). 14
In sum, the very point of departure for the projionents of target
zones, namely, the overall appraisal that the
is itself not universally

existing system has failed,

accepted. Opponents of target zones acknowledge

that the present system has weaknesses but do not see these weaknesses
as more serious than those demonstrated by earlier

systems.

In addition,

opponents emphasize that the present system has demonstrated some "valuable

strengths.' Specifically, exchange rate changes are viewed as having made
a positive contribution to securing effective

external payments adjust-

ment over the medium to long run. The present system is also credited
with having maintained a mechanism of conflict

resolution (namely, the

foreign exchange market) that has not involved either suspension of

—19—

currency convertibility or large—scale restrictions on trade and capital
flows; indeed, supporters of the present system claim that floating

rates allowed the removal of certain
argued that independent monetary

restrictions. Furthermore, it is

policy, facilitated by the existing

exchange rate system, permitted the application of successful disinfla-

tionary policies. Finally, it is argued that no exchange rate regime
would have emerged unscathed from the combination of shocks, portfolio
shifts, and structural and institutional

changes that occurred during

the years of nanaged floating.

B. Would the introduction of

target zones improve matters?

(1) Would target zones provide an anchor? As noted earlier, one of
the central arguments for the introduction of target zones is that such
zones would provide an anchor for medium—term exchange rate expectations.
But would it, and at what costs?

Skeptics make the following points.

If the absence of an anchor stems from lack of information

about future government policies, then it is not clear that publication
of target zones, rather than announcement of the future course of policies
themselves, is the preferred way to provide that information. Obviously,
if the zones are not published

(i.e., quiet zones), then their adoption

will not alleviate the policy uncertainty problem at all. 15
If the source of uncertainty is that market participants do

not possess information on the model linking government policies with
the consequent levels of exchange rates, then target zones (loud zones)
do indeed provide the missing information.
either

This presupposes, however,

that the government has superior information about the "true

—20—

model" or that the government carries enough credibility

to convince

market participants that it will adjust its policies to consistently
maintain exchange rates within the announced zone (i.e., it will adjust
its policies to make the exchange rate forecast come true). Opponents
of target zones see no evidence that governments have such superior

information or knowledge about such a model. Further, they point out
that experience with preannounced exchange rate targets in Latin America
suggests that countries would probably find it difficult to adhere to
such targets. 16
Even if the target zones were credible for some period of
time, critics argue that the occasional need for revision of the target
zones will invite the same type of one—way bet for speculators that

ultimately felled the Bretton Woods system. Of course, since governments are not formally committed to defend the target zones, they may
choose to allow exchange rates to depart from the zone (while subsequently

announcing a revised zone). But in that case, the zones themselves would
soon lose their credibility.

Even if the zones are announced, critics contend that "soft"

versions of target zones characterized by wide and frequently revised
zones are not likely to provide a strong and reliable anchor because
they will not sufficiently narrow expectations

about the future rate.

Yet such wide and frequently revised zones are said to be necessary (by
critics) to account for our measure of ignorance about the equilibrium
exchange rate and for changing real conditions.

— 21

Even if the anchor is

credible

—

and

durable,

its

introduction

may be costly. The argument here is that the volatility or misalignment
of exchange rates is not the likely source of difficulties but rather a
manifestation of the prevailing package of macroeconomic policies.
Without introducing a significant change into the conduct of policies, a
manipulation of exchange rates to satisfy the zones may not improve

matters at all. In fact, the absence of the exchange rare as a market
gauge for assessing policies will then only confuse matters and reduce
the information essential for policymaking.

(2) Would target zones provide discipline? It is widely agreed
that misalignment of real exchange rates arises to a large extent from

undisciplined and uncoordinated macroeconomic policies. Hence, the
ability of target zones to reduce misalignment rests in good measure on

their ability to enhance discipline. Skeptics put forward the following
arguments.

Experience suggests to them that national governments are
unlikely to adjust appreciably the conduct of domestic policies so as to

satisfy the constraints imposed by the exchange rate regime. Rather, it
is argued, it is more likely that the exchange rate regime adjusts to

whatever discipline national governments choose to have. As an illustration, it is pointed out that other external pressures aimed at restoring

discipline to policy in major industrial countries (e.g., individual
Article IV consultations, Fund Executive Board discussions of the world
economic outlook, Group of Five surveillance meetings, OECD country

reports) have met with only limited success. Why then should target
zones succeed where other similar measures have produced such limited
results?

— 22 —

Evidence from earlier periods during which exchange rates were
more rigid does not suggest that greater fixity of exchange rates
induced either lower average external imbalances, or more rapid adjustment of such imbalances, or greater symmetry of adjustment as between
either surplus and deficit countries, or between reserve and nonreserve

currency countries. 17 Why then should target zones provide the impetus
to discipline when exchange regimes with greater formal commitment have
not consistently done so?

• In a related vein, it is argued that by focusing attention on
exchange rates rather than on the root cause of misalignment, namely,
the stance and mix of macroeconomic policies, one may lessen the pressures
for corrective action on the ultimate sources of the problem.
Critics argue that if the nominal target zones reflect rigid
targets for real exchange rates, they can destabilize the price level. 18
Thke, for example, the case of a country that experiences an unexpected

wage push that raises its price level relative to that abroad. Its real
exchange rate will then have appreciated relative to its initial level.
If the authorities attempt to restore the original real exchange rate by
announcing a more depreciated nominal target zone, then the implied
expansion in monetary policy (needed to keep the actual exchange rate

within the new target zone) will increase the price level. In short,
critics warn that while a rigid real exchange rate may he helpful for
preventing trade balance deteriorations due to eroding competitiveness,

it can also present new dangers for controlling inflation. More

broadly,

monetary policy is not the appropriate policy response to all types of
disturbances.

— 23 —

Critics

point out that while target zones can supply inform-

ation on intercountry divergences in policy, they do not provide guidance

on the right stance of policy within a country. For example, if two
countries each have inflation rates of 10 percent, the exchange rate
may be stable but few would argue that monetary policy in either country

was appropriate. Again, so the critics argue, target zones do not ensure
discipline.

(3) Would target zones enhance coordination and strengthen
surveillance? In appraising the effects of the adoption of target zones
on policy coordination and on Fund surveillance, skeptics make the following observations.

Whatever the exchange rate regime, there are strong barriers
to coordination for at least two reasons: (1) exchange rates are by their
very nature •competitive" in the sense that one country's gain is frequently another country's loss; (ii) various compromises on growth, inflation,
and income distribution at the national level often leave little room for

further compromise on policies at the international level. 19 Target
zones, so say their critics, cannot overcome these barriers.
The process of negotiating target zones could produce
dangerous frictions among the negotiating parties and could lead ultimately
to a reduced level of coordination in this and other areas.
ate cannot rule out the possibility that the cumbersome negotiation of target zones would land the system back in the management

— 24 —

delays

of the latter days of the Bretton Woods system, with adverse

effects on the desired flexibility of real exchange rates. With
target zones, one loses the "safety valve" provided by the marketplace
for foreign exchange as a mode of conflict resolution.
To the extent that the adoption of target zones results in
a significant loss in independence in the conduct of domestic monetary
policy, the authorities may be tempted to adopt discriminatory trade
practices and other measures of protection in order to compensate for
the loss of a powerful policy instrument.

The use of target zones as a possible focal point for Fund

surveillance raises three related potential problems. First, the use of
the exchange rate as a primary indicator of disequilibria in macroeconomic

policies could send misleading signals. Critics note that the more
general Fund practice as applied to adjustment programs and financial
programing is to employ a whole set of macroeconomic indicators for

diagnostic purposes. Would exchange rate movements vis—'—vis the target
zone constitute a "sufficient statistic" for monitoring macroeconomic

policies? If one believes that the answer to that question is negative,
then orienting Fund surveillance around that single indicator, in addition
to possibly diverting attention from the root causes of disequilibria,
may jeopardize the quality of surveillance,
The second problem raised by skeptics is that the target zone
approach is agnostic about which policy instruments should be used to

respond to departures of exchange rates from the zone. The usual pre-

sumption is that it will be monetary policy. 20 However, if the root
cause of the disequilibrium is an inappropriate monetary—fiscal policy

— 25

nix,

—

then an excessive emphasis on monetary policy could produce compliance

with the target zones and yet leave the fundamental problem unsolved.
In short, critics argue that the calculation of the target zones
would have to be based on an appropriate and broad set of indicators
to avoid sending false signals about both the need for adjustraent and

the appropriate corrective measures.
Third, critics contend that target zones do not resolve the problem
of how to allocate and enforce the burden of adjustment among member

countries. When more than one member's (effective) exchange rare leaves
the zone, it will be necessary to specify who does what if an effective

and coordinated policy response is to take place. But target zones, so
the critics argue, offer no solution to this "14—1 problem."

(4) Could target zones escape the fate of the Bretton Woods
system?

Opponents of the target zone approach to exchange rate management remain unconvinced that target zones could escape the fate of Bretton

Woods. They make essentially three arguments. First, technological advances in transferring funds across national boundaries, in combination
with absence of parallel growth in official reserves, mean that the
capital mobility problem (hot money flows) is now even more formidable

than in the early 1970s. Second, difficulties associated with negotiating mutually—consistent target zones would as before produce large discontinuous changes in exchange rates, thus motivating strong speculation.
In addition, if the timing of exchange rate changes were done unpredic-

tably to prevent such speculation, this would destroy the raison d'tre

— 26 —

of

the target zone scheme itself. Third, the viability of the EMS owes

much to the unusual political commitment behind it, to capital controls
imposed by some members, and to the structural characteristics of its

members. 21 None of these factors would, according to the critics, necessarily transfer to an exchange rate arrangement among a larger and more

heterogeneous group of countries. As such, to them, the viability of
the EMS does not imply much about the viability or desirability of a
target zone system.

II. Operational Questions Associated with the Possible Implementation
of Target Zones
11.1: How would the target zones be calculated?
An important implicit assumption in the target zone approach to
exchange rate management is that the authorities can approximate the

equilibrium (real) exchange rate to a useful degree. But by what methods
or techniques? Three methods deserve explicit consideration.
The first is the purchasing—power—parity (PPP) approach. If the
authorities can identify a base period when the country was in
external balance, then the equilibrium value for the nominal exchange
rate in the current period is the value of the exchange rate in the base
period adjusted for the intercountry difference in inflation rates

between the current and base periods. This is equivalent to restoring
the value of the real exchange rate in the base period. Since the real
exchange rate, in turn, is often viewed as a measure of the country's

—27—

•

competitive position, the PPP approach can be regarded as an analysis
of competitiveness as well.

The

an index

exchange rate used for such calculations would typically be
of effective exchange rates using bilateral trade weights or

nore sophisticated combinations of trade weights and trade price
elasticities (e.g., MEI*{ weights). Inflation differentials could be
measured by consumer price indices, or more likely, by indices of
either unit labor cost's or prices in manufacturing.
The PPP approach carries the advantage of simplicity and ease of

computation. Arrayed against this, however, are several rather serious
disadvantages

for use in a target zone context.

First, PPP will be a suitable indicator of the equilibrium exchange
rate when all disturbances between the base and current periods are

monetary in origin. In this case, general price levels will be
altered but relative prices (of imports and exports, or of tradables
and nontradables, or of individual tradables like food or fuel) will

not. In contrast, when disturbances are real and do alter relative
prices, then it will be desirable to have a departure from PPP (i.e.,
a change in the real exchange rate). This point is relevant because
there have been numerous real disturbances over the past 13 years of
managed floating (e.g., large changes in oil prices, changes in savings
and Investment propensities), and there

is little reason to

believe

that such real disturbances will not occur in the future. This means
that if a PPP formula were used to compute the equilibrium rate in a
target zone, there would probably have to be a manual "override option"

—28—

to permit departures from PPP whenever there were real disturbances to

the system. But this override option robs PH' of its simplicity and
computational facility.

A second disadvantage of the PPP approach is that actual exchange
rates of major currencies during the l970s and early 1980s have not
followed the paths implied by PPP——and for both the short and

long run. 22 To most observers, the empirical failure of PPP in the
short run is attributable to an intrinsic difference between exchange

rates and prices of national outputs. The former are jumpy, forward—
looking, auction prices that move in anticipation of future events
whereas the latter are sticky, backward—looking, administered prices that

may largely reflect previous events. In the long run, structural changes
and permanent supply shocks nay cause PH' to miss the mark.

In any

case, the poor empirical track record of PPP suggests that exchange rate
forecasts based on PPP might not be credible to market participants.
A third difficulty with PPP is that the results themselves appear to
be quite sensitive to the choice among alternative price indices and base
periods to the income levels and income growth rates of the countries
involved in the comparison (i.e., the so—called productivity—bias in PPP)
23 and to the level of aggregation in the data (manufacturing versus the

entire economy). 24 Such sensitivity, in turn, makes it difficult to
speak with confidence about all but very large misalignments.
A second method of calculating equilibrium exchange rates for
target zones is to employ an estimated structural model of exchange
rate determination that relates the (nominal) exchange rate to

— 29 —

"fundamentals."

Two

popular

such models are the monetary model and

the portfolio balance model. In the

monetary model, the change in the

exchange rate is usually explained by changes in the ratio of hone to
foreign money supplies and by changes in the ratio of the demand for
money at home to that abroad (where the demand for money is a function
of, inter alia, real income, nominal interest rates). The portfolio
balance model relates the (nominal) exchange rate to the stocks of
assets denominated in the hone and foreign currencies (where these asset
stocks include money supplies as well as interest—bearing securities).
Since the stocks of financial assets can be related to cumulative budget
deficits, cumulative current account imbalances, open market operations,
and exchange market intervention, the portfolio balance model provides a
direct role for such policies in influencing exchange rates.

In the

monetary model, such policies affect exchange rates only to the extent
that they affect the supply or demand for money.
Given estimates for such a structural model of exchange rates, the
equilibrium exchange rate could be defined as the rate corresponding
to the desired path of the explanatory fundamentals in the equation
(i.e., money supplies, real income, interest rates, budget positions).
This estimate of the equilibrium nominal

exchange rate, combined with

some assumed consistent path for prices at home and abroad, could then
be translated into an estimate of the equilibrium

real exchange rate.

This structural approach has three advantages: (i) it is forward—
looking and thus compatible with the intrinsic nature of the price

behavior of such assets as securities denominated in

different currencies;

30 —

(ii)

it provides a direct link between macroeconomic policy

variables and

exchange rates; and (iii) it recognizes that in today's world of high
international mobility of capital, the proximate determinants of exchange

rates, at least in the short run, probably lie in asset markets rather

than goods markets. At the same time, the structural exchange rate
equation approach is subject to at least two serious deficiencies.
The most serious shortcoming is that all known structural models
of exchange rate determination have been shown to have very limited
forecasting ability.

In fact, extensive empirical testing over the

past few years has demonstrated that the out—of—sample performance of
structural exchange rate models is frequently no better than that

yielded by naive" models (e.g., a random—walk model). 25 with the
benefit of hindsight, it seems that an important reason for the poor
performance of the various models is the nature of exchange rates as

asset prices. As indicated above, exchange rates are very sensitive to
expectations concerning future events and policies.

Periods that are

dominated by rumors, announcements, and "news" which alter expectations
are likely to induce a relatively large degree of exchange rate vola-

tility. Since by definition "news" cannot be predicted on the basis of
past information, it follows that by and large the resulting fluctuations

of exchange rates are unpredictable. In a way, this asset market perspective suggests that one should not expect to be able to forecast accurately exchange rate changes with the aid of simple structural models.
The role of the simple structural models is to account for the systematic

component of the evolution of exchange rates. In cases where the systematic,

—31—
predictable component is relatively small, one may expect to account for

only a small fraction of the variability of exchange rates. The main
message of all this is that target zones based on exchange rate forecasts
from such models night not carry sufficient credibility to act as an
anchor.

Another problem with the structural exchange rate models is that
the explanatory variables can be difficult to measure and interpret on

a timely basis. For example, the portfolio balance model requires
measurement of asset stocks by currency, by country of issuance, and
by residence of the holder. But such data only becoute available much
after the fact and estimates based on extrapolation of benchmark figures

may introduce substantial error into the calculations. Similarly, in
the monetary model one faces the problems of which monetary aggregate
to use (in view of financial market innovations) • how to forecast that

aggregate over the relevant tine horizon, and how to distinguish short—

term movements in velocity from trends. For these reasons, the prospects
of obtaining timely forecasts (target zones) from these models are not
encouraging.

The third method for calculating equilibrium exchange rates is the

underlying balance approach. In this approach, the (real) equilibrium
exchange rate is defined as the rate that would make the

'

underlying"

current account (i.e., the actual current account adjusted for temporary
factors) equal to "normal" net capital flows during the next two

or

years, given (i) anticipated macroeconomic policies in the subject

three

— 32 —

countries,

(ii) the delayed effects of past exchange rate changes, and

(iii) a number of other expected developments.

Furthermore, the equality

between underlying current accounts and normal capital flows must not be
achieved either by wholesale unemployment, or by artificial incentives
to incoming or outgoing capital, or by undue restrictions on trade. 26
If after accounting for these factors, "underlying" current accounts are
calculated to be quite different from "normal" capital flows, the implication is that either planned macroeconomic policies or present exchange
rates need to change to prevent such undesirable balance of payments
scenarios from taking place.

This underlying balance approach to exchange rate assessment was
developed by the Fund staff in the early l970s (see IMP (1984b));
it similarly serves as the framework for calculation of •misaligninents"

in Williamson (1935). The inputs for the calculations come from various
sources. Estimates of "anticipated macroeconomic policies," and their
associated real growth and inflation paths, can be obtained from national
projections or from the Fund's world economic outlook projection's.

Estimates of "normal" net capital flows typically come from an analysis
of past trends adjusted for expected future structural developments

(e.g., capital liberalization measures). Finally, estimates of the
effect of exchange rate changes on current accounts can he derived, for
example, from either of the Fund's two operating trade models, namely
the Multilateral Exchange Rate Model (MERN) or the World Trade Model
(WTM). 27

— 33 —

For application in a system of target zones, the underlying balance
approach carries three advantages. First, it recognizes that judgments
about the appropriateness of current exchange rates cannot be divorced
from either future anticipated macroecononic policies, or from delayed
effects of past exchange rates that are not yet visible but are likely
to emerge in the future, or from particular factors (e.g., dock strikes)

that are temporary in nature. In this sense, it not only focuses attention
on the root cause of
addresses

misalignment

(i.e., inappropriate policies) but also

the "time dimension" in the misalignment problem.

Second,

the underlying balance approach appreciates that a desirable

or sustainable payments position need not imply a zero current account

balance. Specifically, it recognizes that a country with a relatively
low domestic savings rate but with relatively attractive domestic
investment opportunities can run a persistent current account deficit
by drawing on foreign savings if (i) it invests those foreign savings
wisely; and (ii) the return on domestic investments is not artificially
high (because of special incentives for or restrictions on international
capital flows, or because of unsustainably high government borrowing).
A third advantage of the underlying balance approach is that, at
least in principle, it ensures that the computed equilibrium exchange
rates are consistent across countries. 28 This is so because the trade
models that underlie such exchange rate calculations are specifically

designed to be used in a multilateral setting. Since target zones must
be mutually consistent, this is not a trivial consideration.

— 34 —

Moving to the negative side of the ledger, the underlying balance
approach is subject to a number of problems.
First and foremost, the concept of "normal" net private capital
flows is a particularly ambiguous one; yet estimates of these capital
flows play a key role in the estimate of the equilibrium real exchange

rate. The reasons why the concept is so slippery include the following:
(1) While private saving rates are reasonably stable over time and
across countries, the geographic loci of perceived investment opportunities are not; the latter depend on a wide set of expected policies in
both the origin and host countries——many of which can change precipitately. (ii) Various controls on capital flows make it difficult to
determine what is "normal," especially when these controls change over
tine. (iii) Acquisition of foreign assets subjects the holder to risks
(e.g., expropriation risk) that are fundanentally different from those
associated with domestic assets, and therefore consideration of such
risks may limit exposure even when average real rates of return on foreign

assets are high. (iv) Large changes in government fiscal positions, and
drastic shifts in private portoflio composition, can lead to large swings
in observed capital flows, the duration of which is highly uncertain.

The end result of all this is that estimates of "normal net capital
flows for the likely participants in a target zone system are subject
to a considerable margin of error.
A second problem with the underlying balance approach is that it is
not well suited to the analysis and diagnosis of the mix of macroeconomic

policies. In general, macroeconomic policies influence the equilibrium

—35—

exchange rate in this approach via their effect on anticipated real

output and inflation paths over the next two to three years. Thus, the
model will produce different estimates of the equilibrium exchange rate

for different real output and inflation paths. But it cannot distinguish
among policy mixes that yield the same output and inflation paths.

This

must be regarded as a shortcoming since the cause of misalignment may
lie more with an inappropriate mix of policies (e.g., overly loose fiscal
policy cum overly tight monetary policy) than with an inappropriate stance
of policies (e.g., excessively expansionary monetary and fiscal policy).
The third difficulty with the underlying balance approach is that

it is operationally complex. Ihta requirements are substantial, computations depend on large—scale trade models, the rationale behind some of
the calculations is not transparent, and estimates of some key parameters

(e.g., short—run and long—run tradeelasticities) are uncertain. 29
All of this, in turn, might be burdensome for agreement on, and continuous
revision of, target zones.
Fourth, the large—scale trade models that are likely to be used in
this approach do not pay sufficient attention to either financial var—
lables or to the important distinction between expected and unexpected

values of key economic variables. These omissions render this approach
somewhat remote from the mechanisms usually associated with the deter-

mination of market exchange rates. Therefore, target zones based on
forecasts from the underlying balance approach may again be questioned
by market participants.

— 36 —

To summarize, each of the three methods of calculating equilibrium
exchange rates has strengths and weaknesses. It might, however, not be
necessary to follow just one method. Instead, one could construct a
consensus" forecast on the basis of estimates from several methods.
Such an exercise would also provide information on the comparative
performance of each method which, in turn, could aid in the ultimate

selection of the proper calculation method. Finally, in appraising the
methods of calculating equilibrium exchange rates, it is important to
recognize that such methods are already being applied to some degree
whenever the Fund "takes a view" on the appropriateness of major currency

exchange rates. In this sense, the problems raised are not new ones.
The differences are that in a system of target zones (especially the
"harder" versions) the method of calculating equilibrium exchange
rates would be more explicit and subject to greater scrutiny, and that
the results of such calculations would be shared with the market.

11.2: What currencies should be included in the system of target zones?

Mother central issue for a system of target zones is the number
and choice of currencies to be included. Several considerations seem
paramount.

For administrative efficiency, it is desirable that member-

ship should be kept fairly small. This is because the complexity of
negotiations, and the danger of conflicts that might bring about a
collapse of the system, can be said to increase rapidly as the number
of partners rises.

This position is consistent with the view that

centralized management of exchange rates is feasible only when the

— 37 —

n.nber of decisions to be made is reasonably small. 30 In this connection,
it is useful to recall that although a large number of currencies were
managed under the Bretton Woods system, countries took the initiative
for

par value changes, the Fund could only concur with or object to par

value

changes proposed by a member, and par values were changed rather

infrequently. 31 similarly, the present system of managed floating is a
decentralized system that permits "market—based" decisions to act as a
safety valve when more centralized decisions about adjustment responsi-

bilities and exchange rate alignments do not prove possible. In short,
since international decision—making on exchange rates is likely to be
difficult, one should not unduly burden the system with too many players.
For a target zone system to have an appreciable impact on
conditions in foreign exchange markets, it is desirable that the member-

ship include major currency countries. Although the vast majority of
countries currently maintain some form of "pegged" exchange arrangements,
the largest trading countries maintain either "limited flexibility"
(e.g., the EMS) or "more flexible" exchange arrangements, including
'•independent floating" by four of the largest industrialS countries

(Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States). 32
Reflecting this, it has been estimated that about two thirds to four
fifths of world trade is conducted at floating rates. 33 The key to
progressing toward more fixity in exchange rates therefore lies not in
inducing many countries to adopt constraints on exchange rate flexi—

bility——thisis already a fact of life——but rather in inducing the largest

— 38 —

trading

countries to accept such constraints. This consideration has no

doubt influenced the leading proposals

(e.g., Roosa (1984)) that the key

members of a target zone be either the three largest industrial countries
or the Group of Five (or perhaps Group of Seven) countries.

A further consideration is the characteristics of the potential

member countries. These characteristics, emphasized in the literature
on so—called optimal currency areas, are relevant not for choosing the
right number of countries for a target zone but rather for assessing
the likely membership.

The more important country characteristics ate the following:

(1) The openness of the economy. This criterion suggests that
relatively open economies should prefer greater fixity of exchange
rates because exchange rate fluctuations induce larger domestic price
changes in more open economies, thereby complicating the task of
domestic stabilization policies.

(ii) The size of the economy. Small economies are said to be
more inclined to join currency unions because, in the absence of such
monetary integration, their effective economic size would be suboptimal.
This of course begs the question of to whom to peg.
(iii) The degree of commodity diversification.

Highly diversified

economies are deemed more likely candidates for greater fixity of exchange
rates because their diversification provides some natural insulation
against a variety of shocks; hence, there is less need for the insulation
properties of a flexible exchange rate.

— 39 —

(iv)

The degree of factor mobility. Countries between which there

is a high degree of factor mobility are viewed as better candidates for
currency unions because factor mobility provides a substitute for exchange

rate flexibility in promoting external adjustment. Since factor mobility
ta in turn likely to diminish with geographic distance, this criterion
is often used to justify currency unions between small neighboring states.

Cv) Similarity of inflation rates. The argument here is that
countries with similar tastes for inflation——and more important, similar

histories of inflation——will tend to prefer greater fixity of exchange

rates. There is however a chicken—and—egg problem: do member countries
of a currency union have similar inflation rates because they belong
to the union, or have they joined the union because of their similar
capacities to combat inflation?

Obviously, these country characteristics do not all point in the

same direction. For example, the criteria of openness, size, and factor
mobility suggest that the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany,
and Japan would have relatively weak incentives to join a target zone,
relative say, to the smaller European countries that are members of

the EMS. th the other hand, the criteria of commodity diversification
and similarity of inflation rates lean perhaps the other way.

A final consideration is the relationship to existing currency

blocs. In thinking about the potential membership of a target zone
system, it is important to recognize that most countries are already
part of a currency bloc, be it via pegging to a single currency or currency basket, or via participation in an arrangement with limited exchange

— 40 —

rate

flexibility (e.g., the EMS). This raises three points: (1) where

members of the target zone system are also members of other (regional)
currency blocs, provision would have to be made for ensuring consistency
of cross exchange rates and for coordinating intervention practices
between the "core" target zone and "satellite" currency blocs;
(ii) countries that already have non—exchange—rate linking arrangements
(e.g. a customs union) nay be reluctant to undertake additional linkages
(i.e. target zones) for fear of restricting too tightly their room for
independent action; and (iii) if the most natural and profitable opportunities for currency union are exploited first, then it is likely
that a target zone system among major currency countries nay have to
operate with more flexibility (e.g., wider margins and more frequent
revision of central rates) than satellite currency blocs.
11.3: Row wide should the target zones be and how frequently should they
be revised?
The equilibrium exchange rate——also sometimes referred to as the
central rate——represents only one of several parameters that characterize

target zones. Two others are the width of the zones surrounding the
central rates and the frequency by which the zones are revised,
What considerations bear on the determination of these latter two
parameters?

Concerning the width of the zones, four factors are relevant.
First, the zones must be wide enough to accommodate transitory disturbances that do not alter long—run equilibrium real exchange rates.

In this sense, the zone may be viewed as providing a buffer. The
buffer not only guards against costly shifts in resources due to

— 41 —

excessively

frequent changes in central rates but also provides the

authorities with breathing space to sort out permanent from transitory

shocks. Second, the zone should be wide enough to reflect uncertainties
about the equilibrium central rate itself. As noted earlier, there
are various approaches to calculating the real equilibrium exchange
rate and there are uncertainties about the parameter values in each

model. To many observers, little is gained by acting as if equilibrium
exchange rates could be assessed with great precision.
this, some proposals for target zones recommend

Recognizing

initial zones on the

order of 10 percentage points on each side of the central rate (see,

for example, Williamson (1985)). The third factor to be considered
is speculation. A well—known weakness of fixed exchange rates is
that frequently they offer speculators "one—way

bets" about the

direction of changes in parities. Target zones must therefore be
sufficiently wide to allow for occasional changes in central rates
within the zone without provoking one—way speculation.
central

Fourth, if

rates were specified in terms of a numeraire currency, then

the width of the target zone linking nonnumeraire currencies will
in

general be different to that between each currency and the

numeraire.
Also, there is no reason why the width of the zones should be

constant over time. For example, if uncertainty about the equilibrium
real exchange rate and about the nature of disturbances diminished
with experience, then narrower zones could be adopted. On the other

— 42 —

hand, if turbulence increased over time, wider zones could be adopted.
Finally, as a corollary of the above arguments, there is no logical
presumption that the width of the zone should be the sane for all

members. In this connection, it is relevant to note the experience
of the EMS in which the currency of Italy, a country that has had
relatively high inflation in the past, is subject to wider margins

than other currencies. Similarly, it has been suggested that if the
United Kingdom were to join the EMS, special provision should be
made in the form of wider margins for the pound sterling to reflect
the influence of oil price developments on the exchange rate.
Turning to the frequency of adjustment, a number of points need

to be considered. To begin with, the frequency with which the central
rates (and zones around then) are adjusted should reflect the frequency
of changes in real economic conditions, as well as, of course, the size
of inflation differentials across member countries.

Examples of changes

in real economic conditions would include permanent changes in the
terms of trade, continuing intercountry differences in labor productivity,
and intercountry shifts in saving and investment propensities. Because
such changes in real economic conditions generally do not occur at close
intervals, they are unlikely to induce frequent changes in the

zones. The size of inflation differentials depends

target

primarily on how

successful target zones are in inducing harmonization of members' macroeconomic and structural policies, particularly

monetary policy. The

second factor governing the desired frequency of adjustment is the flexi-

bility of macroeconomic policy instruments. Specifically, since a change

— 43 —

in

real economic conditions can be reconciled either by a change in

macroeconomic policies with an unchanged zone or by a change in the zone
with unchanged policies, it follows that inflexible policies call for

higher frequency of zone adjustment, and vice—versa. Third, there is
the credibility issue. Frequent revisions in the zones reduce credibility
of the zones and thereby reduce their value as an anchor for expectations.

On the other hand, frequent changes in macroeconomic policies designed
to sustain the zones may also reduce credibility——but this time of the
policies.

Therefore,

the optimal frequency of adjustment from a credi-

bility viewpoint involves balancing between these two considerations.

Fourth, some have argued that if target zones are adjusted frequently

for inflation differentialsand the need for balance of payments adjustment, speculative attacks will be discouraged, since they are motivated

by large discrete changes in exchange rates. Fifth, the frequency of
adjustment must obviously be constrained by the availability of the data
necessary for computations.

11.4: How would exchange rates be kept within the zones and with what
consequences for other policy objectives?
For a system of target zones to operate successfully, it is necessary that exchange rates be kept within the agreed zones, at least most

of the time. But how would participating countries assure this result?
Three policy instruments should be considered.

The most obvious instrument is domestic monetary policy.
Indeed, as indicated in Section I, a differentiating characteristic
of target zones is that the authorities pay more attention to the
exchange rate in the conduct of domestic monetary policy than they do

— 44 —

under the present system of managed floating. What this means is
that participating members will have to seek greater coordination of

monetary policies, with a consequent reduction in the ability to inde-

pendently control the money supply. For example, a member of the system
that sees its nominal exchange rate fall to the bottom of the zone would
be expected to slow its money growth rate and to increase its domestic
interest rate vis—'a—vis those of other members; 35 in this way, it

would induce an appreciation in its nominal exchange rate, thereby
keeping its exchange rate within the target zone.

Assuming that the

pass—through of nominal exchange rate changes into domestic prices is
less than complete, the same monetary policy action would allow the
member to satisfy its target for the real exchange rate as well. 36
There is little doubt about the ability of major industrial countries to influence nominal and real exchange rates in the medium term

using domestic monetary policy. 37 The key question concerns the willingness
to do so given the implied reduction in their ability to then use domestic

monetary policy for internal objectives. To Dany observers, it is simply
naive to believe that the United States, Japan, and the Federal Republic
of Germany would be willing to override internal objectives for exchange

rate targets in the formulation of domestic monetary policy. Under this
view, "soft" target zones are the strongest commitment one can

reasonably

envisage for the three largest potential members. Others argue, however,
that the independence of monetary policy is far from complete under the
present system, even for those countries classified by the Fund as

— 45 —

"independently

floating." To take but one recent example, the U.K. author-

ities reacted to the large decline in the dollar/pound rate in early
1985 by encouraging large increases in domestic interest rates——and this
even though there was strong domestic pressure for lower interest rates

to help reduce unemployment. For this reason, supporters of target zones
argue that all countries already have implicit target zones beyond which
they are willing to sacrifice internal objectives for the exchange rate.
It is argued therefore that the loss of monetary independence at the
margin would be minimal.

A second possible policy instrument for keeping exchange rates
within target zones is sterilized exchange market intervention (i.e.,
exchange market intervention that leaves the monetary base unchanged).
Its main attraction is that, if effective, it would

permit

the author-

ities to influence exchange rates while simultaneously maintaining
control of the domestic money supply.
Unfortunately, the prognosis for using sterilized exchange market
intervention as the primary instrument for controlling exchange rates

is not favorable. The Jurgensen Report (1983), for example, supports
the view that sterilized intervention by itself is unlikely to be an
effective tool for influencing the level of the exchange rate over the

medium or long—term. 38 Similarly, recent empirical work on exchange
rate determination indicates that while domestic and foreign currency
assets may well be imperfect substitutes——a necessary condition for
sterilized exchange market intervention to be effective——risk premiums
in exchange markets are not well explained by relative asset supplies

— 46 —

(the

very variables affected by exchange marker intervention). 39 In

short, the effects of sterilized intervention on market exchange rates
are likely to be small and uncertain in size.

Nevertheless, sterilized

may have a useful role to play in dampening short—term
of exchange rates, in countering disorderly market

intervention

volatility

conditions,

in complementing and supporting other policies, and in expressing an
attitude toward exchange markets.

Capital controls represent a third instrument for keeping exchange

rates within target zones. This is however generally not regarded as an

attractive option for two reasons. First, even aggressive capital control
programs, such as those of the early 1970s, were not able to stem private
capital flows, and the subsequent development of offshore banking markets

suggests even lower effectiveness today. Second, capital control programs
are most effective in altering exchange rates when they cover all types

of capital transactions. But in that case, there is no presunption that
the resource allocation costs of impeding the international flow of
capital would be less serious than departures of exchange rates from
the zones themselves.

The preceding discussion suggests that the primary instrument
for keeping exchange rates within target zones is likely to be monetary

policy. If this is so, then a second relevant question emerges: with
monetary policy geared more to external objectives, what policy instruments will be assigned to internal balance (i.e., price stability and
high employment)?

— 47 —

One logical answer is fiscal policy. 40 Here, the key question

is not so much whether fiscal policy can affect aggregate demand in najor

industrial countries. Experience suggests that it can. Rather, the
issue is whether fiscal policy is a sufficiently flexible policy instrument
to be used for stabilization policy in a world in which some countries
have medium—term targets for reducing the share of government expenditure
in overall economic activity, some are contemplating large structural
changes in their tax system, some are commited to given levels of
social programs and defense spending, some are wedded to preannounced

public sector borrowing requirements, and some are facing legislatures
that can take years (not months) to enact significant cuts in budget
deficits.
A second policy option (favored for example by Meade (1984)) is

to use labor—market policy for internal balance. In brief, the idea
is to lower the money wage rate in any sector which has excess supply

of labor and to raise it where there is excess demand. The problem,
recognized by supporters, is that the implementation of such a policy
would involve the substantial reform of labor market institutions.
In short, although sound in its internal logic, it begs the central
question of how to bring such a labor market policy into being in

advanced industrial economies. The slow progress in reducing structural
rigidities in European labor markets bears testimony to the difficulties
involved.

In sum, because of the limitations of other policy instruments,

monetary policy is often called on to serve both external and internal

— 48 —

objectives.

If a move to target zones were made, it would require shift-

ing more of the emphasis toward external objectives. This might not
create a major problem if all members of the target zone geared monetary
policy toward price stability; or if coordinated, sterilized exchange
market intervention could ease the external obligations of monetary
policy; or if fiscal policy could be made flexible enough to deal

effectively with internal balance. itwever, since none of these
three outcomes is likely to be fully realized, members of a target zone
system would probably still be faced with serious conflicts between

external and internal balance. At the same time, the constraints on
macroeconomic policies induced by a target zone system might make a
contribution to the realization of these three outcomes.
III. Postcript

This paper, along with others that examined issues raised in the

reports on the international monetary system presented by the 1puties
of the Group of Ten and Group of Twenty—Four, was discussed by the

Fund's cecutive Board in early 1986. Since then, efforts to improve
the functioning of the exchange rate system have centered on enhancing
economic policy coordination among the largest economies and on
strengthening the multilateral setting for Fund surveillance, including the formulation of a set of "objective indicators."
At its meeting on April 9—10, 1986, the Interim Committee agreed
that "if better exchange rate performance were to be achieved on a
durable basis, it would be of the essence that economic policies be
conducted in a sound and mutually consistent way and that exchange rate

— 49 —

considerations

should play their part in those policies" (International

Monetary Fund (1986), p. 115). The Committee also reconfirmed the key
role that Fund surveillance needs to play in the functioning of the

international monetary system. "To improve the multilateral setting
for surveillance, the Committee asked the Executive Board to consider
ways in which its regular reviews of the world economic situation could
be further adapted to improve the scope for discussing external imbal—
ances, exchange rate developments, and policy interactions among members.

An approach worth exploring further was

the

formulation of a set of

objective indicators related to policy actions and economic performance,

having regard to a medium—term framework. Such indicators might help
to identify a need for discussion of econonic policies" (p. 115).

The leaders of the seven major industrial countries, meeting on
May 4—6, 1986 in Tokyo at the twelfth annual economic summit, reinforced

this commitment to closer coordination of economic policies. They asked
that their finance ministers meet at least once a year to review their
individual economic objectives and forecasts collectively, and that
they use a set of quantitative indicators of economic policies and
performance with a particular view to examining their mutual compati-

bility" (International Monetary Fund, 1986, p. 145). They welcomed the
recent examples of improved coordination among the Group of Five
countries——including the Plaza Agreement of September 22, 1985——but
felt that additional measures were needed "to ensure that procedures
for effective coordination of international economic policy are

strengthened further" (ibid, p. 157). Toward this goal, the leaders,

— 50 —

together

with the representatives of the European Community parti-

cipating in the meeting, reaffirmed their intention "to cooperate

with the IMP in strengthening multilateral surveillance, particularly
among the countries (the Group of Five) whose currencies constitute

the SDR" (ibid, p. 157). Further, they asked that in conducting such
surveillance and in conjunction with the Managing Director of the IMF,
account be taken of "such indicators as growth rates of gross national
product (GNP), interest rates, inflation rates, unemployment rates,
ratios of fiscal deficits to GNP, current account and trade balances,

money growth rates, international reserve holdings, and exchange rates"
(ibid, p. 157).

In July 1986, the Fund's Executive Board discussed a staff paper
on "Indicators Relating to Policy Actions and Economic Peforniance." 41
This was followed in September by the Executive Board's discussion of the
staff's world economic outlook exercise, the published version of which
appeard in October,

In the context of analyzing the medium—term prospects

of industrial countries, that exercise contains a section which reviews
certain potential sources of tension in the interaction of economic
developments and considers their implications for the stance of policies.
SThen the Interim Committee next met on September 28, 1986 in

Washington, it once again focused, inter alia, on the use of indicators

in surveillance. The committee agreed that "a key focus of indicators
should be on points of interaction among national economies, in particular developments affecting the sustainability of balance of payments

— 51 —

positions,

and on the policies underlying them" (International Monetary

Fund, 1986, p. 309). The Committee also asked the Funds Executive
Board to develop further the application of indicators in the context
both of the period consultations with individual member countries and
of the World Economic Outlook so as to facilitate the nultilateraj.

appraisal and coordination of economic policies" (ibid).

— 52 —

FOOTNOTES

lAt its meeting in Seoul, Korea on October 6—7, 1985, the Interim
Committee of the Board of Governors of the International Monetary
Fund requested the Executive Board of the Fund '. . . to study the issues
raised in these reports (the reports on the international monetary
system presented by the Deputies of the Group of Ten and the Deputies
of the Group of Twenty—Four) with a view to facilitating a substantial

consideration by the Committee at its next meeting." This paper is
one of the series of papers prepared in late 1985 in response to
that request.

2Some other proposals for improving exchange rate stability are
analyzed in Crockett and Goldstein (1987).
31n the Group of Ten report, target zones are described as follows:
the authorities concerned would define wide margins around an
adjustable set of exchange rates devised to be consistent with a sus-

tainable pattern of balances of payments" (par. 31). (See International
Monetary Fund (...).).

4Another way of summarizing the difference between a system of target
zones and the present system of managed floating would be as follows.
Under target zones, authorities must come to a mutually agreed view on

the appropriate zones for major currency exchange rates. In contrast,
under the present system, authorities have not generally expressed
their own view on appropriate zones for exchange rates, let alone come
to a common view with other authorities.

— 53 —

5Target zones are intended to reflect estimates of real equilibrium
exchange rates because it is the real exchange rate that is most
relevant for resource allocation decisions and for balance of payments
adjustment; however, it is usually assumed that for operational purposes
these real rate calculations would be translated into nominal exchange

rate zones. The assumption is that the authorities can alter real rates
by operating on nominal rates. Also, whereas a breach of the target
zone is expected to initiate a review of the whole range of a country's
macroeconomic and structural policies, most target zone proposals assume
that monetary policy will carry the primary responsibility for managing
the exchange rate.

6lnternational Monetary Fund (1974b).
7Existing procedures do not rely on the assessment of appropriate zones
but rather use as a starting point the last occasion on which exchange
rate developments were brought to the attention of the Executive Board.
8Coordination may be thought of as encompassing all international

influences on domestic policymaking; see Polak (1981). It might be
regarded as the chief criticism because short—term volatility and
longer—term misalignment of exchange rates are generally regarded as
manifestations of the lack of discipline and coordination.
9See Lingerer, Evans and Nyberg (1983) for a review of the EMS

ence during the 1979—82 period.
l°International Monetary Fund (1984a).

"See, for example, Bryant (1983) and Obstfeld (1985).

experi-

— 54 —

l2This

assumes that such an order of magnitude is compatible over

the long run with a reasonable buildup of debt and with an acceptable
maturity profile.

l3Critics of the present system might reply that the Group of Five
New York agreement was a reaction to the absence of coordination and the
large misaliguments fostered by the present system.
'4See solomon (1982) on this point.
'5Some observers also doubt whether in practice quiet zones could he

quiet for long. They argue that it is not possible for the Fund and
national authorities to know what target zones are without this inform—
ation leaking out.
'6See

Calvo

(1983).

'7See International Monetary Fund (1984c), Tables 2 and 3.
'8See Adams and Gros (1986) for an analysis of the dangers for
inflation of real exchange rate targets.
l9See

Polak

(1981).

20Most proposals for target zones (e.g., Williamson (1985)) assume
that fiscal policy is not well suited to be an instrument of exchange
rate policy because it is too inflexible and because its (alleged)
comparative advantage (vis—'a—vis monetary policy) is in influencing

domestic demand rather than the balance of paents.
21See Ijngerer (1984) for a discussion of the implications of the

EMS for the likely success of a return to a system of fixed hut adjustable exchange rates.

— 55 —

22See Frenkel (l981a). Of course, to the extent that actual exchange
rates have been subject to misalignnents, one would not want the actual
rates

to closely follow a PPP path. However, divergencies from PPP have

been so marked and so persistent as to raise doubts about the credibility
of exchange rate forecasts based on PPP.
23See Balassa (1964).
24See

International Monetary Fund (1984b).

25Meese and Rogoff (1982) and Isard (1986).

26This description of the real equilibrium exchange rate is a close
relative of those outlined in Nurkse (1945), InternatIonal Monetary
Fund (1970), and the Group of twenty—Four Report, para. 69.
27See Artus and Mccuirk (1981) and Deppler and Ripley (1978).

2SThis advantage must be qualified in view

crepancy in

of the birge global dis-

current account positions. This discrepancy makes it harder

to reach agreement on what consltutes an equilibrium pattern of current
account positions.
29See, for example, Goldstein and Khan (1984).

300f course, exchange rates established in a target zone would have
clear implications for nonparticipants to which they would have to
adjust and/or react.
31The Bretton Woods system also had the U.S. dollar as the numeraire.

With the dollar as anchor, exchange rate decisions could take place one—
at—a—time. When this was no longer the case (e.g., August—December 1971),

negotiations over exchange rates were much more difficult. It is not
clear what currency or currency—basket would serve as numeraire in a
target

zone.

— 56 —

321t is worth recalling that the currencies of EMS members float
against currencies of many nonmembers.
338ee International Monetary Fund (1984c) and the Group of Ten
Report, para. 9.

34A counterargument is that changes in macroeconomic policies in
response to real changes in the economy could act at times to enhance
the credibility of policy if they were perceived as responsive to these
changes.

351t is not clear what form monetary intervention would take.
Members could intervene in domestic financial markets (exchanging

money for debt of the same currency of denomination) or in international financial markets (exchanging monies of different currency

denomination). If the latter were envisaged, questions could arise
about the adequacy of intervention assets and about sterilization
operations.

36Obstfeld (1985) reports that month—month correlations between
nominal and real exchange rates for the 1976—85 period were above
0.95 for the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, and the deutsche mark.
371n the long run (say, three to five years) ,

the ability to

use monetary policy to affect the real exchange rate will be more

modest. Also, even in the medium term, this ability will be lower
for the smaller, more open, more highly indexed industrial countries

than for the larger, less open, less indexed ones. See Goldstein and
Khan (1984) for a survey of estimates of these "pass—through" effects.

— 57 —

38" Intervention will normally be useful only when complementing
and supporting other policies." JurgenAen Report (1983), p.
39See, for example, Dooley and Isard (1983).
40Fiscal. policy also has a role to play in achieving a given real

exchange rate on a sustainable basis.
41See

paper.

Crockett

and Goldstein (1987) for a published version of that

— 58 —

REFERENCES

Adams, Charles and Daniel Gros, "The Consequences of Real Exchange

Rate Rules for Inflation: Some Illustrative Examples," IMF
Staff Papers, (Washington), Vol. 33 (September 1986), pp. 439—76,

Artus, Jacques R., and Andrew D. Crockett, Floating Exchange Rates and
the Need for Surveillance, Essays in International Finance, No. 127
Princeton University (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1978).

and Anne Kenney McGuirk, "A Revised Version of the Multilateral
Exchange Rate Model," IMP Staff Papers, (June, 1981).

_____ and John H. Young, "Fixed and Flexible Rates: A Renewal of the
Debate," IMP Staff Papers, (December 1979), pp. 654—98.
Bergsten, C. Fred, and John Williamson, "Exchange Rates and Trade Policy,"
in Trade Policy in the 1980s, ed. William R. Cline, (ed,), Washington:
Institute for International Economics, 1983.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey, "Is Exchange Rate Volatility 'Excessive'?" New
England Economic Review, (september/October 1983), pp. 5—14.
Bryant, Ralph C., "Comments and Discussion" on "Floating Exchange
Rates After Ten Years," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
1 (1983), The Brookings Institution (Washington), pp. 71—79.
Calvo, Guillermo, "Trying to Stabilize: Some Theoretical Reflections

Based on the Case of Argentina," in P. Aspe, R. Dornbusch, and
M. Obstfeld, (eds.), Financial Policies and the World Capital
Market: The Problem of Latin American Countries, (University of
Chicago Press), 1983, pp. 199—216.

— 59 —

dine,

William R., International Monetary Reform and the Developing

Countries (Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1976).
Crockett, A., and M. Goldstein, Strengthening the International

Monetary System: Exchange Rates, Surveillance and Objective
Indicators, Occasional Paper (Washington: International Monetary
Fund, forthcoming).
Deppler, Michael, and Duncan H. Ripley, "The World Trade Model:
Merchandise Trade," IMF Staff Papers (March 1978), pp. 147—206.

Deputies of the Group of Ten, "The Functioning of the International
Monetary System: A Report to the Ministers and Governors of the
Group of Ten," June 1985, circulated as EBD/85/l54, Supplement 1.

Deputies of the Group of Twenty—Four, "The Functioning and Improvement
of the International Monetary System: Report of the Deputies of
the Group of 24," August 1985, circulated as EBD/85/228.

Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard, "A Portfolio Balance Model of Exchange
Rates and Some Structural Estimates of the Risk Premium," IMP

Staff

Papers (December 1983), pp. 683—702.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1980:1, pp. 143—85.

Dunn, Robert, "Exchange Rate Rigidity, Investment Distortions, and the
Failure of Bretton Woods," Essays in International Finance, No. 97,

Princeton University (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1973).

Emminger, Otmar, Exchange Rate Policy Reconsidered, Occasional Paper
No. 10 (New York: Group of Thirty, 1982).

— 60 —

The Dollar's Borrowed Strength, Occasional Paper No. 19 (New York:
Group of Thirty, 1985).
Ethier, Wilfred, and Arthur I. Bloomfield, "Managing the Managed Float,"

Essays in International Finance, no. 112. (Princeton, New Jersey:
princeton University Press, 1975).

Frenkel, Jacob A., "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parities During
the l97Os," European Economic Review, Vol. 16, (May 1981),
pp. 145—166.

"Reflections on European Monetary Integration," Weltwirt—
schaftliches Archiv 111, No. 2, 1975, pp. 214—221.
"International Liquidity and Monetary Control," in von Furstenberg,
George M. (ed.) International Money and Credit: The Policy Roles,
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1983, pp. 65—109.
"Comments on Exchange Rate Arrangements in the 'Eighties'" in
The International Monetary System: Forty Years After Bretton
Woods, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Conference Series No. 28,
1984, pp. 119—25.
"A Note on 'the Good Fix' and 'the Bad Fix'," European Economic
Review, 28 No. 1—2, June—July, 1985, pp. 125—27.

_____

"Seeking a Solution through Policy Coordination," in John H. Makin
(ed.) Exchange Rate Targets: Desirable Or Disastrous, Washington, D.C.

American Enterprise Institute, 1986, pp. 10—22
"Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of News: Lessons
from the 1970's" Journal of political Economy, (August 1981),
pp. 665—705.

— 61 —

Frenkel,

Jacob A., and Joshua Aizenman, Aspects of the Optimal Management

of Exchange Rates, Journal of International Economics, (November
1982), pp. 231—56.

Frenkel, Jacob A., and Michael L. Mussa, "The Efficiency of Foreign
Exchange Markets and Measures of Turbulence," American Economic
Review (May 1970), pp. 374—81.

_____

"Comments on Exchange Rate Arrangements in the Eighties," in

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, The International Monetary System,
Boston, May 1984, pp. 119—25.

Genberg, Hans, "On Choosing the Right Rules for Exchange Rate Management," The World Economy (December 1984), pp. 391—406.

Goldstein, Morris, Have Flexible Exchange Rates Handicapped Macroeconomic
Policy? Princeton Special Papers in International Economics, no. 14.
Princeton, N.J., 1980.

and M. Khan, "Income and Price Effects in Foreign Trade," in
R. Jones and P. Kenen (eds), Handbook of International Economics,
Vol. II, North—Holland Publishing Co., 1985, pp. 1041—1105.
Group of Thirty, The Foreign Exchange Markets Under Floating Rates,
a Study in International Finance by the Exchange Markets
Participants' Study Group (New York: Group of Thirty, 1980).

_____

The Problem of Exchange Rates (New York: Group of Thirty, 1983).

Helleiner, Gerald K., Towards a New Bretton Woods: Challenges for the
World Financial and Trading System, Report by a Cotninowealth

Study Group (London: Commonwealth Secretariat, 1983).

— 62 —

International

Monetary Fund, The Role of Exchange Rates in the

A Report by the Executive Directors
(Washington: IMF, 1970).

International Monetary Reform: Documents of the Committee of
Twenty (Washington: IMF, 1974).
"Guidelines for the Management of Floating Rates" in Annual

Report of the Executive Directors of the International
Monetary Fund, 1974, Washington, TMF, 1974).

_____ (1984a), Exchange Rate Rate Volatility and World Trade, a study
by the Research Department ot the International Monetary Fund,
Occasional Paper No. 28 (Washington: IMF, July 1984).

_____ (1984b),

Issues in the Assessment of the Exchange Rates of

Industrial Countries, a study by the Research Department of the
International Monetary Fund, Occasional Paper No. 29 (Washington:
IMF, July 1984).

The Exchange Rate System: Lessons of the Past and
_____ (1984c),
Options for the Future, a study by the Research Department of
the International Monetary Fund, Occasional paper No. 30
(Washington: IMF, July 1984).

_____

(1986),

IMF Survey (Washington), Vol. 15.

Isard, Peter, "The Empirical Modelling of Exchange Rates: An Assessment
of Alternative Models," IMF Departmental Memorandum 86/36, June 1986.
Jurgensen Report, Report of the Working Group on Exchange Market

vention. Washington: U.S. Treasury, 1983.

— 63

—

Kenen, Peter, "Reforming the International Monetary System," paper
prepared for presentation to New York Academy of Sciences,"
September 1985.

McCuirk, Anne Kenney, "Oil Price Changes and Real Exchange Rate Movements
among Industrial Countries," IMF Staff Papers, (December 1983)
pp. 843—884.

McKinnon, Ronald, An International Standard for Monetary Stabilization
(Washington, Institute for International Economics, 1984).

Meade, James, "A New Keynesian Bretton Woods," Three Banks Review (June
1984), pp. 8—25.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of
the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International
Economics, (February 1983), pp. 3—24.
Mikesell, Raymond and Henry Goldstein, "Rules for a Floating—Rate Regime,
Essays in International Finance, No. 109, Princeton University
(Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1975).

Mussa, Michael, tmpirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange
Rates and Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," in Theory
Policy, Institutions: Papers from the Carnegie—Rochester
Conferences on Public Policy, ed. by Karl Brunner and Allan H.

Meltzer (Amsterdam: North—Holland; U.S. and Canada: Elsevier
Science Publishers, 1983), pp. 165—312.

Mussa, Michael, 1981. The Role of Official Intervention. Group of
Thirty Occasional Paper, No. 6, New York.

—64--

Nurkse, Ragnar, Conditions of International Monetary Equilibrium,

Essays in International Finance, No. 4, Princeton University
(Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, Spring 1945).

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Floating Exchange Rates: Performance and Prospects,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming, 1985.

Polak, Jacques J., Coordination of National Economic Policies, Occasional
Paper No. 7 (New York: Group of Thirty, 1981).

Roosa, Robert V., "How to Create Exchange Rate Target Zones," Journal of
Commerce, 3 June, 1983.

______

"Exchange Rate Arrangements in the Eighties," in Federal

Reserve Bank of Boston, The International Monetary System:
Forty Years After Bretton Woods, Boston, May 1984,
pp. 104—118.

Shafer, Jeffrey R., and Bonnie B. Loopesko, "Floating Exchange Rates
After Ten Years," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 1
(1983), The Brookings Institution (Washington), pp. 1—70.
Solomon, Anthony M., "International Coordination of Economic Policies:

I. The Role of Economic Summitry; II. Coordinating Monetary
Policy?" The David Horowitz Lectures at Tel Aviv University,

Tel Aviv, and Hebrew University, Jerusalem, March 4 and 5, 1982
(unpublished).

Solomon, Robert, Reforming the Exchange—Rate Regime, International
Economic Letter, RS Associates, Inc. (Washington), Vol. 3,
No. 7 (July 18, 1983).

— 65 —

Tobin,

James, A Proposal for International Monetary Reform, Cowles

Foundation Paper No. 495, Cowles Foundation for Research in
Economics (New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press,
1980).

lingerer, Horst, Owen Evans, and Peter Nyberg, The European Monetary

System: The Experience, 1979—82, Occasional Paper No. 19
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, May 1983).

_____

"The European Monetary System and the International Exchange

Rate System," Departmental Memorandum, DM18413, Il'IF,

January 1984.

Willett, Thomas D., Floating Exchange Rates and International Monetary
Reform, American Enterprise Institute Studies in Economic Policy
(Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
Research, 1977).

Williamson, John, The Exchange Rate System, (Washington, Institute
for International Economics, 2nd edition, 1985).

