                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                COFINANCING IN ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

                                      Matthew J. Kotchen
                                      Neeraj Kumar Negi

                                      Working Paper 21139
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21139


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2015




Neeraj Kumar Negi works at the GEF Independent Evaluation Office (GEF IEO). The datasets on
GEF projects used for the paper were prepared by the GEF IEO and the GEF Secretariat. These were
accessed after securing required permissions from the two Offices.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Matthew J. Kotchen and Neeraj Kumar Negi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Cofinancing in Environment and Development: Evidence from the Global Environment Facility
Matthew J. Kotchen and Neeraj Kumar Negi
NBER Working Paper No. 21139
May 2015
JEL No. Q01,Q2,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

Leveraged cofinancing from public and private sources has emerged as a policy priority among
international environment and development agencies. There is nevertheless surprisingly little research
on the determinants and impacts of cofinancing for accomplishing environment and development
goals. This paper contributes to the literature with a focus on three interrelated questions: (1) How
does observed cofinancing depend on characteristics of the development project, the country where
the project takes place, and the agencies responsible for project funding and execution? (2) What
factors explain the likelihood that project cofinancing is based on loans rather than grants, and
that cofinancing comes from the private sector rather than public agencies or non-governmental
organizations? (3) Does greater cofinancing result in better environment and development projects?
To answer these questions, we take advantage of data from the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
on 3,269 projects from 1991 through the beginning of 2014. The results provide insight not only on
how agencies may target cofinancing going forward, but also on how greater emphasis on cofinancing
may implicitly shift environment and development priorities.


Matthew J. Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu

Neeraj Kumar Negi
Independent Evaluation Office
The Global Environment Facility
1818 H Street, NW, Mail Stop P5-500
Washington, DC 20433 USA
nnegi1@thegef.org
                                              I. Introduction
Questions about how to make international aid more effective are as old as aid itself. At the
macro level, some argue that not enough aid is the fundamental problem (e.g., Sachs 2005),
while others argue that aid is itself detrimental to economic development (e.g., Easterly 2006).
Meanwhile, at the micro level, the policy community is focused more immediately on finding
ways to increase the impact of aid on a project-by-project basis. With this goal in mind,
leveraged cofinancing has emerged as an increasingly important policy priority. The
International Monetary Fund (2014) defines cofinancing as “the joint or parallel financing of
programs or projects through loans or grants to developing countries provided by commercial
banks, export credit agencies, other official institutions in association with other agencies or
banks, or the World Bank and other multilateral financial institutions” (p.226). With the
support of most development agencies, the basic rationale for the promotion of cofinancing is
to leverage more resources from public and private sources to accomplish project, program, and
development goals.1
        The emphasis on cofinancing is especially pronounced in multilateral funds with a focus
on environmental protection and climate change, where leveraging scarce resources is
considered essential for providing global public goods at a meaningful scale. The Global
Environment Facility (GEF), which has provided more than $13.5 billion in grants for
environmental projects, has made cofinancing central to its mission. GEF grants have leveraged
an additional $65 billion of cofinancing for projects in 165 developing countries (GEF 2014a),
and recent policy reforms seek to increase its levels of cofinancing even further (GEF 2014b).
Other examples are the Climate Investment Funds (CIFs) that operate in developing and
middle-income countries to address climate change. Donor countries have contributed $7.6
billion to the CIFs, which are expected to leverage an additional $57 billion from other sources
(CIFs 2014). More recently, pledges of more than $10 billion to the Green Climate Fund (GCF)
were made in 2014 with the expectation that the GCF will prioritize cofinancing when making
funding decisions. Specifically, one of the GCF’s guiding principles is “leveraging of other

1
  The World Bank provides a recent and prominent example as part of the International Development
Association’s (IDA) 17th replenishment. Participants identified maximizing development impact as an overarching
theme and agreed that “IDA17 could not be business as usual, and welcomed the focus on leveraging private
investment, public resources, and knowledge” (p. 13). Many specific recommendations were made about how the
World Bank should seek to leverage greater private and public resources through cofinancing.


                                                      1
financing, including public and private financing, seeking to maximize leverage in the case of
private financing” (GCF 2013, p.17).
         Advocates of cofinancing point to benefits beyond mobilizing more financial resources.
Frequently heard arguments are that cofinancing promotes recipient country ownership of
projects and programs; increases the likelihood of follow-up activities and stakeholder support;
broadens the scope of what agencies can undertake; and helps insure that aid finances only the
incremental costs to get projects and programs up and running. In many cases, the relevant
ministries in recipient countries even find that demands for cofinancing help influence their
own government priorities in beneficial ways. Within the push for greater cofinancing, there is
also growing emphasis on the need to leverage the private sector in particular, and to employ
more non-grant financial instruments, such as loans, guarantees, bonds, and equity. This is
considered particularly important for environment and development projects focused on global
problems, where the objective is frequently to catalyze broad and transformative impacts, with
climate change being the leading example (Venugopal and Srivastava 2012; Buntaine and Pizer
2014).
         But greater demands for cofinancing raise concerns as well. Critics argue that
accounting for cofinancing in project development and approval can shift funding priorities
from true environment and development needs to ones that simply have greater cofinancing
potential. There are measurement and implementation challenges, where definitions are not
always clear, and the mobilization and verification of leveraged finance takes additional staff
time and resources. Recipient countries also raise concerns about how greater demands for
cofinancing may promote indebtedness of poor countries rather than provide a means of more
effective aid.
         Despite the increasing demands for cofinancing among environment and development
agencies, along with disagreement about its potential value, there is surprisingly little research
on the subject. This paper contributes to the literature with a focus on three interrelated
questions:
    1. How does observed cofinancing depend on characteristics of the development
         project, the country (or countries) where the project takes place, and the agencies
         responsible for project funding and execution?



                                                2
   2. What factors explain the likelihood that project cofinancing is based on loans rather
       than grants, and that cofinancing comes from the private sector rather than public
       agencies or non-governmental organizations?
   3. Does greater cofinancing result in better environment and development projects?
       We take advantage of a comprehensive data set from the GEF on 3,269 projects from
1991 through the beginning of 2014. We first estimate models to explain project cofinancing
ratios—cofinancing amount over the GEF grant amount—as a function of a broad set of
project, country, and agency characteristics. We then estimate models to explain the likelihood
that a project receives cofinancing in the form of loans and from the private sector. A strength
of the analysis is our use of fixed-effects models at the country level; this means that key
results are based on variation among projects within countries. We therefore control for
potentially important sources of unobserved heterogeneity based on differences among
countries. The third part of our analysis takes advantage of detailed ex post evaluations of more
than 650 completed projects. With these data, we estimate models that explain project
outcomes related to the achievement of stated objectives and the likelihood of continued
benefits after project completion. The models test for differences among project, country, and
agency characteristics, but they are primarily intended to determine whether greater
cofinancing results in better performing projects.
       Some of our main results include the following: Larger projects are associated with
greater cofinancing ratios, as are projects focused on climate change in particular. Among the
agencies that lead projects, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank stand out
as those with substantially higher cofinancing ratios, especially the ADB. Countries rated with
better “government effectiveness” and “regulatory quality” host projects with higher
cofinancing ratios, while better ratings for “voice and accountability” and “control of
corruption” tend to lower cofinancing ratios. Larger grants and a focus on climate change
increase the likelihood of loan financing and private sector involvement, and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and foundations are more likely to execute projects with private sector
involvement than are multilateral development banks (MDBs). Projects with more cofinancing
are more likely to achieve favorable ex post evaluations for achieving their goals and
expectations for sustained impacts, while projects with larger grants are less likely to achieve
favorable ratings. Finally, projects with private sector involvement tend to achieve lower


                                                3
ratings for both project outcome and the likelihood of sustained impacts, whereas greater GDP
per capita and “regulatory quality” improve project ratings in both categories.


                                     II. Related Literature
We are aware of only one other study that examines the determinants of cofinancing in
development projects. In a working paper for the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB),
Miller and Yu (2012) use GEF data to study cofinancing ratios. They find that cofinancing
ratios depend on whether the financing is foreign or domestic, based on grants or loans, and
provided by a MDB or a United Nations (UN) agency. While Miller and Yu’s (2012) analysis
is similar to the first part of ours, they employ only a subset of the data that we use here, and
the specifics of our econometric methods and findings differ in ways that we discuss later in the
paper. One important difference, however, is that our preferred results are based on fixed
effects models. Moreover, while Miller and Yu consider cofinancing ratios, they do not
investigate the determinants of non-grant and private sector cofinancing or the effect of
cofinancing on project outcomes.
       We not aware of any study that investigates the determinants of non-grant cofinancing
or involvement of the private sector. While we focus on environmentally related projects, the
question is to the best of our knowledge unstudied more generally in development economics at
the project level. There is a large literature that looks at how foreign aid affects private
investment at a macro level, and the results are inconsistent (e.g., Papanek 1973; Harms and
Lutz 2006; Herzer and Grimm 2012). Seeking to reconcile the differences, Selaya and Sunesen
(2012) argue that empirical studies should not lump all aid together, but, rather, should
distinguish between aid focused on complementary inputs versus substitutable physical capital.
They find that the former draws in foreign direct investment while the latter crowds it out. Our
focus here is on the provision of global environmental public goods, which we do not expect to
crowd out private investment.
       In a recent paper, Buntaine and Pizer (2014) consider whether aid directed at renewable
energy facilities catalyzes private investment in clean energy. They find that aid targets
countries that already have substantial private investment in renewable energy, and that greater
amounts of aid do not spur additional private investment. Accordingly, Buntaine and Pizer
(2014) raise questions about whether aid can effectively leverage the private sector to mitigate


                                                4
greenhouse-gas emissions through the promotion of renewable energy. Our approach is
different in that we examine factors that influence private sector cofinancing alongside aid on a
project-by-project basis, including projects focused on climate change and other environmental
issues. Our analysis therefore seeks to identify ways to better engage the private sector and
promote non-grant financial instruments up front, so that catalytic effects are more likely in the
future.
          The third part of our analysis considers how realized levels of cofinancing, and a broad
range of other variables, explain differences in ex post project evaluations. While we are
unaware of research that is directly related the study of cofinancing in this context, there is
certainly a literature on project evaluation. Many of the existing studies use country-level
economic, political, and social indicators to explain project rates of return (e.g., Isham et al.
1997; Isham and Kaufmann 1999) or terminal evaluations (e.g., Dollar and Levin 2005;
Guillaumont and Laajaj 2006; Chauvet et al. 2010). Other studies look more specifically at how
project characteristics, agency involvement, and local conditions affect project outcomes
(Deininger et al. 1998; Kilby 2000; Khwaja 2009; Assefa et al. 2014). Importantly, Denizer et
al. (2013) find that variation in the success of projects is greater within countries than between
countries, and that inclusion of both macro and micro variables is important for explaining
differences. This is the approach we take here, and we relate our specific findings to those in
other studies when discussing the empirical results.
          Finally, Buntaine and Parks (2013) describe how there is very little evidence on the
outcome of environmental projects in developing countries beyond case studies, and they
conduct an analysis of 157 environmental projects at the World Bank. Some of their main
findings are that projects are more successful when countries have a stronger public sector,
when the World Bank provides a greater proportion of concessional finance, and when the
focus is on local benefits rather than global public goods. Several of our results are related to
theirs, as we will discuss, but our analysis differs is several important ways: We study the effect
of cofinancing, both the amounts promised ex ante and realized ex post; we consider two
different outcome measures, one for project outcome and one for the likelihood of sustained
impacts; and our data set on project terminal evaluations is significantly larger and includes
observations across many agencies.



                                                 5
                             III. Institutional Background on the GEF
The GEF is a multilateral fund that provides grants and concessional funding to cover the
incremental costs of transforming development projects into ones that provide global
environmental benefits. The GEF was established in 1991 and serves as the official financial
mechanism for many international conventions.2 The GEF has several environmental focal
areas: biodiversity, climate change, persistent organic pollutants, international waters, land
degradation, and ozone depleting substances. To date, the GEF has disbursed $13.5 billion that
has leveraged $65 billion in cofinancing for more than 3,900 projects in 165 developing
countries.
        The GEF operates through a partnership with accredited agencies that are responsible
for proposing and managing GEF projects. All project proposals must first be endorsed by
recipient countries, and agencies usually provide assistance to governments in developing
countries or NGOs that develop and implement projects.3 Most GEF projects are one of three
types—full-size projects (FSPs), medium-sized projects (MSPs), and enabling activities
(EAs)—and the approval process differs by project type.4 FSPs are those with requests of more
than $2 million, and the initial concept must be approved by the GEF Council, which is a
governing body of 32 members with representatives from both developed and developing
countries. Once a FSP receives Council approval, the concept is developed further into a full
proposal with the aim of endorsement by the GEF Secretariat and approval by the GEF Partner
Agency responsible to begin implementation. MSPs are those with requests up to $2 million
and that undergo an expedited approval process whereby the Council delegates its approval to
the GEF Secretariat. EAs are projects that assist countries with reporting requirements of UN
Conventions and/or with information to facilitate policy and strategic decision making. EAs
have a funding threshold of $1 million. Those falling under the threshold undergo the same
expedited approval process as MSPs, but those with requests greater than $1 million follow the
same approval process as FSPs. Preparation grants are also available to aid in the development

2
  These are the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification, and the Minamata Convention on Mercury. The GEF also supports implementation of the
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer for countries with economies in transition.
3
  There are currently 14 accredited agencies, including UN agencies, MDBs, and NGOs. The specific agencies
with projects included in the data set are listed in the next section.
4
  Projects may also fall under programmatic approaches (PAs) or the small grants program (SGP), but we do not
include projects within these categories in our analysis.

                                                     6
of projects, with potential activities ranging from convening meetings to hiring consultants and
conducting a preliminary study.
        After projects begin implementation, they undergo a monitoring process that culminates
with a terminal evaluation at project completion. The lead agency charged with implementing
the project is responsible for completing the terminal evaluation. There are specific guidelines
for reporting on progress throughout and on whether the project achieved its intended results
(GEF 2008). The GEF Independent Evaluation Office (GEF-IEO) reviews the terminal
evaluations to validate the findings and aggregate results across projects for lessons learned,
many of which are reported in the GEF’s Annual Outcome Reports.5
        Every four years, as part of a replenishment process, the GEF reviews and revises its
funding and strategic priorities. Policies are set about the resource allocation among focal areas
and other specific programs, in addition to the allocation among recipient, developing
countries. Currently, 57 percent of GEF resources are provided through country allocations to
specific focal areas, and the remainder is allocated on a first-come first-serve basis within other
programmatic areas. Country allocations are based on a formulaic approach that accounts for
each country’s potential for global environmental benefits, outcome and capacity to deliver the
benefits, and equity weights based on national income.6
        As part of the most recent replenishment process, which concluded in May 2014, the
GEF made specific policy recommendations seeking higher levels of cofinancing (GEF 2014b)
and subsequently revised its cofinancing policy (GEF 2014c). The GEF defines cofinancing as
“resources that are additional to the GEF grant and that are provided by the GEF Partner
Agency itself and/or by other non-GEF sources that support the implementation of the GEF-
financed project and the achievement of its objectives” (p.3). The GEF seeks to reach a
cofinancing ratio of at least 6:1 for its overall portfolio, with expectations of greater
cofinancing from upper-middle income countries. While the GEF does not impose minimum
thresholds or require specific sources of cofinancing in the review of projects, it does engage
with countries and agencies to develop strategies for achieving greater cofinancing. The aim is
to “(a) enhance the effectiveness and sustainability of the GEF in achieving global


5
  These are available online at http://www.thegef.org/gef/APRs.
6
  The most recent allocations are reported in GEF (2014d). The GEF’s allocation mechanism operates much like
the outcome-based allocation system for each country’s funding envelope in the International Development
Association (IDA).

                                                     7
environmental benefits; and (b) strengthen partnerships with recipient country governments,
multilateral and bilateral financing entities, the private sector, and civil society.” (p. 3).


                              IV. Data Sources and Summary Statistics
We collected and merged several data sets. This section describes the different sources of data,
explains how they were combined, and presents basic summary statistics.


                                         A. Project Characteristics
Our primary source of data is the GEF’s Project Management Information System (PMIS). The
PMIS includes information on all GEF projects from the initial proposal stage through project
completion and evaluation. We use the PMIS data as of March 2014.7 We consider only those
projects included in the PMIS that ultimately received Secretariat approval and were not part of
an interrelated programmatic approach. This means that all observations can be treated as an
independent GEF project ready to receive funding. The data set consists of 3,269 projects
spanning the GEF Pilot Phase through five replenishment periods (denoted GEF-1 through
GEF-5), with approval dates ranging from 1991 into 2014. Figure 1 shows the number of
projects by year of approval, along with an indicator for the associated GEF phase.
        Central to our analysis is information on each project’s level of GEF funding and
cofinancing. Panel A of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for these variables. Approved GEF
grants are $3.3 million on average, and 46 percent of the projects received a preparation grant
to aid in project development. Although not reported in the table, the average preparation grant
was approximately $89,000. On average, projects had cofinancing commitments of $16 million
at the time of approval, and the average cofinancing ratio among projects—cofinancing over
the GEF grant plus any preparation grant—was just under 3.8 This means that, on average, each
dollar of GEF funding allocated to a project was associated with approximately $3 of
cofinancing. But not all projects receive cofinancing: 18 percent of the projects receive no
cofinancing at all. Understanding what explains variation in the cofinancing ratio at project
approval is, as we will see, an important part of our analysis. There are, however, some outliers
at the upper ends of the grant and cofinancing distributions that we trim in our subsequent

7
 Much of the PMIS data is available online at http://www.thegef.org/gef/gef_projects_funding.
8
 Note this is the average cofinancing ratio among projects and not the ratio for all projects collectively, which
would be $16 million / $3.3 million = 4.85.

                                                       8
analysis. We drop observations in the upper 1 percent, leaving a maximum of $27 million for
the GEF grant and a maximum of 36 for the cofinancing ratio. We return to Panel B of Table 1
below.
         We summarize categorical variables from the PMIS data in the different panels of Table
2. Most projects are FSPs, followed by EAs and MSPs. Among the focal areas, two-thirds of
the projects are categorized as either biodiversity or climate change. Multi-focal area projects—
ones that include at least two other focal areas—are the next most common, and each of the
other focal areas account for less than 10 percent. The United Nations Development Program
(UNDP) is by far the most common lead agency, accounting for nearly half of the GEF
projects. Other lead agencies with a substantial number of projects are the World Bank and the
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). For all other agencies, we kept distinct
categories for those that account for at least one percent of the projects, while combining all
others into the “Other agency” category.9 Governments were the executing partner for 76
percent of the projects. Far fewer projects were executed by multilateral agencies or NGOs,
foundations, and institutes; and less than one percent was executed by the private sector. Most
of the projects took place in Africa, followed by Asia, Latin American / Caribbean, and Europe
/ Central Asia. Though not indicated separately in the table, 10 percent of the projects are
categorized as “regional” because they include more than one country within the same region.
Finally, almost 8 percent of the projects are categorized as “Global” because they involve
countries in more than one of the four other regions.


                                       B. Country Characteristics
We collected data on country characteristics from the World Bank. The first is gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita for each country and year. We matched the data with projects based
on the year of project approval and the country where the project took place. For regional and
global projects, the matching is based on the average GDP per capita of all participating
countries when listed. When specific countries are not listed, the variable is left missing. As
shown in Panel B of Table 1, the mean GDP per capita when averaged across projects is $3,007
in 2013 dollars.

9
 The other agency category includes the GEF Secretariat with 26 projects, the African Development Bank (AfDB)
with 22 projects, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) with 11 projects, the World
Wildlife Fund (WWF) with 2 projects, and Conservation International (CI) with one project.

                                                     9
         Other data were collected to capture potentially important dimensions of governance
that could affect cofinancing and the outcome of GEF projects. We use four of the World
Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI).10 These include indices that measure
governance as it relates to “voice and accountability,” “government effectiveness,” “regulatory
quality,” and “control of corruption.” Each index is scaled as a percentage to reflect the number
of countries in a given year that score worse than a particular country. For example, a 60 for
regulatory quality in country for year means that 60 percent of the countries included in the
World Bank’s data set score worse on regulatory quality than country in year . The WGI data
is not available for every year, so when missing, we imputed data from the closest year that was
available.11 This is not, however, much of a limitation because these data are primarily
designed for studying cross-sectional differences among countries rather than changes over
time, and this will influence how we use the WGI indicators in our statistical models. Again,
for regional and global projects, we use the mean of all countries participating in the project
when countries are listed, otherwise the variable is left missing. As shown in Panel B of Table
1, all of the WGI variables range from zero to above 90 and have means close to 40.


                                 C. Loan and Private Sector Cofinancing
We obtained a further data set from the GEF Secretariat that included more details on the types
and sources of project cofinancing. Of particular interest is (a) whether the cofinancing was in
the form of a loan, including both concessional and non-concessional loans, and (b) whether
cofinancing was delivered through the private sector. We focus on loans and private sector
cofinancing because of the recent initiatives to promote loans and private sector involvement at
the GEF and other institutions focused on delivering environmental and development finance.
         We consider loan and private sector cofinancing for only MSPs and FSPs because no
EAs include loans and only two have private sector involvement. Of the 2,198 MSPs and FSPs
in the data set, we obtained the more detailed cofinancing data on 1,778 (81 percent) of the

10
   These data are available at http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home, where there is also a
detailed description of the methodology. Two indicators not used in the analysis that we report here are “rule of
law” and “political stability and absence of violence.” We do not include these variables to minimize collinearity
with the other indicators and because they never produced statistically significant results.
   Specifically, data are not available for years 1991-1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2013, or 2014. When first compiling
11

the WGIs, they were produced every other year. We use data imputation such that 1996 data is used for 1991-
1995, and for the other missing years, we use data available from the most recent previous year. Later in the paper,
we report clustered standard errors for our regression models that account for the data imputation.

                                                        10
observations. These are all of the projects for which the data are available. Twenty-two percent
of the projects include loan financing, and the conditional mean amount of loan financing was
59 percent of each project’s total cofinancing. Regarding private sector involvement, 38 percent
of the projects had private sector involvement, and the conditional mean of private sector
financing was 36 percent of a project’s total cofinancing. Other sources of private sector
financing were grants and in kind contributions. In our empirical analysis, we investigate the
determinants of loan based cofinancing and private sector involvement in GEF projects.


                                    D. Project Terminal Evaluations
Our final source of data comes from the GEF-IEO and is based on reviews of the terminal
evaluations that agencies provide upon project completion. For a subset of the GEF’s
completed projects, the GEF-IEO conducted a detailed and independent evaluation of the
terminal evaluations and created a consistent set of variables for making comparisons among
projects. We use the complete set of data available from the GEF-IEO as of March 2014.
        Project outcomes—The first variable is an overall evaluation of project outcomes based
on stated goals. The variable is based on indicators in three dimensions: relevance to the
intended focal area and country priorities; effectiveness at achieving outcomes; and efficiency
with respect to costs and implementation times.12 The indicators are then combined into an
overall outcome variable with six ordered categories. These data are available for 688 MSPs
and FSPs. The different categories and percentages are highly satisfactory (5%), satisfactory
(42%), moderately satisfactory (36%), moderately unsatisfactory (13%), unsatisfactory (4%),
and highly unsatisfactory (less than one percent). In our subsequent analysis, we convert the
outcome variable into a binary indicator of satisfactory or better (47%).
        Sustainable impact—The second variable is a measure of sustainable impact, which
measures the likelihood of continued project benefits after project completion. The variable is
based on indicators in four dimensions: likelihood of continued financial resources; sufficient
social and political interests; adequacy of institutional frameworks and governance; and
environmental conditions. The overall sustainable impact variable is available for 666 MSPs
and FSPs. In this case, the evaluation is based on four ordered categories for the likelihood of

12
  The project outcome measure focuses on results and does not include other dimensions such as monitoring and
evaluation, project design, or, importantly, cofinancing. More details on how the GEF-IEO created variables from
the terminal evaluations are contained in Annex B of the GEF Annual Outcome Report 2013 (GEF 2013).

                                                      11
sustained impacts, which are likely (15%), moderately likely (45%), moderately unlikely
(30%), and unlikely (10%). When analyzing these data, we convert the categories into a binary
indicator of moderately likely or better (55%).
           Actual cofinancing—The data set also includes information on the realized level of
cofinancing delivered as part of project implementation. This, of course, may differ from the
cofinancing numbers described previously based on intended levels of cofinancing at the time
of project approval. Data on actual cofinancing is available for 610 MSPs and FSPs, and the
numbers do indeed differ from those at the time of project approval. The mean amount of
actual cofinancing is $17 million, compared to the expected mean amount for these same
projects of $13 million. When conducting our analysis of variables that affect project outcomes
and sustainable impact, we will use the measure of actual cofinancing. We will also account for
whether actual cofinancing exceeded or fell short of the expected amount. Among the 610
projects for which the data are available, 60 percent received more than the expected amount of
cofinancing.


                    V. The Determinants of Cofinancing at Project Approval
We begin with the question of what explains variation in cofinancing at the project approval
stage. We first estimate a model of the form


     (1)
                                                                                           ,


where the dependent variable is the cofinancing ratio for project                  in country   and approval
year . The independent variables are, respectively, the size of the GEF grant, an indicator for
having received a preparatory grant, an indicator for an enabling activity, a categorical variable
for focal area, a categorical variable for lead agency, a categorical variable for executing
partner type, GDP per capita, the set of WGI indicators, and a categorical variable for region.13
The specification also controls for annual fixed effects with              , and       is an error term. The
regional controls in specification (1) mean that coefficients are identified based on variation in

13
   We do not include a categorical variable to distinguish between MSPs and FSPs because of collinarity with the
size of the GEF grant, which is the basis for distinction between the two categories.

                                                      12
projects within regions after controlling for a common time trend. This is useful for estimating
potential effects of the WGI indicators, which, as mentioned previously, are better equipped for
cross-sectional comparisons than for differences within countries over time.
           A limitation of specification (1) is that it does not control for sources of unobserved yet
time invariant heterogeneity among countries that could affect cofinancing ratios. To address
this concern, we estimate a fixed effects model of the form


     (2)
                                                                                  ,


where the only difference is inclusion of a country fixed effect                        in place of the WGI
indicators and regional controls. This means that coefficients are identified entirely off of
variation in projects within countries assuming an overall common time trend.14 When showing
the results of this model and all others, we report standard errors that are clustered at the
country level to account for potential unobserved correlation among projects within countries
and over time.
           In addition to ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of specifications (1) and (2), we
estimate corresponding Tobit models for each. The first is a pooled Tobit model, and the
second is the random effects Tobit model.15 Recall that 18 percent of the projects have zero
cofinancing, and this motivates estimation of the Tobit models, which are able to account for a
large number of corner solutions at zero for the dependent variable (Wooldridge 2002). In
particular, the Tobit model is useful for deriving marginal effects of the explanatory variables
that account for the combined effects of changes in the probably of having cofinancing and
changes in cofinancing conditional on having a positive amount. The Tobit models therefore
provide our preferred estimates, while comparisons with the OLS models provide useful
robustness checks.16



14
   To take advantage of all the data, we also include regional and global projects with their own fixed effects when
estimating specification (2). The results do not change in any meaningful way if these observations are excluded.
15
   We estimate the random effects Tobit model rather than a fixed effects Tobit because the latter is not unbiased
(Wooldridge 2002).
16
   We also estimate double hurdle models to examine the extensive and intensive margins of cofinancing ratios
separately. We discuss these models and results at the end of this section.

                                                        13
        We report the results of all four models in Table 3. The first two columns contain the
OLS estimates. The second two columns contain the Tobit estimates of the overall marginal
effect; that is, we report the unconditional marginal effects for each independent variable
evaluated at its mean. Looking across the columns, we find that the estimates are quite
consistent across models. In particular, the coefficient signs, magnitudes, and statistical
significance change very little between either of the two OLS models or the two Tobit models,
and differences between the OLS and Tobit models are also quite small.17 Hence we focus our
discussion on the Tobit results, and specifically on coefficients of the random effects estimates,
unless otherwise indicated.
        Whether a project receives a preparatory grant or not has an insignificant effect on a
project’s cofinancing ratio, yet the size of the overall GEF grant does. Because the GEF grant
variable is log transformed, it can be interpreted such that a 10-percent increase in the size of a
GEF grant is associated with a 0.048 increase in the cofinancing ratio. In other words, a 10-
percent increase in the GEF grant for the averaged sized project means that there is just under 5
cents in additional cofinancing per GEF dollar spent. EAs are associated with significantly
lower cofinancing ratios, with each GEF dollar producing $1.17 less on average. This result is
not surprising because EAs tend to focus on foundational work that is less likely to attract
cofinancing.
        The cofinancing ratios differ across focal areas. The coefficients reported in Table 3 are
interpreted relative to the omitted category of multi-focal area projects. Those with lower
ratios, but not significantly different from each other, are biodiversity, ozone related, and
organic pollutants. Those with higher ratios, but also not significantly different from each other,
are climate change and international waters. The most notable comparison is between the
GEF’s two primary environmental foci: projects focused on biodiversity are associated with
lower cofinancing ratios than those focused on climate change; and after controlling for other
variables in the model, the average difference is 0.8 and statistically significant. Miller and Yu
(2012) find a similar pattern of results across focal areas on a more restricted sample, though
their models do not include country-level fixed effects.


17
   Regarding the Tobit models, a likelihood-ratio test for significance of the panel-level variance component does
not reject the null hypothesis (                      ), implying that the overall random effects estimates are not
statistically different from the pooled estimates.

                                                        14
       Regarding differences among lead agencies, the ADB stands out with the highest
cofinancing ratios—a substantial 3.8 higher on average than the omitted category of the UNDP.
Other agencies with higher ratios are the World Bank and the Other agency category. These are
0.86 and 0.68 higher, respectively, than the UNDP on average, but while the World Bank is
generally higher than most agencies with statistical significance, the Other agency category is
not. Thus the general finding is that the World Bank and ADB are associated with projects that
have higher cofinancing ratios, but the ADB is the real standout with ratios even greater than
the World Bank by 2.9 on average. These results build on Miller and Yu’s (2012) finding that
MDB’s tend to have higher cofinancing ratios than UN agencies. We find no statistically
significant differences among the executing partner types of multilateral agencies,
governments, private sector, or NGO/foundation/institution.
       With respect to country characteristics, GDP per capita has no statistically significant
relationship with cofinancing ratios in any of the models. We turn to the pooled models for
inference about the governance indicators, for which we focus only on the qualitative signs. In
both the OLS and Tobit models, voice and accountability is associated with lower ratios, yet
government effectiveness is associated with higher ratios. The former result may represent an
unintended consequence of more participatory and transparent processes, while the later result
shows a relationship between good governance and greater finance. With the pooled OLS
estimates, there is evidence that better regulatory quality promotes cofinancing, yet greater
control of corruption discourages it. The later result is interesting to the extent that reported
cofinancing may not always be legitimate, perhaps being based on non-additional finance or
double counting. The final set of results are related to geographic region. We find that country
or regional projects are associated with greater cofinancing ratios than global projects (the
omitted category). In all regions the ratios are between 0.57 and 0.84 higher, yet they are not
statistically different from one another.
       The preceding analysis considers how different variables affect intended cofinancing
ratios at the time of project approval. A limitation of the models, however, is the assumption
that a single mechanism determines whether a project has cofinancing (the extensive margin)
and the amount of cofinancing conditional on having some (the intensive margin). While the
OLS models do not distinguish between the two margins at all, the Tobit model assumes the
sign of the two effects is the same. It is nevertheless possible that variables could have different


                                                15
effects on the extensive and intensive margins, meaning that how a variable affects whether
there is cofinancing could differ from the way it affects the conditional amount of cofinancing.
To explore this possibility, we estimate a “double hurdle” model that separately examines the
extensive and intensive margins with (i) a linear probability model of whether the cofinancing
ratio is greater than zero, and (ii) an OLS regression on only those observations with positive
cofinancing ratios. We again estimate pooled and fixed effects variants of the model and report
the full set of results in Appendix Table 1.
        A few results are nevertheless worth highlighting. We find evidence that the focal areas
of climate change and international waters have different effects on each margin. Specifically,
climate change and international waters projects are less likely to have cofinancing, but
conditional on having it, they have more of it. We also find differential effects with two
governance indicators. Better regulatory quality decreases the odds of having cofinancing, but
when there is cofinancing, better regulatory quality is associated with higher ratios.
Interestingly, better control of corruption has the opposite pattern: better control increases the
odds of having cofinancing, but decreases the conditional cofinancing ratio.


                           VI. Loan and Private Sector Involvement
We now investigate whether project cofinancing includes (i) some amount in the form of a loan
(concessional or non-concessional), and (ii) private sector involvement. Keep in mind that
loans need not come from the private sector, and the private sector can support GEF projects in
ways other than loans. Recall that the loan and private sector cofinancing data are available for
a subset of projects analyzed in the previous section and that the data apply only to MSPs and
FSPs.
        We estimate linear probability models using the same general specification as that in
equations (1) and (2). For one set of models, the dependent variable is an indicator for whether
the project’s cofinancing includes a loan. In parallel with the previous analysis, we estimate one
model with regional dummies and the WGI indicators and another model with country fixed
effects. The same pair of models are then estimated again with the dependent variable as an
indicator for whether the project’s cofinancing has private sector involvement. The only change




                                               16
in the right-hand-side variables from the previous models is exclusion of the indicator for
EAs.18 Table 4 reports the results of all four models.
         We first discuss the results for loans. We focus primarily on the fixed effects estimates,
which control for time invariant, unobserved heterogeneity across countries. Projects with
larger GEF grants are more likely to include loans: doubling the size of a GEF grant increases
the probability of the project including a loan by 0.08, or equivalently 8 percentage points.
Projects that received a preparatory grant are 6 percentage points less likely to included loans.
One possible explanation for this result is that a project needing more assistance in the
development stage is a good indicator for whether it is less likely to generate revenue in support
of loan payments.
         The pattern of results for focal areas is similar to that shown previously for the overall
cofinancing ratio. Climate change projects are 8 percentage points more likely to include loans
than multi-focal area projects, which are not statistically different from those focused on
biodiversity. The focal areas that are significantly less like to include loans are ozone related
and organic pollutants.
         When compared to the UNDP, all agencies are more likely to lead projects that include
loans. The point estimates are such that the ADB, IADB, and the Other agency category are all
more than 60 percentage points more likely. The World Bank and IFAD are also significantly
more likely, by 40 and 37 percentage points, respectively. We find no statistically significant
results for the executing partner type.
         In the pooled linear probability model, GDP per capita is associated with a negative
effect on the probability of a project including a loan. The magnitude is such that a 10-percent
increase in GDP per capita decreases the probability of a loan by just under half of a percentage
point. The result is not, however, statistically different from zero in the fixed effects model.
None of the WGI variables is significant in the pooled model, but there is a regional pattern
worth noting. When projects are based in one region, or more commonly one country, they are
more likely to include a loan as part of the cofinancing. Those in Europe / Central Asia and
Latin America / Caribbean are the most likely to include loans, with both being close to 15



18
  We also estimated standard and random-effects Probit models. We do not report these results here because the
qualitative results and magnitudes of the marginal effects are so similar to those of the linear probability models.
These results are, however, available upon request.

                                                        17
percentage points more likely than a global project. Projects in Africa and Asia are also more
likely, but with approximately half the magnitude.
       We now turn to the private sector results in columns (3) and (4) of Table 4. Some of the
results are similar to those for loans, but others are quite different. Projects with larger GEF
grants are more likely to involve the private sector, though the magnitude is small. A doubling
of the GEF grant increases the probability by approximately half a percentage point. Projects
that received a preparatory grant are about 6 percentage points more likely to involve the
private sector.
       Differences between the primary focal areas of biodiversity and climate change
continue to arise, with the former being almost 20 percentage points less likely to involve the
private sector and being significantly less likely than multi-focal area projects. Land
degradation is also significantly less likely to involve the private sector. Interestingly, the effect
of ozone related and organic pollutant projects on private sector involvement differs than that
for loans. Both are associated with greater private sector involvement, with magnitudes even
greater than climate change, i.e., 32 and 16 percentage points greater than multi-focal area
projects, respectively, compared to 11 percentage points greater for climate change.
       When it comes to promoting private sector involvement, IFAD and UNIDO are the
leading agencies. Compared to the UNDP, these agencies are about 25 percentage points more
likely to have projects that involve the private sector. This is perhaps not surprising given that
IFAD seeks to promote agricultural development and UNIDO has a specific mandate to
promote private sector development. The World Bank is also associated with greater private
sector involvement, but the magnitude is quite a bit smaller, at close to 6 percentage points
more likely than the UNDP. It is worth noting how the ADB and IADB are not associated with
greater private sector involvement, yet they were the standout agencies with respect to loans.
We find only one statistically significant difference for the effect of executing partner type.
When the executing partner type is a NGO/Foundation/Institution, projects are significantly
more likely—i.e., 14 percentage points—to have private sector cofinancing than if the partner
type is a multilateral agency. It is worth noting, however, that the executing partner type being
the private sector does not mean projects received private sector cofinancing. Indeed, we do not
find a significant effect of the variable on private sector cofinancing, though this is likely



                                                 18
because of the small number of observations (only 15 in the regression model) that have a
private sector entity as the executing partner.
       In contrast to the results for loans, we find that GDP per capita increases the probability
of cofinancing from the private sector. A doubling of GDP per capita increases the probability
of private sector cofinancing by 5 percentage points. For the other results about country
characteristics, we turn to the pooled linear probability model. We find some evidence that
greater voice and accountability decreases private sector cofinancing, while greater government
effectiveness increases it. Among regions, Asia is the outlier having the lowest probability of
private sector cofinancing, at 11 percentage points less likely than global projects and more
than 15 percentage points less than any other region.


                        VII. Project Outcome and Sustainable Impact
We now turn to the analysis of terminal evaluations, from which we have two measures: project
outcome related to the achievement of goals and the likelihood of sustained impacts. Recall that
the evaluation data are available for a subset of the GEF’s completed projects, that is, those that
the GEF-IEO has covered in its independent review. Our empirical approach mirrors that from
the previous section in that we estimate linear probability models to explain project outcome
and the likelihood of sustained impact. For these models, we include country characteristics,
but do not estimate fixed effects models because there are fewer observations upon which to
identify within-country effects. Because of the fewer observations, we also control for the
common time trend with GEF Phase dummies rather than a dummy variable for each year. The
explanatory variables are generally the same as those used previously. The only differences are
our use of actual levels of cofinancing as an explanatory variable, along with an indicator for
whether actual cofinancing exceeded anticipated cofinancing at the time of project approval.
We continue to report standard errors clustered as the country level.
       We first consider project outcome, where the dependent variable is an indicator of
whether a project achieves an outcome rating of “satisfactory” or better. We report three linear
probability models in columns (1) through (3) of Table 5. We estimate the different
specifications because of missing data for some of the variables. The first model excludes the
cofinancing and country-characteristic variables and has 688 observations. The second model
includes the cofinancing variables, but the data are missing for 96 observations, thereby


                                                  19
reducing the observations in the model to 592. The third model includes the country
characteristics, which are missing for some regional and global projects with unspecified
countries, and this reduces the observations further to 546. Given our focus on cofinancing and
the advantages of including country characteristics in the model, we prefer the estimates in
column (3), upon which we concentrate discussion. It is nevertheless reassuring to see that the
coefficients estimated across all three models change little when restricting the sample.
           All of the financing variables have statistically significant effects on project outcome.
Greater cofinancing increases the probability of a project achieving a satisfactory rating, as
does having greater cofinancing than expected. A one-percent increase in the amount of
cofinancing increases the probability of a satisfactory rating by 3 percentage points, and
achieving greater than expected cofinancing increases the probability by 10 percentage points.
Interestingly, after controlling for cofinancing, projects with larger GEF grants receive lower
ratings: a one-percent increase in the GEF grant decreases the probability of a satisfactory
rating by more than 6 percentage points. Finally, projects with preparatory grants also rate less
well, having a lower probability of a satisfactory rating by 9 percentage points.19
           There are no statistically significant differences in the outcome ratings of projects
within the single focal areas. There is, however, evidence that the single focal area projects
achieve higher outcome ratings. Specifically, when compared to multi-focal area projects, those
with a singular focus on biodiversity, climate change, and land degradation are all more likely
to achieve a satisfactory rating by at least 15 percentage points. One possible explanation is that
multi-focal area projects face additional challenges of needing to satisfy outcome criteria in
more than one focal area, in addition to being more complex.
           We find no statistically significant differences among the lead agencies. The finding is
consistent with two possible interpretations. The first is that the lead agency does not affect
project outcome after controlling for the other variables. The second is that the probability of a
project receiving a satisfactory rating does not depend on subjectivity of the lead agency that
provided the terminal evaluation prior to the GEF-IEO’s independent review. This result is of
interest because of the potential for differences in evaluation criteria among agencies
notwithstanding the GEF-IEO’s evaluation guidelines.



19
     See Denizer et al. (2013) for a qualitatively similar result among World Bank projects.

                                                           20
         We find a particularly interesting result regarding the executing partner type. When the
executing partner is from the private sector, projects tend to perform less satisfactorily.
Compared to projects executed by multilateral organizations, those executed by the private
sector are 31 percentage points less likely to achieve a satisfactory rating. Moreover, the
multilateral organizations are not statistically different from governments or the
NGO/Foundation/Institution category. The apparent under-performance on the outcome
measure by the private sector is an important result in light of the way that the GEF and other
environment and development agencies—in addition to many donor countries—are seeking to
promote greater private sector engagement in such projects. While we are not able to explain
the mechanism underlying the result, the finding raises an important question for further
research. One question worth pursuing, for example, is whether these projects tend to be more
risky.
         Three results for project outcome standout based on country characteristics. First,
greater GDP per capita is associated with better outcomes: a one-percent increase in GDP per
capita increases the probability of a satisfactory rating by just under 7 percentage points.
Second, better regulatory quality within a country improves project outcomes. The magnitude
of this result is such that a 10-pecrent increase in a country’s rating for regulatory quality
increases the probability of a satisfactory rating by 5 percentage points. This finding accords
with Dollar and Levin’s (2005) aggregate level result that better institutions lead to better
project outcomes.20 Finally, global projects are more likely to obtain satisfactory ratings than
regional or single-country projects, and while the differences among regions are not statistically
significant, the magnitudes are such that Africa and Latin America / Caribbean projects are less
likely to be satisfactorily rated. Dollar and Levin (2005) find a similar result for World Bank
projects in Africa.
         We turn now the results for the likelihood of sustained impacts. These models are
reported in columns (4) through (6) in Table 5, and the dependent variable is the only
difference from the corresponding models in columns (1) through (3). We are now focused on
explaining the probability that a project is at least “moderately likely” to have sustained
impacts. Projects are more likely to have sustained impacts if they have greater amounts of


20
  We do not find a statistically significant effect of “government effectiveness.” This result contrasts with that in
Butaine and Parks’ (2013) study of environmentally related projects at the World Bank.

                                                         21
cofinancing, if actual cofinancing exceeds anticipated cofinancing, and if the overall GEF grant
is smaller. These results all have the same sign and similar magnitudes as those for project
outcome. One difference is that the effect of preparatory grants is statistically insignificant for
sustained impacts.
       The results differ somewhat among environmental focal areas. Ozone related projects
are, by a large margin, those most likely to have sustained impacts, being 54 percentage points
more likely than multi-focal area projects. Because ozone related projects typically involve
changes to production practices based on the diffusion of a new technology, this result may not
be particularly surprising. Climate change and international waters are the other focal areas
associated with greater likelihoods of sustained impacts, where the magnitudes are estimated
with reasonable amounts of statistical precision.
        Several other results standout. The UNDP appears to be an outlier with regard to its
leading on projects that are less likely to have sustained impacts. Compared to the Other agency
category, UNDP projects are 37 percentage points less likely to rate at least moderately likely
for sustainable impacts. The UNDP ratings are also significantly less likely than those for
UNEP, UNIDO, and the World Bank. However, as indicated above, interpretation of this result
should be done with caution because we are not able to distinguish whether this is due to
differences in the initial ratings that UNDP submits, in some unobserved characteristic of
UNDP projects, or in actual outcomes. We again find a large and statically significant result
when the executing agency is from the private sector: compared to all other types, projects
executed by the private sector are about 30 percentage points less likely to have sustained
impacts. While we find no statistically significant results for GDP per capita or the WGI
indicators, we do find that projects in Africa are less likely to have sustained impacts, and the
magnitude of this result is substantial: African projects are significantly less likely than all
other regions and 17 percentage points less likely than global projects.


                                       VIII. Conclusions
Leveraged cofinancing from public and private sources has emerged as a policy priority among
international environment and development agencies as a means for accomplishing
environmental and development goals. This paper contributes to the literature with a focus on
the determinants and impacts of cofinancing in the largest and longest running multilateral fund


                                                22
focused on global environmental problems and sustainable development. We motivate the
analysis with three questions and use them again to organize a qualitative summary of our main
results.
           How does observed project-level cofinancing depend on project characteristics, country
characteristics, and the agencies responsible for project funding and execution? We find that
larger projects are associated with greater cofinancing ratios, as are projects seeking to address
climate change compared to other environmental challenges. The ADB and the World Bank
stand out as leading projects with substantially higher cofinancing ratios, especially the ADB.
We find evidence that a country’s ratings of better “government effectiveness” and “regulatory
quality” are associated with higher cofinancing ratios, while greater “voice and accountability”
and “control of corruption” are associated with lower ratios. More globally focused projects
tend to have lower cofinancing ratios.
           What factors explain the likelihood of loan cofinancing and private sector involvement?
Projects with larger grants and a focus on climate change are more likely to have both loan
cofinancing and private sector involvement. Projects that receive a preparatory grant are less
likely to receive a loan, yet more likely to have private sector involvement. The same pattern
arises for projects focused on reducing ozone and organic pollutants. Institutions more likely
associated with projects that include both loan cofinancing and private sector involvement are
IFAD, UNIDO, and the World Bank. In contrast, the ADB and the Asia region more generally
are strongly associated with loan cofinancing but not private sector involvement. NGOs and
foundations are more likely to execute projects with private sector involvement than the MDBs.
Finally, countries rated as having greater “voice and accountability” are less likely to have
private sector involvement, while those with greater “government effectives” are more likely.
           Does greater cofinancing result in better environment and development projects? The
answer to this question appears to be “yes.” Projects that have greater cofinancing are more
likely to achieve higher ex post evaluations for both outcome satisfaction and sustained
impacts. These results hold even though projects with larger grants are less likely to achieve
favorable ratings. Among the environmental focal areas, climate change projects are the only
ones likely to achieve more favorable ratings for both outcome satisfaction and sustainable
impacts. The UNDP is the only lead agency that stands out as being associated with lower
ratings for sustainable impacts, but there are qualifications to this result that we have discussed


                                                 23
previously. Projects executed by the private sector tend to achieve lower ratings for both
project outcome and sustainable impacts. Greater GDP per capita and “regulatory quality” of a
host country increase project outcome, yet projects in African countries tend to achieve lower
ratings in both of the performance measures.
        The result presented in this paper have broader implications going forward. Greater
demands for cofinancing are emerging in a wide range of agencies and governments seeking to
maximize the impact of aid for environment and development. The trend is clear across
bilateral and multilateral development agencies, including the GEF, the CIFs, and the newly
created GCF. Regarding climate finance in particular, cofinancing is considered central to
achieving the necessary scale and transformative effects. In this context, our results further the
understanding of how project, country, and agency characteristics are more or less associated
with cofinancing, the use of loan financial instruments, and private sector involvement. We also
provide the first evidence on how cofinancing affects project outcomes. Finally, while agencies
and governments may use our results to target projects with greater cofinancing potential, it is
important to keep in mind how doing so may implicitly shift environment and development
priorities.




                                               24
                                       References

Assefa, Y., O. Rivera, and D. Vencatachellum (2013) “Macro and Micro Determinants of
       Project Outcome,” African Evaluation Journal, 2(1), Article #86.

Buntaine, M. and B. Parks (2013) “When Do Environmentally Focused Assistance Projects
       Achieve Their Objectives” Evidence from World Bank Post-Project Evaluations,”
       Global Environmental Politics, 13:65-87.

Buntaine, M. and W. Pizer (2014), “Encouraging Clean Energy Investment in Developing
       Countries: What Role for Aid?” Climate Policy, DOI:10.1080/14693062.2014-953903.

CIFs (2014), “About the Climate Investment Funds,” Available on the CIFs webpage, accessed
       January 28, 2014 at https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/aboutus.

Chauvet, L., P. Collier, and A. Fuster (2006) “What Explains Aid Project Success in Post-
      Conflict Situations,” World Bank Policy Research Working Group Paper No. 5418.

Deninger, K., S. Lyn, and S. Basu (1998) “Does Economic Analysis Improve the Quality of
      Foreign Assistance?” World Bank Economic Review, 12:385-418.

Denizer, C., D. Kaufmann, and A. Kraay (2013) “Good Countries or Good Projects? Macro and
       Micro Coorelates of World Bank Project Outcome,” Journal of Development
       Economics, 105:288-302.

Dollar, D. and V. Levin (2005) “Sowing and Reaping: Institutional Quality and Project
       Outcomes in Developing Countries,” World Bank Policy Research Working Group
       Paper No. 3524.

Easterly, W. (2006), The White man’s Burden: Why the West’s Effort’s to Aid the Rest Have
       Done So Much Ill and So Little Good, New York, New York: The Penguin Press.

GCF (2013), Decisions of the Board—Fifth Meeting of the Board, 8-10 October 2013. Green
      Climate Fund, GCF/B.05.23.

GEF (2013), “GEF Annual Outcome Report 2013,” Prepared by the GEF Independent
     Evaluation Office.

GEF (2008), “Guidelines for GEF Agencies in Conducting Terminal Evaluations,” The GEF
      Independent Evaluation Office, Evaluation Document N.3.

GEF (2014a), “What is the GEF,” Available on the GEF webpage, accessed January 28, 2014
      at http://www.thegef.org/gef/whatisgef.



                                           25
GEF (2014b), “Report of the Sixth Replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund,” Prepared by the
      GEF Secretariat and the World Bank as Trustee, GEF/A.2/07/Rev.01.

GEF (2014c), “Co-Financing Policy,” Prepared by the GEF Secretariat, GEF Policy: FI/PL/01.

GEF (2014d), “GEF-6 Indicative STAR Allocations,” GEF/C.47/Inf.08, July 1.

Guillaumont, P and R. Laajaj (2006) “When Instability Increases the Effectiveness of Aid
       Projects,” World Bank Policy Research Working Group Paper No. 4034.

Harms, P. and M. Lutz (2006) “Aid, Governance and Private Foreign Investment: Some
      Puzzling Findings for the 1990s,” The Economic Journal, 116:773-790.

Herzer, D. and M. Grimm (2012) “Does Foreign Aid Increase Private Investment? Evidence
       from Panel Cointegration,” Applied Economics, 44:2537-2550.

International Monetary Fund (2014), External Debt Statistics: Guide for Compilers and Users,
        Washington, DC: IMF Publication Services.

Isham, J. and D. Kaufmann (1999) “The Forgotten Rationale for Policy Reform: The
       Productivity of Investment Projects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114:149-184.

Isham, J., D. Kaufmann, L. Prichett (1997) “Civil Liberties, Democracy, and the Outcome of
       Government Projects,” World Bank Economic Review, 11:219-242.

Khwaja, I. (2009) “Can Good Projects Succeed in Bad Communities?” Journal of Public
      Economics, 93:899-916.

Kilby, C. (2000) “Supervision and Outcome: The Case of World Bank Projects,” Journal of
       Development Economics, 62:233-259.

Miller, S. and B. Yu (2012) “Mobilizing Resources for Supporting Environmental Activities in
        Developing Countries: The Case of the GEF Trust Fund,” IDB Working Paper Series,
        N. IDB-WP-329.

Papanek, G. (1973) “Aid, Foreign Private Investment, Savings, and Growth is Less Developed
      Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 81:120-130.

Sachs, J. D. (2005), The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time, New York, New
       York: The Penguin Press.

Selaya, P. and E. Sunesen (2012) “Does Foreign Aid Increase Foreign Direct Investment?”
       World Development, 40:2155-2176.




                                            26
Venugopal, S. and A. Srivastava (2012), Moving the Fulcrum: A Primer on Public Climate
      Financing Instruments Used to Leverage Private Capital, World Resources Institute,
      Working Paper, August 2012.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2002), Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge
      Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

World Bank (2014), Additions to IDA Resources: Seventeenth Replenishment - IDA17:
      Maximizing Development Impact. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.




                                           27
        300
        200
        100
              0

                  19 1
                  19 2
                  19 3
                  19 4
                  19 5
                  19 6
                  19 7
                  19 8
                  20 9
                  20 0
                  20 1
                  20 2
                  20 3
                  20 4
                  20 5
                  20 6
                  20 7
                  20 8
                  20 9
                  20 0
                  20 1
                  20 2
                  20 3
                    14
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    9
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    0
                    1
                    1
                    1
                    1
                  19




                                          GEF Pilot              GEF-1
                                          GEF-2                  GEF-3
                                          GEF-4                  GEF-5



Figure 1: Number of GEF projects by year of approval and GEF phase, with a total of 3,269 projects




                                               28
                   Table 1: Descriptive statistics on financing and country characteristics

      Variable                                Mean          Std. Dev.         Min           Max          Obs.
      Panel A: GEF grant and cofinancing variables
      GEF grant ($ millions)                  3.33            5.99           0.01          134.62        3269
      Preparatory grant (1=yes)               0.46            0.50           0.0             1.0         3269
      Cofinancing ($ millions)                15.96           57.90          0.0          1,303.60       3269
      Cofinancing ratio                       2.99            7.21           0.0           133.14        3269

      Panel B: Country characteristics
      GDP per capita (2013 $s)                 3,007         3,202            110          24,036         3055
      Voice and accountability (WGI)           39.25         21.85              0            93.3         3082
      Government effectiveness (WGI)           41.60         19.93              0            90.9         3070
      Regulatory quality (WGI)                 41.40         20.00              0            96.6         3072
      Control of corruption (WGI)              39.12         20.57              0            92.2         3070
      Note: Data for all observations are reported here, but in the statistical analysis we trim outliers on the
      upper end of the GEF grant and cofinancing ratio. Eliminating the upper on percent leaves a maximum
      of $27 million for the GEF grant and 36 for the cofinancing ratio.




                        Table 2: Descriptive statistics on project categorical variables

Variable                         Percentage           Variable                                            Percentage
Project Type                                          Lead agency
Full-sized project                  46.6              UN Development Programme (UNDP)                           48.3
Medium-sized project                20.6              World Bank                                                22.0
Enabling activity                   32.8              UN Environment Program (UNEP)                             18.5
                                                      UN Industrial Development Org. (UNIDO)                    5.4
Focal area                                            Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)                   1.2
Biodiversity                        36.6              Asian Development Bank (ADB)                              1.1
Climate change                      30.8              International Fund for Ag. Development (IFAD)             1.2
Multi-focal area                    12.5              Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)                    1.0
Persistent organic pollutants       9.2               Other agency                                              1.3
International waters                5.8
Land degradation                    4.2               Region
Ozone depleting substances          0.9               Africa                                                    31.3
                                                      Asia                                                      24.7
Executing partner type                                Latin America / Caribbean                                 20.3
Government                        76.0                Europe / Central Asia                                     16.1
Multilateral agency               14.7                Global (more than 1 region)                               7.6
NGO/Foundation/Institute           8.5
Private sector                     0.8
Note: Percentages based on 3,269 projects and may not sum to 100 due to rounding.




                                                         29
      Table 3: Regression models explaining differences in cofinancing ratios at project approval

                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)
                                                              OLS Fixed                      Random
                                                  OLS          Effects         Tobit       Effects Tobit

GEF grant (ln)                                   0.414***      0.452***       0.473***       0.488***
                                                  (0.070)       (0.074)        (0.060)        (0.061)
Preparatory grant (1=yes)                          0.065         0.019          0.137          0.096
                                                  (0.215)       (0.213)        (0.148)        (0.124)
Enabling activity (1=yes)                       -1.156***     -1.078***      -1.118***      -1.168***
                                                  (0.271)       (0.263)        (0.192)        (0.200)
Focal Areas (Multi-focal area omitted)
  - Biodiversity                                  -0.147        -0.236       -0.447***      -0.500***
                                                  (0.187)       (0.191)        (0.127)        (0.160)
  - Climate change                               1.088***      0.976***       0.348**         0.293*
                                                  (0.238)       (0.253)        (0.169)        (0.164)
  - International waters                           0.753       1.285**          0.188         0.436*
                                                  (0.525)       (0.582)        (0.327)        (0.264)
  - Land degradation                               0.913         0.821          0.380          0.333
                                                  (0.560)       (0.549)        (0.362)        (0.265)
  - Ozone related                               -1.652***     -1.675***      -1.026***       -1.037**
                                                  (0.383)       (0.531)        (0.248)        (0.516)
  - Organic pollutants                           -0.773**     -1.015***      -0.614***      -0.704***
                                                  (0.336)       (0.366)        (0.234)        (0.225)
Lead Agency (UNDP omitted)
  - ADB                                          6.085**      6.115**         3.710**       3.797***
                                                 (2.708)       (2.524)         (1.695)       (0.508)
  - FAO                                           -0.585       -0.330          -0.419        -0.321
                                                 (0.428)       (0.441)         (0.275)       (0.418)
  - IADB                                         1.355*       1.474**           0.703         0.653
                                                 (0.781)       (0.693)         (0.515)       (0.447)
  - IFAD                                           0.079        0.067          -0.086        -0.120
                                                 (0.479)       (0.485)         (0.306)       (0.408)
  - UNEP                                        -0.319**       -0.035          -0.050         0.051
                                                 (0.142)       (0.161)         (0.112)       (0.142)
  - UNIDO                                          0.257        0.439          -0.185        -0.080
                                                 (0.306)       (0.306)         (0.213)       (0.247)
  - World Bank                                  1.292***      1.278***        0.866***      0.856***
                                                 (0.317)       (0.311)         (0.201)       (0.133)
  - Other agency                                   0.922        0.889           0.631        0.675*
                                                 (0.847)       (0.799)         (0.541)       (0.407)
Executing partner type (Multilateral omitted)
  - Government                                     0.235       -0.278           0.187        -0.004
                                                 (0.289)       (0.306)        (0.210)        (0.172)
  - Private sector                                 0.071       -0.385           0.117         0.006
                                                 (0.813)       (0.920)        (0.575)        (0.566)
  - NGO/Foundation/Institution                    -0.211       -0.495           0.124         0.019
                                                 (0.351)       (0.374)        (0.243)        (0.226)
GDP per capita (ln)                               -0.037        0.458          -0.040         0.067
                                                 (0.100)       (0.323)        (0.073)        (0.055)
Voice & accountability (WGI)                     -0.012*          --          -0.008*           --


                                                   30
                                               (0.007)                       (0.005)
Government effectiveness (WGI)                 0.020**           --          0.015**           --
                                               (0.008)                       (0.006)
Regulatory quality (WGI)                       0.014*            --            0.008           --
                                               (0.007)                       (0.006)
Control of corruption (WGI)                    -0.011*           --           -0.005           --
                                               (0.007)                       (0.005)
Region (Global omitted)
  - Africa                                    0.917***           --          0.727***          --
                                               (0.306)                        (0.228)
  - Asia                                      0.952***           --          0.841***          --
                                               (0.293)                        (0.212)
  - Europe/Central Asia                       0.721**            --          0.720***          --
                                               (0.333)                        (0.241)
  - Latin America/Caribbean                   0.626***           --          0.578***          --
                                               (0.218)                        (0.168)

Year dummies                                                Yes              Yes   Yes         Yes
Country fixed effects                                                        Yes
Observations                                               2,978            2,990 2,978       2,990
R-squared (within)                                         0.303            0.276
Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the country level. One, two, and three
asterisk(s) indicate statistical significance at the 90-, 95-, 99-percent levels.




                                                 31
                 Table 4: Linear probability models of loans and private sector involvement

                                                 (1)                 (2)        (3)             (4)
                                                            Loans                   Private sector
                                                LPM          LPM Fixed          LPM      LPM Fixed Effects
                                                             Effects

GEF grant (ln)                                0.063***           0.083***     0.044**         0.054***
                                               (0.012)             (0.011)    (0.018)          (0.018)
Preparatory grant (1=yes)                      -0.039*           -0.060***    0.058*           0.058*
                                               (0.020)             (0.019)    (0.031)          (0.031)
Focal Areas (Multi-focal area omitted)
  - Biodiversity                                -0.025              -0.039   -0.086**         -0.079**
                                                (0.034)            (0.033)    (0.039)          (0.039)
  - Climate change                             0.094***            0.079**    0.112**          0.108**
                                                (0.035)            (0.034)    (0.046)          (0.047)
  - International waters                         0.024               0.065    -0.125*           -0.083
                                                (0.047)            (0.050)    (0.070)          (0.073)
  - Land degradation                             0.043               0.030     -0.087          -0.107*
                                                (0.055)            (0.054)    (0.065)          (0.064)
  - Ozone related                              -0.202**           -0.237**    0.308**          0.318**
                                                (0.078)            (0.093)    (0.124)          (0.123)
  - Organic pollutants                        -0.143***          -0.156***   0.162***          0.155**
                                                (0.045)            (0.048)    (0.058)          (0.061)
Lead Agency (UNDP omitted)
  - ADB                                       0.613***           0.617***       0.010            0.001
                                               (0.107)            (0.109)     (0.071)          (0.067)
  - FAO                                         0.029              0.051       -0.025            0.037
                                               (0.043)            (0.043)     (0.092)          (0.093)
  - IADB                                      0.602***           0.648***      -0.041           -0.049
                                               (0.096)            (0.092)     (0.070)          (0.074)
  - IFAD                                      0.393***           0.370***     0.229**         0.228**
                                               (0.088)            (0.088)     (0.092)          (0.098)
  - UNEP                                      0.076***           0.119***    -0.082**           -0.031
                                               (0.019)            (0.024)     (0.036)          (0.042)
  - UNIDO                                     0.202***           0.203***    0.238***         0.253***
                                               (0.057)            (0.057)     (0.064)          (0.068)
  - World Bank                                0.408***           0.403***     0.068**          0.057*
                                               (0.031)            (0.032)     (0.032)          (0.031)
  - Other agency                              0.631***           0.663***      -0.038           -0.150
                                               (0.106)            (0.105)     (0.147)          (0.164)
Executing partner type (Multilateral
omitted)
  - Government                                   0.013             -0.026      0.026           0.005
                                                (0.024)           (0.026)     (0.035)         (0.033)
  - Private sector                              -0.117             -0.153      0.215           0.221
                                                (0.116)           (0.121)     (0.141)         (0.153)
  - NGO/Foundation/Institution                  -0.044             -0.043    0.147***         0.139**
                                                (0.037)           (0.037)     (0.051)         (0.056)
GDP per capita (ln)                           -0.041***            -0.031     0.037*          0.049**
                                                (0.015)           (0.032)     (0.020)         (0.024)
Voice & accountability (WGI)                    -0.001                --      -0.001*            --


                                                       32
                                                  (0.001)                           (0.001)
Government effectiveness (WGI)                     0.001              --            0.003*              --
                                                  (0.001)                           (0.001)
Regulatory quality (WGI)                           0.001              --             0.000              --
                                                  (0.001)                           (0.001)
Control of corruption (WGI)                       -0.001              --            -0.001              --
                                                  (0.001)                           (0.001)
Region (Global omitted)
  - Africa                                       0.078***             --             -0.062             --
                                                  (0.028)                            (0.038)
  - Asia                                         0.082***             --           -0.113***            --
                                                  (0.026)                            (0.035)
  - Europe/Central Asia                          0.155***             --             -0.044             --
                                                  (0.035)                            (0.046)
  - Latin America/Caribbean                      0.143***             --             -0.051             --
                                                  (0.026)                            (0.032)

Year dummies                                            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Country fixed effects                                                  Yes                            Yes
Observations                                           1,653          1,653          1,653           1,653
R-squared (within)                                     0.379          0.381          0.141           0.119
Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the country level. One, two, and three asterisk(s)
indicate statistical significance at the 90-, 95-, 99-percent levels.




                                                       33
                       Table 5: Linear probability models of outcome and sustainability

                                                    Outcome                          Sustainability
                                           (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)

Cofinancing actual (ln)                     --      0.032***    0.029**       --       0.027**        0.024*
                                                     (0.011)    (0.012)                 (0.013)       (0.013)
Cofinancing greater than expected          ---      0.107**     0.105**       --       0.110***       0.089*
(1=yes)
                                                     (0.048)    (0.050)                 (0.041)       (0.047)
GEF grant (ln)                            -0.022    -0.055**   -0.062**     -0.017     -0.052**       -0.054*
                                          (0.023)    (0.027)    (0.029)    (0.022)      (0.025)       (0.028)
Preparatory grant (1=yes)               -0.091***       -      -0.090**      0.042       0.014         0.032
                                                    0.096***
                                         (0.033)     (0.035)    (0.039)    (0.039)        (0.044)     (0.048)
Focal Areas (Multi-focal area
omitted)
  - Biodiversity                        0.159***    0.145**     0.176**      0.110       0.076          0.079
                                         (0.059)    (0.067)     (0.080)    (0.080)      (0.088)        (0.098)
  - Climate change                      0.173***    0.143*      0.152*    0.260***      0.211**        0.181*
                                         (0.064)    (0.079)     (0.091)    (0.086)      (0.093)        (0.104)
  - International waters                  0.144       0.125      0.173    0.252***      0.212*         0.176*
                                         (0.104)    (0.138)     (0.110)    (0.092)      (0.108)        (0.105)
  - Land degradation                      0.176     0.192*      0.282*    0.249***       0.168          0.226
                                         (0.109)    (0.107)     (0.149)    (0.091)      (0.105)        (0.150)
  - Ozone related                         0.206       0.177      0.208    0.504***     0.555***       0.539***
                                         (0.162)    (0.190)     (0.200)    (0.090)      (0.097)        (0.128)
  - Organic pollutants                   -0.052      -0.106      0.044      -0.143     -0.221**        -0.021
                                         (0.088)    (0.083)     (0.145)    (0.087)      (0.111)        (0.154)
Lead Agency (Other agency omitted)
  - UNDP                                 -0.057      -0.178     -0.173         -       -0.376**       -0.365**
                                                                          0.395***
                                         (0.173)     (0.152)    (0.150)    (0.143)        (0.172)     (0.169)
  - UNEP                                 -0.044      -0.160     -0.198     -0.285*        -0.261      -0.218
                                         (0.147)     (0.127)    (0.142)    (0.145)        (0.159)     (0.164)
  - UNIDO                                 0.077      -0.043     -0.214      -0.014         0.006      -0.200
                                         (0.253)     (0.222)    (0.254)    (0.210)        (0.213)     (0.243)
  - World Bank                           -0.026      -0.168     -0.164      -0.256        -0.254      -0.250
                                         (0.179)     (0.151)    (0.149)    (0.155)        (0.183)     (0.183)
Executing partner type (Multilateral
omitted)
  - Government                            0.041       0.040       0.035      0.051         0.053       0.027
                                         (0.076)     (0.080)    (0.086)    (0.046)        (0.048)     (0.053)
  - Private sector                      -0.403**    -0.374**    -0.314*     -0.234        -0.288      -0.313*
                                         (0.154)     (0.176)    (0.167)    (0.181)        (0.185)     (0.185)
  - NGO/Foundation/Institution            0.068       0.033       0.041      0.024        -0.016       0.000
                                         (0.083)     (0.085)    (0.099)    (0.052)        (0.053)     (0.066)
GDP per capita (ln)                         --          --      0.066*         --            --        0.054
                                                                (0.034)                               (0.040)
Voice & accountability (WGI)                --         --        -0.002       --            --         0.001
                                                                (0.002)                               (0.002)
Government effectiveness (WGI)              --         --        -0.002       --            --         0.004


                                                     34
                                                                   (0.003)                               (0.003)
Regulatory quality (WGI)                    --           --        0.005**         --          --        -0.000
                                                                   (0.002)                               (0.003)
Control of corruption (WGI)                 --           --         0.000          --          --         0.000
                                                                   (0.002)                               (0.002)
Region (Global omitted)
  - Africa                               -0.168**     -0.156**        -         -0.072      -0.117**        -
                                                                  0.250***                              0.171***
                                          (0.066)      (0.072)     (0.083)      (0.044)      (0.050)     (0.056)
  - Asia                                  -0.019        0.006      -0.089        0.041        0.057      -0.010
                                          (0.077)      (0.078)     (0.087)      (0.080)      (0.071)     (0.070)
  - Europe/Central Asia                    0.029        0.015     -0.182**       0.080        0.046      -0.066
                                          (0.081)      (0.081)     (0.089)      (0.057)      (0.060)     (0.063)
  - Latin America/Caribbean               -0.042       -0.041     -0.264**      0.101*        0.092      -0.092
                                          (0.097)      (0.097)     (0.110)      (0.057)      (0.056)     (0.062)

GEF Phase dummies                               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                                    688         592        546        666         576          530
R-squared (within)                             0.054       0.078      0.113     0.085        0.101        0.159
Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the country level. One, two, and three asterisk(s)
indicate statistical significance at the 90-, 95-, 99-percent levels.




                                                       35
                      Appendix Table 1: Double hurdle models explaining differences in
                                  cofinancing ratios at project approval

                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                    LPM        Fixed Effects     OLS       OLS Fixed
                                                                   LPM                      Effects

GEF grant (ln)                                    0.061***       0.063***       0.500***    0.571***
                                                   (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.098)     (0.104)
Preparatory grant (1=yes)                         0.041***       0.038***        -0.021      -0.051
                                                   (0.011)        (0.010)        (0.220)     (0.221)
Enabling activity (1=yes)                        -0.175***      -0.169***      -1.064***   -0.980***
                                                   (0.026)        (0.027)        (0.269)     (0.278)
Focal Areas (Multi-focal area omitted)
  - Biodiversity                                 -0.109***      -0.118***        -0.347*    -0.462**
                                                   (0.014)        (0.015)        (0.201)     (0.206)
  - Climate change                               -0.165***      -0.169***       1.344***    1.200***
                                                   (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.277)     (0.304)
  - International waters                         -0.112***      -0.094***         0.714      1.267**
                                                   (0.026)        (0.027)        (0.548)     (0.592)
  - Land degradation                             -0.085***      -0.098***        0.979*       0.782
                                                   (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.569)     (0.565)
  - Ozone related                                   0.006          0.004       -1.673***   -1.636***
                                                   (0.039)        (0.037)        (0.422)     (0.565)
  - Organic pollutants                            -0.049**      -0.064***       -0.816**   -1.100***
                                                   (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.367)     (0.405)
Lead Agency (UNDP omitted)
  - ADB                                           -0.051**        -0.003       5.937**     6.010**
                                                   (0.021)        (0.025)       (2.699)     (2.529)
  - FAO                                             -0.019         0.010         -0.594     -0.296
                                                   (0.026)        (0.028)       (0.435)     (0.452)
  - IADB                                           -0.043*        -0.021          1.214    1.293**
                                                   (0.025)        (0.028)       (0.747)     (0.640)
  - IFAD                                           -0.032*        -0.033         -0.077     -0.129
                                                   (0.018)        (0.024)       (0.494)     (0.512)
  - UNEP                                          0.056***       0.061***       -0.341*      0.060
                                                   (0.016)        (0.017)       (0.174)     (0.200)
  - UNIDO                                        -0.135***      -0.109***         0.143      0.354
                                                   (0.028)        (0.027)       (0.371)     (0.367)
  - World Bank                                      -0.003        -0.001       1.421***    1.411***
                                                   (0.012)        (0.013)       (0.354)     (0.355)
  - Other agency                                    -0.032        -0.025          1.174      1.146
                                                  -0.051**        -0.003       5.937**     6.010**
Executing partner type (Multilateral omitted)
  - Government                                     0.000          -0.015         0.274      -0.334
                                                  (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.325)     (0.351)
  - Private sector                                 0.001          -0.010         0.227      -0.195
                                                  (0.058)        (0.059)        (0.896)     (0.992)
  - NGO/Foundation/Institution                   0.056***        0.046**        -0.028      -0.322
                                                  (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.379)     (0.417)
GDP per capita (ln)                               -0.004           0.008        -0.034       0.492
                                                  (0.008)        (0.017)        (0.115)     (0.363)


                                                    36
Voice & accountability (WGI)                    0.000            --          -0.014*           --
                                               (0.000)                       (0.008)
Government effectiveness (WGI)                  0.001            --          0.018*            --
                                               (0.001)                       (0.009)
Regulatory quality (WGI)                       -0.001*           --          0.022**           --
                                               (0.001)                       (0.009)
Control of corruption (WGI)                    0.001*            --          -0.013*           --
                                               (0.001)                       (0.008)
Region (Global omitted)
  - Africa                                     0.034*            --          0.946***          --
                                               (0.017)                        (0.338)
  - Asia                                      0.062***           --          1.050***          --
                                               (0.020)                        (0.329)
  - Europe/Central Asia                       0.070***           --          0.804**           --
                                               (0.019)                        (0.381)
  - Latin America/Caribbean                   0.044***           --          0.668***          --
                                               (0.015)                        (0.253)

Year dummies                                                Yes              Yes   Yes         Yes
Country fixed effects                                                        Yes               Yes
Observations                                               2,978            2,990 2,436       2,440
R-squared (within)                                         0.513            0.500 0.268       0.245
Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the country level. One, two, and three
asterisk(s) indicate statistical significance at the 90-, 95-, 99-percent levels.




                                                 37
