NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF TUITION INCREASES ON UNDOCUMENTED COLLEGE STUDENTS'
ATTAINMENT
Dylan Conger
Lesley J. Turner
Working Paper 21135
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21135
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2015

We are indebted to the City University of New York Office of Policy Research for making the data
extracts available for analysis and Colin Chellman and Andrew Wallace in particular for providing
key insights. We also thank Burt Barnow, Leah Brooks, Celeste Carruthers, Stephanie Riegg Cellini,
Duncan Chaplin, Rajeev Darolia, Julia Gelatt, Jessica Howell, Jonathan Smith, Gema Zamarro, and
participants at the meetings and seminars of the Association for Education Finance and Policy, Association
for Public Policy Analysis and Management, American University, Brookings Institution, CUNY,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Population Association of America, and Society for Research
on Educational Effectiveness for very helpful comments. We are grateful for the excellent research
assistance provided by Cinthia Josette Arevalo. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Dylan Conger and Lesley J. Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Impact of Tuition Increases on Undocumented College Students' Attainment
Dylan Conger and Lesley J. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 21135
April 2015
JEL No. H75,I21,J15
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of a temporary price shock on the attainment of undocumented college students
enrolled in a large urban college system. In spring 2002, the City University of New York reversed
its policy of charging in-state tuition to undocumented students. By fall 2002, the state legislature
restored in-state rates. Using a differences-in-differences identification strategy, we estimate impacts
on reenrollment, credits, grades, and degree completion. The price shock led to an immediate 8 percent
decrease in senior college students' enrollment. Senior college students who entered college the semester
prior to the price shock experienced lasting reductions in attainment, including a 22 percent decrease
in degree receipt. Conversely, among senior college students who been enrolled for at least a year,
the price shock only affected the timing of exit.
Dylan Conger
George Washington University
Trachtenberg School of Public Policy
and Public Administration
805 21st Street NW
Washington, DC 20052
dconger@gwu.edu
Lesley J. Turner
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115E Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
turner@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

The share of high school graduates who enroll in college in the United States has grown substantially in
recent decades, yet college completion rates have declined, especially among low-income students (Bound,
Lovenheim and Turner, 2010; Bailey and Dynarski, 2011). A large body of research provides evidence that
reducing the price of college can increase college attendance (e.g., Deming and Dynarski, 2010), yet far less is
known about the effect of price on enrolled students’ ultimate degree attainment. In this paper, we estimate
the impact of an unanticipated and temporary tuition increase on the attainment of undocumented college
students within a major urban university system. Focusing on undocumented students - the majority of
whom are low-income and ineligible for federal and state financial aid - provides an opportunity to evaluate
the effect of price changes on the attainment of enrolled students with limited financial resources.
Undocumented youth who migrate to the US as children are also a centerpiece of federal immigration
reform proposals and recent higher education policies in many states. Although federal efforts to pass
legislation extending legal status and other federal benefits to undocumented youth have been unsuccessful,
18 states now provide in-state tuition benefits to undocumented youth who received their secondary schooling
in the state. This subsidy represents a substantial reduction in postsecondary costs given that out-of-state
tuition rates are typically more than twice the in-state rates (Hemelt and Marcotte, 2011).
We estimate the effect of a temporary removal of this in-state subsidy on the outcomes of undocumented
students enrolled in New York City’s public university system, the City University of New York (CUNY). For
a single semester, CUNY reversed its long-standing policy of charging in-state tuition rates to undocumented
students from New York. Students enrolled in one of CUNY’s “senior” colleges (institutions that offer both
bachelor’s and associate’s degrees) experienced a 123 percent price increase, while associate’s degree-seeking
community college students experienced a 23 percent increase.1 This one-semester price shock provides a
natural experiment for examining the effect of tuition on undocumented students’ attainment, measured by
their reenrollment, credit accumulation, grades, and degree receipt.
To identify impacts on short-run attainment, we use a generalized differences-in-differences identification
strategy that compares changes in undocumented students’ outcomes before and after the tuition hike to
differences in the outcomes of documented noncitizens (93 percent of whom are permanent residents), a
group unaffected by the policy change. The elimination of the in-state tuition subsidy substantially decreased
undocumented senior college students’ short-run attainment, with reenrollment falling by 8 percent in the
1 Though postsecondary institutions are typically classified as “four-year” or “two-year”, we use the CUNY System’s label of
“senior” college (as opposed to “four-year” college) because approximately 40 percent of CUNY’s senior college students start
out in an associate’s degree program and these students face the same tuition charges as senior college students enrolled in a
bachelor’s degree program. Thus, the magnitude of the price change is specific to the institution, not the degree. We elaborate
on this point in Section 2.

2

semester of the price increase. Among undocumented community college students, the price increase had no
effect on reenrollment, but decreased credits earned by approximately 8 percent. We can rule out all but
very small impacts on grades for both senior and community college students, and provide evidence that
senior college students induced to leave school by the price shock were not negatively selected, on average.
We estimate that over half of the senior college students induced to dropout by the spring 2002 price
shock would not have successfully maintained enrollment in the following semesters, even in the absence of
any price increase. For these inframarginal students, the price shock affected the timing of college exit but
not long-run attainment. Inframarginal exits occur primarily among students who spent at least one year in
college before the price increase. Conversely, senior college students who enrolled in fall 2001 - the semester
immediately prior to the tuition increase - experienced lasting reductions in attainment. One interpretation
of this finding is that as college students gain more experience, they are better able to predict their long-run
success. As a result, price shocks close to college entry are more likely to affect marginal students who would
have ultimately been successful to dropout.
To evaluate the long-run impacts of the price shock, we compare the outcomes of undocumented students
in the the 2000 and 2001 entry cohorts to those of undocumented students who started college in 1999,
again using differences in documented noncitizens’ outcomes by entry cohort to generate a counterfactual.
We estimate that the price shock experienced by undocumented senior college students from the 2001 entry
cohort resulted in a 22 percent decrease in degree receipt within eight years of entry. We find no evidence of
long-run impacts on community college students’ outcomes.
Our paper contributes to research and policy concerning the effect of college prices on human capital
acquisition. Research reviewed by Deming and Dynarski (2010) points to significant increases in collegegoing among students who experience an exogenous drop in price due to policy changes. However, there is
less evidence on the impact of price changes on the postsecondary attainment of students after they have
already spent time in college. Although gaps in college entry by family income have shrunk in recent years,
low-income students’ graduation rates remain low (Bailey and Dynarski, 2011), suggesting that the effects
of financial need on attainment persist beyond the enrollment margin. A handful of studies suggest that
increases in need-based grants can boost the attainment of enrolled students when such increases are not
offset by reductions in other aid.2 Bettinger (2004) provides evidence that Pell Grant aid increases Ohio
public college students’ persistence rates between the first to the second year of college.3 Similarly,GoldrickRab et al. (2012) find higher first- to second-year persistence rates among Pell Grant recipients in Wisconsin
2 A related topic is the role of credit constraints in students’ postsecondary decisions. In a setting where students faced no
direct tuition charges, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2008) find that most dropouts do not face credit constraints, suggesting
a potentially large role for non-financial factors in students’ persistence decisions.
3 Estimates suggest that an additional $1,000 in Pell Grant aid increases reenrollment by 3 to 4 percentage points, although
these estimates are not robust to controlling for institution fixed-effects.

3

colleges who were randomly-selected to receive an additional $1,000 in aid. Illustrating the importance
of accounting for loan crowd-out, Marx and Turner (2015) estimate that Pell Grant aid does not increase
persistence or attainment in a setting where additional grant aid reduces aid from federal loans. Castleman
and Long (2013) estimate the impact of state need-based grant aid on Florida high school graduates’ college
enrollment and attainment and impacts on both initial enrollment and degree receipt. However, the positive
effect of grant eligibility on enrollment makes it is difficult to determine whether grant aid eligibility increased
attainment above and beyond its impacts on college attendance. Addressing concerns of both selection into
college and crowd-out of federal and institutional grant aid, Angrist et al. (2014) examine the impact of a
need- and merit-based scholarship in Nebraska. They find substantial impacts on the persistence of nonwhite
students, but estimate that overall, at least 80 percent of funds were spent on students whose behavior was
not affected by the grant.4
We contribute to research on the effect of prices on enrolled students’ attainment in several ways. First,
we estimate both short- and long-run impacts of a price shock, focusing on semester to semester reenrollment
as well as degree receipt. Second, our context allows us to isolate the impact of price increases on student
outcomes because undocumented students are unable to easily offset the price shock with additional grant
aid or borrowing. Finally, to our knowledge, ours is the first study that provides suggestive evidence that
students early in their college careers are more vulnerable to price increases than more experienced students.
Our findings also contribute to research examining the effect of state, local, and institutional policies
aimed at making college more accessible to undocumented students. Four prior studies use national survey
data and a standard difference-in-difference framework to estimate the effects of in-state tuition subsidies on
undocumented students’ college enrollment decisions. Kaushal (2008), Chin and Juhn (2011), and Darolia
and Potochnick (2014) estimate the average effects of in-state tuition across all states with such policies,
while Flores (2010) focuses on the impact of Texas’ in-state tuition subsidy. All four studies rely on data
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the American Community Survey (ACS) and proxy for
undocumented status with Mexican (or Hispanic) students who are not citizens. Three of the four studies
find positive impacts of eligibility for the in-state tuition subsidy on college enrollment of 2 to 6 percentage4 A related body of research explores the role of monetary incentives tied to other supports (such as mentors) or requirements
(such as a minimum course load or grade point average) on enrolled students’ effort and degree completion. Dynarski (2008)
estimates positive impacts of state merit-based aid on persistence and graduation with larger effects among female students.
Scott-Clayton (2011) studies West Virginia’s PROMISE scholarship and finds positive impacts only during years in which
aid was tied to performance. Results from the Student Achievement and Retention Project, an experimental study that
randomly-assigned students in a Canadian university to receive financial aid (tied to grades), support services, or both, suggests
higher levels of merit aid coupled with support services increased female (but not male) students’ grade point average and
persistence(Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos, 2009). However, a follow-up study that involved stronger incentives found smaller
impacts on attainment (Angrist, Oreopoulos and Williams, forthcoming). Finally, a series of papers examine the impact of
randomly assigned student incentives and find evidence of small, but significant impacts on attainment (e.g., Patel and Rudd,
2012; Barrow et al., forthcoming). Although most studies examining student incentives in higher education find positive impacts
on enrolled students’ attainment, assistance is based on performance and often involves both monetary and additional supports.
Our study focuses exclusively on the estimation of tuition price effects.

4

points (Kaushal, 2008; Flores, 2010; Darolia and Potochnick, 2014). Our study builds on this prior work
by estimating the effect of these subsidies on students’ retention and ultimate degree receipt. In addition
to informing sub-national policies, evaluations of price effects on both college-going and degree attainment
inform federal immigration reform proposals aimed at providing undocumented youth with a pathway to
citizenship through college attendance and completion.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we describe the CUNY System and
provide background information on undocumented young adults. We discuss our data and sample in Section
3 and describe our empirical approach in Section 4. In Section 5, we present estimates of the impact of the
price increase on undocumented students’ attainment during the semester of the policy change and in the
immediately following semesters. Section 6 presents our estimates of the impact of the tuition increase on
longer-run outcomes, including degree receipt, while Section 7 concludes.

2

The CUNY System and Undocumented Students

As an established immigrant gateway, New York is home to approximately three million foreign-born residents, an estimated 625,000 of whom are undocumented (American Community Survey, 2010; Passel and
Cohn, 2010). In fall 2013, approximately 8,300 undocumented students were enrolled in New York state colleges, with 80 percent residing in New York City and attending one of the CUNY System schools (DiNapoli
and Bleiwas, 2014).5
In the period we examine, the CUNY System included 11 senior colleges and 6 community colleges. We
label CUNY schools as senior or community colleges instead of using the standard labels of two- or fouryear institutions because four of the 11 senior CUNY colleges offer both associate’s and bachelor’s degree
programs.6 In addition, CUNY senior college students who are enrolled in an associate’s degree program
face the same tuition rates as those in a bachelor’s degree program. In 2001, nominal in-state tuition
for a full-time student was $3,200 per year at senior colleges and $2,500 per year at community colleges.
Nominal out-of-state rates faced by full-time senior and community college students were $6,800 and $3,076,
respectively.
Our identification strategy relies on unanticipated shocks to undocumented students’ eligibility for in-state
rates. In 1989, long before any state considered granting in-state tuition to undocumented students, New
York City Mayor Edward Koch issued an executive order that extended in-state prices to CUNY students
5 An additional 18 percent of undocumented students were enrolled in a SUNY institution in one of the five counties surrounding New York City, and the remaining 2 percent attended a SUNY institution elsewhere in the state.
6 This practice is not unique to the CUNY System. According to data from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS), in 2013, 60 percent of public institutions categorized as “four-year” schools also offered certificate or associate’s
degree programs.

5

who lacked documentation but who could demonstrate that they graduated from a New York high school
or received a GED from the state (Rincón, 2008). Yet in the fall of 2001, shortly after the terrorist attacks
of September 11, the CUNY Chancellor overturned this policy and announced that starting in the spring
2002 semester, CUNY would charge undocumented students who had previously qualified for the in-state
subsidy out-of-state tuition rates.7 Although no changes to the new pricing policy were anticipated at the
beginning of the semester, by April 2002, Governor George Pataki announced his support for legislation
offering in-state tuition to undocumented students with ties to New York State.8 In the summer of 2002,
the state legislature passed a law that restored in-state tuition benefits for eligible undocumented students.
Thus, for the spring 2002 semester only, tuition rates for undocumented students at senior colleges more
than doubled (from $133 to $283 per credit). With a full-course load of 12 credits, this represented a price
increase of $1,800 for the semester. The price increase faced by undocumented community college students
was smaller (from $104 to $128 per credit), with full-time students facing an approximately $300 (23 percent)
increase for the semester.

2.1

Characteristics and outcomes of undocumented students

The Pew Hispanic Center estimates that there are approximately 1.7 million undocumented immigrants
under the age of 31 who migrated to the US at before they were 16 (Passel and Lopez, 2012). The proposed
Development, Relief, and Education for Alien Minors (DREAM) Act would provide eligible youth with a
pathway to permanent residency status and access to federal benefits, such as aid for college.9 Congress voted
against the DREAM Act in 2001, 2007 and 2010. In an effort to jump-start reforms targeting undocumented
youth, in 2012, the Obama administration announced the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA)
program - an executive order that shields eligible undocumented immigrants from deportation and provides
them with temporary work authorization. President Obama attempted to expand the DACA program to
other undocumented residents in November 2014; however, a federal court order has suspended that action.
In the meantime, several states, Boards of Regents, and individual institutions have opted to extend in-state
tuition benefits to undocumented college students enrolled in public institutions. As of 2014, most of the top
immigrant-receiving states (including California, New York, Texas, Florida, New Jersey, and Illinois) have
granted the subsidy to eligible undocumented youth.
7 See, for instance, Karen W. Arenson’s 2001 New York Times article, “CUNY raises tuition rates for foreigners here illegally.” Downloaded on 2/2/2014 from http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/03/nyregion/cuny-raises-tuition-rates-for-foreignershere-illegally.html.
8 See Joyce Purnick’s New York Times article, “Metro Matters; Tuition, Out of State And Beyond,” (downloaded 1/5/2015
from http://www.nytimes.com/2002/02/18/nyregion/metro-matters-tuition-out-of-state-and-beyond.html) and Sara Hebel’s
May 2002 Chronicle of Higher Education article, “N.Y. Governor Backs Plan to Help Some Illegal Immigrants.”
9 In addition to removing the threat of deportation and the opportunity for legal employment, the bill encourages college
enrollment by offering a pathway to legalization for students who obtain a college degree.

6

Despite the ample policy attention given to undocumented college students, there are few large-scale
analyses of their outcomes because federally-sponsored surveys and other administrative data sources are
prohibited from asking respondents to state their immigration status. Several qualitative studies of undocumented college students identified through non-probabilistic sampling methods find that students who lack
documentation face substantial barriers to college success (Abrego, 2006; Contreras, 2009; Perez, 2009; Gonzales, 2011; Muñoz and Maldonado, 2012). Most undocumented students come from families with limited
financial resources and parents who are themselves undocumented and unable to provide guidance and support in navigating US institutions. Thus, undocumented students face many of the same hurdles encountered
by other low-income, first generation, college students. Their lack of documentation poses greater challenges
to normal college pursuits, such as obtaining driver’s licenses, places to live, student identification cards, and
employment both on and off campus (Contreras, 2009; Muñoz and Maldonado, 2012).
At the same time, these studies suggest that undocumented youth demonstrate a high level of ambition
and resilience. Consistent with this anecdotal evidence, Conger and Chellman (2013) show that undocumented CUNY students’ academic outcomes resemble those of other noncitizen immigrant groups (namely
permanent residents and visa holders), all of whom earn higher GPAs and complete more credits than US
citizens. These findings are in line with research on immigrant students in the K-12 education system, which
often finds that they are a positively-selected group who outperform native-born students with observablysimilar race and class profiles (e.g., Kao and Tienda, 1995; Schwartz and Stiefel, 2006).
In short, many undocumented college students appear to fall in the category of high-ability, low-income
students. As low-income students, they should be highly responsive to tuition shocks. Furthermore, they
are ineligible for most other sources of financial aid and are less able to compensate for tuition increases
with anything other than employment in the informal labor market or loans from family members or other
informal sources. Following the news that tuition will increase in the next semester, we predict that some
undocumented students will exit college, reduce their credit-load, and/or devote less time to their school
work. These negative impacts may continue in later semesters even when the in-state rates are restored if
students face costs associated with switching between working and attending college or expect to face other
tuition increases in the future.10
10 While some students can also choose to lower their consumption, two-thirds of students enrolled in the
CUNY System already live with their parents or guardians making reductions in housing consumption less of
an option for lowering the cost of attendance.
See CUNY’s “2012 Student Experience Survey,” available at:
http://cuny.edu/about/administration/offices/ira/ir/surveys/student/SES2012FinalReport.pdf for further details (accessed 23
September 2014).

7

3

Data and Sample

Our analyses rely on administrative data from the CUNY System, which includes information on first-time,
degree-seeking students’ demographic characteristics and academic outcomes. Crucially, CUNY records
students’ citizenship and immigration status for the purpose of tuition determination. Upon enrollment,
students are asked to identify themselves as US citizens, permanent residents, student or temporary visa
holders, asylees or refugees, or undocumented.11 Students must submit documentation to validate their selfreported status and those who either report that they are undocumented or who fail to provide documentation
(e.g., current visa, temporary authorizations to live and work in the US) are recorded as undocumented. To
qualify for in-state tuition, undocumented students are required to submit a notarized affidavit stating that
they plan to legalize their status as soon as they are eligible. These students also must demonstrate that
they received their secondary schooling in New York State, either from a New York high school or GED
program.
Our main sample consists of the 17,915 noncitizen students who obtained a high school diploma or GED
from New York State and entered an associate’s or bachelor’s degree program between fall 1999 and fall
2001.12 The characteristics of these students and the 43,159 citizens who earned a high school degree or
GED from New York State and entered college between fall 1999 and fall 2001 are displayed in the first
three columns of Table 1. Of the 61,074 students in these entry cohorts, 29 percent are noncitizens and
approximately 3 percent are undocumented.
Compared to noncitizens, CUNY students with US citizenship are younger, more likely to be Hispanic
or White and less likely to be Asian. Citizens are also more likely to be classified as disabled at college
entry and less likely to have graduated from a New York City high school or be GED recipients. Although
citizens enter CUNY with lower high school achievement, as measured by the CUNY college admissions
average (a standardized measure of high school GPA ranging from 0 to 100), they are less likely to require
remedial classes compared to noncitizens. Finally, citizens are more likely to enter college in a bachelor’s
11 A US citizen is an individual who either was born in the US or obtained citizenship through the process of naturalization. Permanent residents (also known as a green card holders) are defined by the US Citizenship and Immigration Services as “any person not a citizen of the United States who is residing the in the U.S. under legally recognized and lawfully
recorded permanent residence as an immigrant” (see the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services Glossary, available at:
http://www.uscis.gov/tools/glossary). Visa holders are individuals who reside in the U.S. temporarily for a specific purpose,
typically to work or attend school. Finally, an undocumented immigrant is one who does not have legal authority to live or
work in the US. This status is achieved either by entering the country illegally, or by violating the terms of a legal visa. US
citizens and permanent residents are eligible for all forms of aid and loans from governmental and private sources. Most visa
holders are ineligible for these sources of aid, with the one exception being Cuban and Haitian entrants.
12 Among the 83,041 degree-seeking students in these entry cohorts, we drop 5,033 (6 percent) with missing citizenship or
documentation information and an additional 455 (less than 1 percent) missing age at entry. Additionally, restricting our sample
to students who earned their high school diploma or GED in New York State excludes 375 (17 percent) undocumented students
and 8,553 (35 percent) documented noncitizens. We impose this restriction to ensure that undocumented students in our
sample were eligible for in-state tuition prior to Fall 2001 and to increase the comparability of documented and undocumented
noncitizens. Among citizens, 7,555 (15 percent) are excluded due to this restriction.

8

degree program and are less likely to initially enroll in a nonselective institution.13
Documented and undocumented noncitizens also differ by their racial/ethnic backgrounds; undocumented
students are more likely to be Black and less likely to be White or Asian than their documented classmates.
Undocumented students are the least likely of the three groups to pursue a bachelor’s degree at entry, and
enter less selective CUNY institutions than documented noncitizens. Finally, undocumented students are
more likely to be GED recipients and less likely to be graduates of New York City high schools compared to
documented noncitizen students.
The final three columns of Table 1 display p-values from tests of the equality of the characteristics
of citizen versus noncitizen students, undocumented versus documented noncitizens, and all three groups,
respectively. Although many of the differences in characteristics across groups are statistically significant, by
in large, these differences are small in magnitude, especially when comparing documented and undocumented
noncitizens. Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 display the characteristics of senior and community college
students, respectively; after conditioning on college type, we find even fewer significant differences in the
characteristics of documented and undocumented noncitizen students.
Table 1 also highlights one of the unique features of our study location. New York City is the largest
city in the US and contains a diverse student population (of both natives and immigrants). Undocumented
youth living in New York City come from all over the world, not just from Latin and South America as
is common in other regions. Thus, the responses of CUNY undocumented students to tuition shocks may
not resemble the responses of other undocumented students across the nation. We address concerns over
the generalizability of our estimates in Section 5.4 by examining whether the impact of the tuition increase
varies by race/ethnicity.

4

Empirical Framework

Our data and setting provide several advantages for estimating effects of price shocks on undocumented
students’ outcomes. First, the decision to eliminate the in-state tuition subsidy for undocumented students
appears to have been made in reaction to 9/11 and not to any patterns observed among undocumented or
documented noncitizens before fall 2001 (Rincón, 2008). Thus, there is no reason to expect undocumented
students were experiencing changes in any relevant drivers of attainment, such as financial need, courses,
institutions, or grades, relative to their documented counterparts who were not exposed to the price shock.
13 We classify institutions’ selectivity using the Barron’s Guide, which places the following colleges in each rank: “Very
Competitive” includes Baruch; “Competitive” includes Brooklyn, City, Hunter, John Jay, and Queens; Less “Competitive”
includes Lehman; “Noncompetitive” includes City Tech, Medgar Evers, New York City College of Technology, Staten Island,
and York; “Nonselective” includes Borough of Manhattan Community College and Bronx, Hostos, Kingsborough, LaGuardia,
and Queensborough Community Colleges.

9

Second, undocumented students are ineligible for most federal, state, and private grants and loans, making
it difficult for these students to buffer the tuition hike with increased financial support from other sources.14
In addition, no exceptions to the elimination of the in-state tuition subsidy appear to have been granted, or
additional supports made available, rendering all previously-eligible undocumented students subject to the
same price increase. These unique circumstances means that our estimates will more closely measure the
theoretical effects of price shocks on postsecondary attainment than studies that examine the effect of a specific subsidy (e.g., Pell Grant aid) on the outcomes of students who have access to other potentially offsetting
resources (e.g., federal loans). Third, most surveys do not request that respondents state their immigration
status or provide documentation to validate their responses. Thus, studies that rely federal data sources,
such as the ACS or the CPS, code both undocumented students and other noncitizen immigrants (namely,
permanent residents and those with legal visas) as treatment group members, leading to measurement error
in students’ exposure to changes in tuition. Our unique data set allows us to more accurately identify the
undocumented, thereby reducing measurement error and allowing us to difference out non-price impacts on
attainment by using documented noncitizens as the control group.15
To estimate the effects of the price shock, we focus on the three semesters surrounding the policy change
and the semester of the price shock: fall 2000 through fall 2004 (with spring 2002 at the center of the
series).16 We estimate generalized differences-in-differences models, where we allow the impact of the policy
change on attainment to have persistent effects after in-state rates were restored to undocumented students:

Yisct = β1 T reatt × U ndoci + β2 P ostt × U ndoci + γXi + δsc + δt + τ × δc + isct

(1)

In equation (1), Yisct is one of several attainment outcomes in semester t for student i who initially entered
college s as a member of cohort c. U ndoci is set to one if the student is undocumented and Xi is a
vector of student covariates measured in the first semester of college including indicators for documentation
status (permanent resident, student visa holder, or asylee/refugee), initial degree program (associate’s versus
bachelor’s degree), high school GPA, high school type (NYC public, NYC private, GED, or other New York
state school), need for remedial courses, disability, age, gender, race/ethnicity (Black, Hispanic, White,
or other), and single parent status. We include semester and college by cohort fixed effects, δt and δsc ,
respectively, and cohort-specific linear trends τ × δc , where τ = t − c represents semesters since entry.
Finally, under the identifying assumption that the outcomes of undocumented and documented noncitizen
14 Undocumented students are ineligible for all federal sources of aid and loans, including the Pell and Stafford programs.
They are also ineligible for the New York Tuition Assistance Program (TAP), the New York State funded grant to low-income
students of up to $5,000.
15 For instance, we can account for the removal of the subsidy leading noncitizens to feel unwelcome in the CUNY System.
In other settings, such “chilling effects” have been shown to alter documented noncitizens’ behavior (e.g., Watson, 2014).
16 In Section 5.2, we show that our results are robust to larger and smaller windows.

10

students would have followed similar trends in the absence of the price increase, isct represents a random
error component. We estimate separate models for students enrolled in senior and community colleges.
Student-semester observations are dropped following degree receipt.17 Standard errors are clustered at the
cohort by college level.
The coefficient on the interaction between the indicator for the semester of the price increase (T reatt )
and undocumented status, β1 , represents the change in attainment during the semester of the tuition hike
on the outcomes of undocumented students relative to documented noncitizens. Additionally, β2 represents
the change in outcomes for undocumented students in the semesters after the tuition hike (compared to the
semesters before the increase) relative to the same change for documented noncitizens.18
The main identifying assumption underlying our research design is that, in the absence of the tuition
increase, the outcomes of documented noncitizen and undocumented students in the spring 2002 and the
following semesters would have followed similar trends. A possible violation of this assumption would be
underlying trends in the outcome variables that are correlated with the policy change. Examination of the
pre-policy trends in attainment, discussed in the following section, suggests that prior to the policy change,
outcomes of documented and undocumented noncitizens followed similar paths.
In this case, an additional potential violation comes from the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
These attacks had a major impact on New York City residents and institutions and may have uniquely
influenced the schooling choices of immigrant students. If the undocumented students felt disproportionately
impacted, perhaps reducing their schooling investments due to a decrease in morale or increased fear of
deportation, then observed changes in spring 2002 could be due to the terrorist attack and not to the change
in the tuition policy. Though we are unable to directly examine the academic response to 9/11, we can test
whether the policy change led to reductions in attainment among documented noncitizens relative to US
citizens. Documented noncitizens at CUNY were not subject to the new tuition policy, but they were exposed
to the post 9/11 environment and may have felt a similar level of hostility and reduction in attachment to
US institutions. As discussed in the following section, trends before and after 9/11 reveal no evidence that
documented noncitizens’ enrollment or attainment differed from that of US citizens.

5

The Impact of Tuition Increase on Attainment

To illustrate our identification strategy and preview our main results, we plot average average reenrollment
(Figure 1), credits attempted (Figure 2), and credits earned (Figure 3) of citizens, documented noncitizens,
17 Only

2 percent of student by semester observations are dropped due to this restriction.
effects for T reatt and P ostt are subsumed by the vector of semester fixed effects while the main effect for U ndoci is
included in Xi .
18 Main

11

and undocumented students over the seven semesters surrounding the policy change.19 In each figure,
the solid black line represents the average outcomes of undocumented students, the dashed dark gray line
represents the average outcomes of documented noncitizens, and the solid light gray line represents the
average outcomes of citizens. Differences between the black and dashed gray lines before and after the policy
change will approximate our differences-in-differences estimates. In each figure, the sample in Panel A is
limited to students who initially enrolled in a CUNY senior college between fall 1999 and fall 2001, while
Panel B is limited to community college students.
Prior to spring 2002, both documented and undocumented noncitizens who initially entered a senior
college were more likely to reenroll relative to citizens (Figure 1, Panel A). The decline in mean reenrollment
for all groups reflects decreases in persistence over time. Reenrollment rates for documented noncitizen and
undocumented senior college students are quite similar prior to spring 2002, while in spring of 2002, when
undocumented students’ tuition rates doubled, their reenrollment drops substantially. Following spring 2002,
reenrollment continues to monotonically decline for all three groups. Relative to documented noncitizens
and citizens, decreases in undocumented students’ reenrollment slow slightly after in-state tuition rates were
restored. Trends in community college students’ reenrollment - shown in Panel B - suggest that the price
shock did not alter undocumented community college students’ reenrollment relative to their documented or
citizen peers.
Figures 2 and 3 display trends in credits attempted and credits earned, respectively. Since we do not condition on enrollment, changes in credits attempted and earned will represent a combination of intensive (e.g.,
course load reductions or less effort devoted to courses) and extensive margin (e.g., dropout) responses. Documented and undocumented noncitizens attempt and earn more credits than citizens. Among senior college
students, trends in credits attempted and earned are similar for documented and undocumented noncitizens
before spring 2002. In the semester of the price increase, undocumented senior college students’ attempt and
earn fewer credits relative to documented noncitizens, suggesting that the policy change reduced both credits
attempted and earned. Following spring 2002, undocumented senior college students’ credit accumulation rebounds slightly, but remains lower than in the pre-spring 2002 semesters. Among undocumented community
college students, pre-spring 2002 trends in credit accumulation do not track documented noncitizens’ trends
as well as in the case of senior college students. Additionally, there is little evidence of significant decreases
in credits attempted or earned by undocumented community college students relative to their documented
peers except in the spring 2002 semester.
The pre- and post-policy trends of US citizens and documented noncitizens reveal no substantial differ19 Note that we use the term “reenrollment” as opposed to “enrollment” as the latter is typically used to refer to the decision
to pursue a degree. We also do not use the term “persistence” because we focus here on reenrollment that is not conditional on
the previous semester (later, we examine persistence rates where reenrollment in time t is conditional on enrollment in t − 1).

12

ences between these two groups in any of the figures. The absence of a difference indicates that documented
noncitizens appear not to have reacted to the tuition hike (via a chilling effect) or to the terrorist attacks of
9/11. Although the absence of a reaction to 9/11 among documented noncitizens (relative to citizens) does
not entirely rule out 9/11 as an explanation for undocumented students’ attainment decreases, it suggests
that 9/11 is unlikely to be the major cause of the changes we observe.

5.1

Impacts on reenrollment, credits attempted, and credits earned

Table 2 reports the coefficients and standard errors on the interaction of undocumented status and indicators
for the semester of the price increase (spring 2002) and semesters following the price increase (post-spring
2002) from estimation of Equation (1). We examine impacts on reenrollment (Panel A), credits attempted
(Panel B), and credits earned (Panel C). We test the equality of the estimated parameters on the interaction of
undocumented and spring 2002 and the interaction of undocumented and post-spring 2002, which provides
a test of whether the initial impacts of the price increase led to persistent reductions in undocumented
students’ attainment even after in-state prices were restored.
The price shock led to a 7 percentage point decrease in undocumented senior college students’ reenrollment, an 8 percent decline relative to fall 2001 reenrollment rates. The price shock resulted in smaller,
but significant impacts on senior college students’ reenrollment in the semesters after the tuition hike was
reversed, leading to a 3 percentage point (3 percent) decrease. The difference between the immediate and
medium-run impacts of the tuition hike on senior college students’ reenrollment suggests that either students
induced to leave college in spring 2002 by the price shock returned to school after in-state tuition rates were
restored or that approximately half of the students who initially dropped out in response to the price shock
would have left in the following semesters even in the absence of the policy change. We distinguish between
these explanations by examining whether the the probability of returning to a CUNY institution, conditional
on having dropped-out, increased among undocumented students in the post-spring 2002 semesters. We find
no evidence that undocumented senior college students who left CUNY in spring 2002 or earlier were more
likely return to college once in-state tuition rates were restored.20
Among undocumented community college students, we find small and insignificant impacts of the price
increase on reenrollment in spring 2002 and later semesters.21 Our estimates imply a price elasticity of enrollment equal to -0.06 for senior college students and -0.08 for community college students. Thus, even though
the estimated impact of the price shock on community college students’ reenrollment is substantially smaller
20 Our point estimates, although insignificant, suggest that undocumented senior college students were 3.4 percentage points
(14 percent) less likely to return to a CUNY institution after spring 2002 (full results available upon request).
21 We can reject the equality of the estimated impact of the price increase in spring 2002 for community versus senior college
students (p = 0.005), but the difference in the estimated impact of the price change after spring 2002 is not statistically
significant (p = 0.291).

13

than that of senior college students, because the price increase undocumented community college students
were exposed to was also small, our estimates imply a slightly larger (albeit not statistically distinguishable
from zero) price elasticity.
Undocumented students from both senior and community colleges attempted and earned fewer credits
in spring 2002 (Table 2, Panels B and C).22 Again, we do not condition on enrollment when estimating
impacts on credits attempted and earned, therefore, our point estimates represent the combined impact
of the price increase on intensive and extensive margin responses. Undocumented senior college students
attempted 0.9 fewer credits in spring 2002 (a 10 percent decrease relative to fall 2001) and earned 0.8 (9
percent) fewer credits. Undocumented community college students attempted and earned 0.4 fewer credits in
spring 2002, representing 7 and 8 percent declines from baseline attainment, respectively. Both community
and senior college students continued to earn fewer credits even after in-state tuition rates were restored.23
The similarities between impacts on credits attempted and earned, as well as the trends shown in Figures
2 and 3, suggest that observed decreases in credit accumulation are largely driven by decreases in credits
attempted, rather than declines in course pass rates. Thus, we focus on estimating impacts on credits earned
in the remaining analyses. Estimated impacts on credits attempted quite similar (available upon request).24
In Figures 4 and 5, we display point estimates and corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals from a
modified version of equation (1), where T reatt × U ndoci and P ostt × U ndoci are replaced with interactions
between U ndoci and a set of indicators for semesters before and after the price increase. Fall 2001 (the
semester immediately prior to the price shock) serves as the omitted category. These event study models
serve two purposes. First, we can test for differences in the trends in documented and undocumented
students’ outcomes prior to the price shock. Second, we can test how the impact of the price shock changes
in each semester after spring 2002.
Differences in reenrollment rates between documented and undocumented senior college students are not
statistically significant before the price shock (Figure 4, Panel A). However, undocumented senior college students are more than 5 percentage points less likely to reenroll in spring 2002 and around 3 percentage points
less likely to reenroll in fall 2002. After fall 2002, impacts on undocumented senior college students’ reenrollment remain negative but are no longer statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Conversely, we find
no evidence of statistically significant decreases in enrollment of undocumented community college students
22 We can reject the equality of the estimated impact of the price shock on credits attempted by senior versus community
college students in spring 2002 with p = 0.032. Differences in estimated impacts on credits earned in spring 2002 are not
statistically significant (p = 0.103).
23 Impacts on credits attempted and earned in the semesters after spring 2002 are not statistically distinguishable between
senior and community college students (p = 0.400 and p = 0.520 for credits attempted and earned, respectively).
24 We also investigate whether the impact of the price increase on senior college students differed by students initial degree
program, since some senior colleges contain both bachelor’s and associate’s degree seeking students. As shown in Appendix
Table A.3 , none of the differences in the estimated impact of the price increase by degree program are statistically significant.

14

in spring 2002 or later semesters relative to their documented peers (Panel B). Differences in reenrollment
three semesters prior to the price shock are statistically significant, suggesting that among community college students, trends in documented noncitizens’ outcomes may not provide as good a counterfactual for
undocumented students as in the case of senior college students.
Trends in credits earned for documented and undocumented senior college students prior to the price
shock are also not statistically distinguishable (Figure 5, Panel A). Although the drop in credits earned
by undocumented senior college students relative to their documented counterparts is largest in spring
2002, statistically significant differences in credit accumulation persist for at least two semesters following
the restoration of in-state rates. Among undocumented community college students, only the spring 2002
difference in credit accumulation is statistically significant at the 95 percent level (Panel B).

5.2

Robustness tests

Tables 3 and 4 display estimated impacts on reenrollment and credits earned from additional robustness
tests. Column 1 includes estimates from models that include student fixed effects. Column 2 contains
estimates from models that use a larger window around the policy change (4 semesters) and column 3
contains estimates from models that use a smaller window (2 semesters).
Including student fixed effects will account for student-specific time-invariant characteristics. To the
extent that students’ time-invariant unobservable characteristics are correlated with both their attainment
and exposure to the policy change, our main estimates will suffer from omitted variables bias. Conversely,
our fixed effects models use students’ own pre-treatment outcomes as their counterfactual outcome in the
absence of the policy change. In this case, documented noncitizens only allow us to identify cohort by school
and semester fixed effects, since these students experience no change in their exposure to the tuition increase.
The disadvantage of using student fixed effects is that attenuation bias due to classical measurement error
in the “treatment” variables will be exacerbated, biasing our estimates towards zero. Even if documentation
status contains minimal measurement error, our “treatment” variable will contain measurement error by
construction. This is because not all students are still enrolled in spring 2002, but we treat all students
as being affected by the price increase. The second and third robustness tests vary the size of the window
around the policy change that we use to define our sample, to show that our results are not driven by the
three semester window we use in our main specification.
We estimate similar impacts of the price increase on undocumented students’ reenrollment using these
alternative models (Table 3). Including a larger or smaller window of semesters around the price increase
results in estimates that are quite similar to our main results. Impacts on undocumented community college

15

students’ reenrollment are insignificant in every specification. The estimated impacts of the policy change
on credits earned are also robust to these alternative specifications (Table 4). Among senior college students,
the estimates suggest that the price increase led to an 8 to 9 percent decrease in credits earned in spring 2002,
and a 5 to 6 percent decrease after the in-state subsidy was restored. Among community college students,
estimates suggest that the price increase resulted in an 5 to 8 percent decrease in credits earned in spring
2002 and a 2 to 7 percent decrease in credits earned in the following semesters.
Finally, Fitterman Hall, part of the Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) campus, was
destroyed in the attacks, leading to a loss of one-third of BMCC’s classroom space. This shock to college
quality may have exacerbated the negative impact of the spring 2002 price increase on undocumented students. However, in Appendix Tables A.4 and A.5, we show that our main estimates are robust to excluding
BMCC students.

5.3

Disentangling extensive and intensive margin responses to the price shock

To better understand how much of the reduction in credits earned by senior college students was driven by
decreases in reenrollment, we estimate a second set of models that condition on enrollment. We first examine
whether the policy change affected the hazard of reenrollment, defined as the probability of reenrolling in
semester t conditional on semester t − 1 enrollment (Table 5, Panel A). Consistent with the estimates
displayed in Table 2, undocumented senior college students experienced a a 7 percentage point (7 percent)
decrease in persistence in spring 2002. Among community college students, our estimates suggest that the
price increase led to an insignificant 2 percentage point (2 percent) decrease in persistence. Unlike our
unconditional reenrollment estimates in Table 2, we find no evidence of impacts on undocumented students’
persistence after spring 2002. This is to be expected since most of the reduced rates of reenrollment in the
post-spring 2002 semesters is driven by exits that occurred in spring 2002. In other words, we would not
expect students who remained enrolled in the semester of the tuition hike to be more likely to leave school
once the subsidy was reinstated.
Next, we examine the impact of the price increase on credits earned by enrolled students (Table 5, Panel
B).25 The price increase led to an insignificant 0.2 (2 percent) decrease in credits earned by senior college
students during spring 2002. This point estimate is 23 percent of the size of the estimated impact when
we do not condition on reenrollment, suggesting that the price increase primarily reduced senior college
students’ attainment by inducing students to leave school. In the semesters after spring 2002, enrolled senior
students earned 0.3 (3 percent) fewer credits. Compared to senior college students, undocumented student
enrolled in community colleges experienced larger reductions in credit accumulation, including a 0.6 credit
25 Separate

estimates for senior college students by initial degree program are contained in Appendix Table A.6.

16

(7 percent) decrease in spring 2002 and later semesters.26 The reductions in attainment that persist after instate tuition rates were restored to undocumented students could stem from several channels. First, affected
undocumented students could respond to the price increase by increasing their non-school work investments
(and lowering their course loads). Alternatively, undocumented students who reenroll following the price
increase could also be negatively selected, and thus, would have earned fewer credits even in the absence of
the policy change. We find no effect of the price shock on enrolled students’ GPA (Table 5, Panel C).27 Our
95 percent confidence intervals rule out impacts larger than a -0.13 point decrease and a 0.05 point increase
in enrolled senior college students’ GPAs and a -0.07 point decrease and 0.10 point increase in enrolled
community college students’ GPAs in spring 2002.
The estimated impacts on credits earned and GPA capture both the effect of the policy change on
attainment and effects driven through selection into the sample of enrolled students. We use student fixedeffects models to disentangle these two potentially offsetting effects. By including a student fixed effect
in equation (1), our results will represent within-student variation in outcomes in spring 2002 and later
semesters and exclude any contamination due to differential selection into persistence following the price
shock. As shown in Appendix Table A.7, estimates impacts on credits earned and GPA from student fixedeffects models are quite similar to those displayed in Table 5, suggesting that the price shock had no effect
on undocumented students’ grades or credits attempted by senior college students.
We further explore selection into reenrollment in the semester of the price shock by comparing undocumented students who exited college in spring 2002 to those who exited in earlier semesters, with documented
noncitizens again serving as a counterfactual. We focus on total credits earned and cumulative GPA in
the semester before exit and limit our sample to senior college students, as we find no effect of the price
shock on undocumented community college students’ exit rates. As shown in Appendix Table A.8, relative
to documented noncitizens, undocumented students who left college in spring 2002 had higher cumulative
GPAs and had earned significantly more credits than those who left college prior to the price shock. If
anything, these results suggest that senior college students induced to leave college due to the price shock
were positively selected, on average.
26 The difference in the estimated impact of the price increase on credits earned by initial degree program is marginally
significant (p = 0.083).
27 We lose a small number of student by semester observations that are missing GPA (49 senior college students and 14
community college students). We find no relationship between the probability of having a missing GPA in a semester in which
the student is classified as being enrolled and the interaction between undocumented status and spring 2002 or post-spring 2002
(available upon request).

17

5.4

Heterogeneity by gender and race/ethnicity

Prior research suggests greater sensitivity to tuition supports among female compared to male bachelor’s
degree-seeking students (e.g., Dynarski, 2008; Angrist, Lang and Oreopoulos, 2009). To determine whether
the price increase had larger impacts on female undocumented students’ attainment, we estimate equation (1)
separately for male and female students. We find no evidence of heterogeneous impacts of the price change
on senior college students’ outcomes by gender (Table 6). However, among community college students, we
find marginally significant heterogeneity in the impact of the price increase on spring 2002 reenrollment by
gender. While the price increase did not significantly affect female undocumented students’ reenrollment
decisions, our estimates suggest that it led to a 5 percentage point decrease in male students’ probability
of reenrollment in spring 2002. We can reject the hypothesis that the interaction between undocumented
status and Spring 2002 is equal for male and female students with p = 0.032. However, in the semesters after
spring 2002, when in-state rates were restored, impacts on reenrollment for male versus female community
college students are not significant at conventional levels (p = 0.113). Additionally, among community college
students, we find no evidence that the price shock had differential impacts on credits earned by gender.
Next, we test for differences in the impact of the price increase on Hispanic versus non-Hispanic students. Undocumented students in New York City are less likely to be Hispanic than undocumented students
elsewhere in the US, therefore, this exercise allows us to determine how generalizable our results are to undocumented students outside of the CUNY System. Again, we estimate equation (1) separately for Hispanic
and non-Hispanic students; results are displayed in Table 7. Among both community and senior college students, undocumented Hispanic students’ experienced the largest reduction in enrollment and credits earned
in spring 2002. In the case of senior college students, differences in the impact of the price increase on credit
accumulation between Hispanic and non-Hispanic students are statistically significant (p = 0.025).28

5.5

Heterogeneity by entry cohort

Finally, we test for heterogeneous impacts of the price increase by entry cohort, separately examining students
who entered a CUNY institution in 1999, 2000, and 2001.29 Earlier cohorts potentially were able to gain
experience with college and have a better idea of whether they ultimately would be successful when the price
shock hit. Conversely, undocumented students in earlier cohorts may have exhausted more of their personal
or family resources, leaving them more vulnerable to the unexpected price shock.
As shown in Table 8, which displays point estimates for the sample of senior college students, we find
28 In Appendix Table A.9, we display results from models that separate non-Hispanic students into three additional categories:
Black, Asian, and White.
29 We group students by academic rather than calendar year. Thus, students entering a CUNY institution in spring 2000 are
classified as entering college in 1999 and students who enter in spring 2001 are classified as 2000 entrants.

18

evidence of heterogeneous responses by the length of time undocumented students had potentially been
enrolled when the price shock occurred. For undocumented students who entered a senior college in 1999 or
2000, the price shock led to a 3 to 7 percentage point (5 to 7 percent) reenrollment decline in spring 2002.
However, students in these entry cohorts - who potentially had been enrolled for at least a year when the
price shock hit - experienced no lasting declines in reenrollment. The estimated impacts of the price shock
in the semesters after spring 2002 are small and insignificant. In other words, all of the students in the 1999
and 2000 entry cohorts induced to leave school due to the price shock were inframarginal. For 2001 entrants,
the immediate impact of the price shock on reenrollment - an 8 percentage point (8 percent) decrease - was
not statistically distinguishable from that experienced by earlier cohorts (p = 0.132). However, 2001 entrants
also experienced lasting declines in reenrollment. Specifically, the probability of reenrollment after spring
2001 fell by 7 percentage points (7 percent), suggesting that close to 90 percent of the students induced to
leave school by the price shock in the 2001 cohort were marginal, and would have persisted for several more
semesters had they not been exposed to the tuition increase. We can reject the equality of post-spring 2002
effects across entry cohorts with p = 0.013. We find similar patterns across entry cohorts when examining
impacts on credit accumulation. We can’t reject the hypothesis that the price shock had similar impacts on
credit accumulation in spring 2001 across entry cohorts (p = 0.224), and after the in-state tuition subsidy
was restored, only 2001 entrants experience lasting reductions in credits earned in a given semester.
In contrast to the patterns we observe among undocumented senior college students, we find no evidence
of heterogeneous impacts of the price increase on undocumented community college students’ outcomes
across different entry cohorts (Table 9). Across all three entry cohorts, impacts on reenrollment are small
and insignificant, while impacts on credits earned are significant (or marginally significant) and of a similar
magnitude.
To further illustrate differences in the impact of the price shock on short- and longer-run attainment,
we estimate event-study models in which we replace T reatt × U ndoci and P ostt × U ndoci in equation (1)
with interactions between U ndoci and a set of indicators for the semesters before and after the price increase
(again, fall 2001 is the omitted category). In this case, we examine impacts on total credits earned (rather
than credits earned in a given semester) up to 12 semesters (6 years) after the price shock. We graph
these coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals for senior and community college students separately in
Figure 6. The black markers represent point estimates specific to the 2001 cohort, the hollow gray markers
represent estimated impacts for 2000 entrants, and the light gray “X” markers represent point estimates for
students in the 1999 entering cohort. The shaded areas represent the values contained by the 95 percent
confidence intervals for each set of point estimates.
Prior to the price shock, there are no differences in cumulative credits earned between documented and
19

undocumented students in community or senior colleges. As shown in Panel A, undocumented students in
the 1999 entry cohort experience a small reduction in cumulative credits in spring 2001, but their credit accumulation is never statistically distinguishable from credits earned by documented students. Undocumented
students belonging to the 2000 entry cohort do experience a statistically significant reduction in cumulative
credits earned relative to their documented counterparts for several semesters during and following the price
shock. However, differences in cumulative credits earned are no longer significant once five semesters after
the tuition hike have passed. Finally, students who entered college in fall 2001 experience immediate and
lasting reductions in cumulative credits earned starting in spring 2001. Even 12 semesters later, these students have earned 6 fewer credits in total than their documented peers. As shown in Panel B, we find no
evidence of immediate or lasting impacts of the price shock on undocumented community college students’
attainment.

6

Longer-Run Outcomes and Degree Receipt

In the previous section, we show that only senior college students belonging to the 2001 entry cohort experienced persistent declines in attainment following the price shock. We build upon these patterns to estimate
impacts of the tuition hike on undocumented senior college students’ long-run attainment, including cumulative credits earned and degree receipt eight years after entry. To do so, we compare differences in the
outcomes of undocumented students who entered college in 1999 relative to cohorts that entered in 2000
and 2001, again using differences in documented noncitizens outcomes across entry cohorts to generate a
counterfactual:

Yisc = α2000 U ndoci × 1 [cohort = 2000] + α2001 U ndoci × 1 [cohort = 2001] + ηXi + ψsc + νisc

(2)

Here, Yics is cumulative credits, associate’s degree receipt, and bachelor’s degree receipt eight years after
entry for student i who initially enrolled in college s as a member of cohort c. U ndoci indicates whether a
student is undocumented. The interaction between U ndoci and indicators for belonging to the 2000 or 2001
entry cohort represents the treatment we are interested in estimating, with corresponding coefficients α2000
and α2001 . The vector Xi includes the same set of controls as in our main equation and we also control for
school by cohort fixed effects, ψsc . Each observation represents a unique student and standard errors are
clustered at the school by cohort level. We limit our sample to senior college students; results pertaining to
community college students are reported in Appendix Tables A.10 and A.11.
Our identifying assumption rules out unobservable differences between students entering college in 1999

20

and those entering in 2000 and 2001 that vary with documentation status and affect long-run attainment.
Although this assumption is fundamentally untestable, we test whether there are differences in observable characteristics along these dimensions; estimates are displayed in Table 10. We find no evidence of
statistically significant changes in the observable characteristics of students by entry cohort that vary by
undocumented status and entry and we do not reject the hypothesis that the estimates are jointly insignificant (p = 0.731 for the 2000 cohort and p = 0.274 for the 2001 cohort). Finally, this approach relies on the
assumption that undocumented students who entered a senior college in 1999 were only affected by the price
shock in the short-run. If some students in this entry cohort also experienced declines in long-run attainment,
our estimates provide a lower bound of the true impacts of the price shock on long-run outcomes.
Table 11 provides estimates from equation (2) for three samples: Panel A for all senior college students;
Panel B for senior college students who initially entered college in a bachelor’s degree program, and Panel C
for those that initially entered an associate’s degree program. Consistent with the results displayed in Panel
A of Figure (6), only undocumented students who entered college in fall 2001 accumulated fewer credits over
the long-run. Relative to undocumented students who entered college in 1999, 2001 entrants earned 7 fewer
credits (a 9 percent decrease). These impacts are driven by bachelor’s degree seeking students, who earned
8 fewer credits (a 10 percent decrease).
The second through fourth columns present estimated impacts on degree receipt within eight years
of entry. Column 2 present estimated impacts of the price shock on receipt of any credential (including
certificates), while columns 3 and 4 focus on receipt of associate of arts or science (AA/AS) and bachelor
of arts or science (BA/BS) degrees, respectively. Again, only undocumented students who entered college
in fall 2001 experienced a reduction in long-run degree receipt. However, these impacts are substantial and
include a 10 percentage point (22 percent) reduction in receipt of any degree and a marginally significant 9
percentage point (22 percent) reduction in bachelor’s degree receipt. Impacts on bachelor’s degree receipt are
driven by bachelor’s degree-seeking students, who experienced a 12 percentage point (23 percent) reduction,
while associate’s degree-seeking senior college students were 12 percentage points (46 percent) less likely to
earn an associate’s degree within eight years of entry.

7

Conclusions

Our results suggest that CUNY’s decision to temporarily remove in-state tuition benefits reduced undocumented students’ short-run attainment. Senior college students were less likely to reenroll while community
college students attempted and earned fewer credits. Senior college students who entered college the semester
prior to the price shock experienced lasting reductions in credit accumulation and degree receipt.

21

The one semester policy change represented an $1,800 (123 percent) tuition increase for full-time senior
college students. During the semester of the price shock, senior college students’ reenrollment rates fell by
6.5 percentage points, which translates into an 8 percent decrease from the fall 2001 reenrollment rate. The
magnitude of this effect is at the upper end of recent estimates from Goldrick-Rab et al. (2012) who find
that a $1,000 increase in financial aid to Pell-eligible students increases their persistence rates by roughly 2
to 4 percentage points.
Furthermore, undocumented students who entered a senior college the semester before the price shock
also experienced reductions in long-run attainment, including a 9 percent decrease in cumulative credits
earned and a 22 percent decrease in degree receipt eight years after entry. The latter effect implies a price
elasticity of degree receipt equal to -0.18. Although we find evidence that the tuition increase led to a
reduction in community college students’ credit accumulation in spring 2002, we find no evidence of long-run
reductions in their attainment. It is possible that the one-semester $300 price increase (which represented
only a 23 percent tuition hike) did not have lasting impacts on community college students’ ability to regain
their the credits lost in spring 2002 and graduate. Finally, we find no evidence that the tuition hike affected
undocumented students’ grades.
While our findings suggest that the $1,800 in-state tuition subsidy substantially increases educational
attainment for highly-constrained students with limited college experience, the benefit-to-cost ratio of this
subsidy is very difficult to calculate. On the benefits side, a major question concerns the labor market returns
to a college diploma for undocumented youth who currently have no permanent legal authority to live and
work in the US. Even students who are enrolled in the DACA program have only temporary authorization
and it is unclear whether this program will become permanent legislation. While returns to a year of college
have been estimated at roughly 10 percent for an average student (e.g., Kane and Rouse 1995; Card, 1999),
undocumented college graduates may experience substantially lower returns. Though the immigration policy
regime may change in the future, the benefits of increasing the college attainment of undocumented are likely
to accrue in non-market realms. For instance, undocumented youth who obtain college diplomas may be
more civically engaged, clearly not as voters, but as consumers and participants in the informal civic and
political context (e.g., Dee 2004; Milligan, Moretti and Oreopoulos 2004). In addition, assuming these
undocumented youth are not deported, many are likely to have children who will be US citizens and who
will benefit from having college-educated parents (e.g., Currie and Moretti 2003). In sum, the subsidy is
likely to be welfare-enhancing, yet the most substantial private benefits are uncertain given these students’
lack of access to formal labor markets.

22

References
Abrego, Leisy Janet. 2006. “I Can’t Go to College Because I Don’t Have Papers”: Incorporation Patterns
of Latino Undocumented Youth. Latino Studies, 4(3): 212–231.
American Community Survey. 2010. 2006-2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates,
Selected Characteristics of the Native and Foreign-Born Populations, New York City (Place).
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_
10_5YR_S0501&prodType=table, accessed September 1, 2014.
Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. Incentives and Services for College
Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(1): 136–163.
Angrist, Joshua, David Autor, Sally Hudson, and Amanda Pallais. 2014. Leveling Up: Early
Results from a Randomized Evaluation of Post-Secondary Aid. NBER Working Paper 20800.
Angrist, Joshua, Philip Oreopoulos, and Tyler Williams. forthcoming. When Opportunity Knocks,
Who Answers? New Evidence on College Achievement Awards. Journal of Human Resources.
Bailey, Martha J., and Susan M. Dynarski. 2011. Inequality in Postsecondary Education. In Wither
Opportunity, ed. Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane, 117–132. New York, NY: Russell Sage.
Barrow, Lisa, Lashawn Richburg-Hayes, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Thomas Brock. forthcoming.
Paying for Performance: The Education Impacts of a Community College Scholarship Program for Lowincome Adults. Journal of Labor Economics.
Bettinger, Eric. 2004. How Financial Aid Affects Persistence. In College Choices: The Economics of Where
to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It, ed. Caroline M. Hoxby. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. 2010. Why Have College Completion Rates
Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 129–157.
Card, David. 1999. The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings. In Handbook of Labor EconomicsVol. 3A,
, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1801–1863. Amsterdam and New York: North-Holland.
Castleman, Benjamin L., and Bridget Terry Long. 2013. Looking Beyond Enrollment: The Causal
Effect of Need-based Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation. NBER working paper 19306.
23

Chin, Aimee, and Chinhui Juhn. 2011. Does Reducing College Costs Improve Educational Outcomes
for Undocumented Immigrants? Evidence from State Laws Permitting Undocumented Immigrants to Pay
In-State tuition at State Colleges and Universities. In Latinos and the Economy: Integration and Impact
in Schools, Labor Markets, and Beyond, ed. David L. Leal and Stephen J. Trejo. New York, NY: Springer.
Conger, Dylan, and Colin Chellman. 2013. Undocumented College Students in the United States:
In-State Tuition Not Enough to Ensure Four-Year Degree Completion. Education Finance and Policy,
8(3): 364–377.
Contreras, Frances. 2009. Sin Papeles y Rompiendo Barreras: Latino Students and the Challenges of
Persisting in College. Harvard Educational Review, 79(4): 601–631.
Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti. 2003. Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission
of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1495–1532.
Darolia, Rajeev, and Stephanie Potochnick. 2014. Dreams Deferred? The Educational and Financial
Implications of In-State-Resident Tuition Policies for Latino Undocumented Immigrants. Paper presented
at the Association for Education Finance and Policy annual meeting, San Antonio, TX.
Dee, Thomas S. 2004. Are there Civic Returns to Education? Journal of Public Economics, 88: 1697–1720.
Deming, David, and Susan Dynarski. 2010. Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to increase Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor. In Targeting Investments in Children: Fighting Poverty When Resources
are Limited, ed. Phillip Levine and David Zimmerman. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
DiNapoli, Thomas P., and Kenneth B. Bleiwas. 2014. Update: The New York State DREAM Act.
http://osc.state.ny.us/osdc/rpt11-2014.pdf, accessed January 18, 2015.
Dynarski, Susan. 2008. Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor. Journal of Human Resources,
43(3): 576–610.
Flores, Stella M. 2010. State Dream Acts: The Effect of In-State Resident Tuition Policies and Undocumented Latino Students. Review of Higher Education, 33(2): 239–283.
Goldrick-Rab, Sara, Douglas N. Harris, Robert Kelchen, and James Benson. 2012. Need-Based
Financial Aid and College Persistence: Experimental Evidence from Wisconsin. Working paper.
Gonzales, Roberto G. 2011. Learning to be Illegal: Undocumented Youth and Shifting Legal Contexts in
the Transition to Adulthood. American Sociological Review, 76(4): 602–619.

24

Hemelt, Steven W., and David E. Marcotte. 2011. The Impact of Tuition Increases on Enrollment at
Public Colleges and Universities. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(4): 435–457.
Kane, Thomas J., and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 1995. Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year
College. American Economic Review, 85(3): 600–614.
Kao, Grace, and Marta Tienda. 1995. Optimism and Achievement: The Educational Performance of
Immigrant Youth. Social Science Quarterly, 76(1): 1–19.
Kaushal, Neeraj. 2008. In-state Tuition for the Undocumented: Education Effects on Mexican Young
Adults. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4): 771–792.
Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2015. Borrowing Trouble? Student Loans, the Cost of
Borrowing, and Implications for the Effectiveness of Need-Based Grant Aid. NBER working paper 20850.
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2004. Does Education Improve Citizenship?
Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10): 1667–
1695.
Muñoz, Susana Marı́a, and Marta Marı́a Maldonado. 2012. Counterstories of College Persistence
by Undocumented Mexicana Students: Navigating Race, Class, Gender, and Legal Status. International
Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 25(3): 293–315.
Passel,
ulation:

Jeffrey,

and

National

D’Vera
and

Cohn.
State

2010.
Trends.

Unauthorized

Immigrant

Pop-

www.pewhispanic.org/2011/02/01/

unauthorized-immigrant-population-brnational-and-state-trends-2010/,

accessed:

Septem-

ber 23, 2014. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and Mark Hugo Lopez. 2012. Up to 1.7 Million Unauthorized Immigrant
Youth May Benefit from New Deportation Rules. http://www.pewhispanic.org/2012/08/14/
up-to-1-7-million-unauthorized-immigrant-youth-may-benefit-from-new-deportation-rules/,
accessed: December 15, 2014. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center.
Patel, Reshma, and Timothy Rudd. 2012. Can Scholarships Alone Help Students Succeed? Lessons
from Two New York City Community Colleges. New York and Oakland: MDRC.
Perez, William. 2009. We ARE Americans: Untold Stories of Undocumented Students in Pursuit of the
American Dream. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.

25

Rincón, Alejandra. 2008. Undocumented Immigrants and Higher Education: ¡Si Se Puede! El Paso, TX:
LFB Scholarly Publishing LLC.
Schwartz, Amy Ellen, and Leanna Stiefel. 2006. Is There a Nativity Gap? Achievement of New York
City Elementary and Middle School Immigrant Students. Education Finance and Policy, 1(1): 17–49.
Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2011. On Money and Motivation: A Quasi-Experimental Analysis of Financial
Incentives for College Achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3): 614–46.
Stinebrickner, Ralph, and Todd Stinebrickner. 2008. The Effect of Credit Constraints on the College Drop-Out Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study. American Economic Review,
98(5): 2163–2184.
Watson, Tara. 2014. Inside the Refrigerator: Immigration Enforcement and Chilling Effects in Medicaid
Participation. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3): 313–338.

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Trends in Reenrollment by Citizenship and Documentation
B. Community College Students

.8
.7
.6
.3

.4

.5

Percent Enrolled

.8
.7
.6
.4

.5

Percent Enrolled

.9

1

.9

A. Senior College Students

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

Semesters since Policy Change
Undocumented

Documented

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Semesters since Policy Change
Citizens

Undocumented

Documented

Citizens

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students belonging
to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State. Each line
in Panels A and B represents the share of students in the specified group who were enrolled in the specified semester. Spring
2002 is represented by “0”. The sample in Panel A is limited to students who initially enrolled in a senior college. The sample
in Panel B is limited to students who initially enrolled in a community college. See text for definitions of documented and
undocumented noncitizens. Student by semester observations following degree receipt are dropped.

26

Figure 2: Trends in Credits Attempted by Citizenship and Documentation
B. Community College Students

7
6
3

4

5

Credits Attempted

8
7
5

6

Credits Attempted

9

8

10

A. Senior College Students

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

Semesters since Policy Change
Undocumented

-1

0

1

2

3

Semesters since Policy Change

Documented

Citizens

Undocumented

Documented

Citizens

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students who
belonged to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts and earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State.
Each line in Panels A and B represents average credits attempted by students in the specified group and semester. Spring
2002 is represented by “0”. The sample in Panel A is limited to students who initially enrolled in a senior college. The sample
in Panel B is limited to students who initially enrolled in a community college. See text for definitions of documented and
undocumented noncitizens. Student by semester observations following degree receipt are dropped.

Figure 3: Trends in Credits Earned by Citizenship and Documentation
B. Community College Students

6
5
2

3

4

Credits Earned

8
7
5

6

Credits Earned

9

7

10

A. Senior College Students

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

Semesters since Policy Change
Undocumented

Documented

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Semesters since Policy Change
Citizens

Undocumented

Documented

Citizens

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students who
belonged to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts and earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State.
Each line in Panels A and B represents average credits earned by students in the specified group and semester. Spring 2002 is
represented by “0”. The sample in Panel A is limited to students who initially enrolled in a senior college. The sample in Panel
B is limited to students who initially enrolled in a community college. See text for definitions of documented and undocumented
noncitizens. Student by semester observations following degree receipt are dropped.

27

Figure 4: Estimated Impacts of the Price Shock on Reenrollment by Semester

.05
0

Point Estimate, 95% CI

-.1

-.05

.05
0
-.05
-.1

Point Estimate, 95% CI

.1

B. Community College Students

.1

A. Senior College Students

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

Semesters since Policy Change

-1

0

1

2

3

Semesters since Policy Change

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State.
Each marker in Panels A and B represents the point estimate from a modified version of equation (1), where an indicator for
undocumented status is interacted with indicators for semesters before/after spring 2002 (with fall 2001 serving as the omitted
category). Spring 2002 is represented by “0”. The thin dashed line represents the corresponding 95 percent confidence interval.
The sample in Panel A is limited to students who initially enrolled in a senior college. The sample in Panel B is limited to
students who initially enrolled in a community college. See text for definitions of documented and undocumented noncitizens.
Student by semester observations following degree receipt are dropped.

Figure 5: Estimated Impacts of the Price Shock on Credits Earned by Semester
B. Community College Students

.5
0
-1.5

-1.5

-1

-.5

Point Estimate, 95% CI

0
-.5
-1

Point Estimate, 95% CI

.5

1

1

A. Senior College Students

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

Semesters since Policy Change

-1

0

1

2

3

Semesters since Policy Change

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who belonged to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts and earned a high school diploma or GED from New York
State. Each marker in Panels C and D represents the point estimate from a modified version of equation (1), where an indicator
for undocumented status is interacted with indicators for semesters before/after spring 2002 (with fall 2001 serving as the
omitted category). Spring 2002 is represented by “0”. The thin dashed line represents the corresponding 95 percent confidence
interval. The sample in Panel A is limited to students who initially enrolled in a senior college. The sample in Panel B is
limited to students who initially enrolled in a community college. See text for definitions of documented and undocumented
noncitizens. Student by semester observations following degree receipt are dropped.

28

Figure 6: Cumulative Credits Earned by Semesters Since Entry and Entry Cohort

2
0
-2
-4
-6
-12 -10

-8

Point Estimate, 95% CI

4

6

8

A. Senior College Students

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

10

11

12

Semesters since Policy Change
1999

2000

2001

2
0
-2
-4
-6
-12 -10

-8

Point Estimate, 95% CI

4

6

8

B. Community College Students

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Semesters since Policy Change
1999

2000

2001

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who belonged to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts and earned a high school diploma or GED from New York
State. Spring 2002 is represented by “0”. Each marker represents the point estimate from a modified version of equation (1),
where an indicator for undocumented status is interacted with indicators for semesters before/after spring 2002 (with fall 2001
serving as the omitted category) and the sample is limited to students who entered college in the specified semester. The thin
dashed line and shaded area represents corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample in Panel A (B) is limited to
students who initially enrolled in a senior (community) college.

29

Table 1: Characteristics of Students by Citizenship and Documentation Status at Entry
Noncitizens

Tests of equality (p -value)

(1) Citizens

30

Age
Female
Race/ethnicity:
Asian/Pacific Islander
Black
Hispanic
White
Single parent
Disabled
Foreign-born
Permanent resident
Visa-holder
Refugee
Need any remediation
High school type:
NYC public
NYC private
NY state
GED
High school GPA (0-100)
Missing high school GPA
Bachelor's degree program
Initial institution selectivity:
Very competitive
Competitive
Less/noncompetitive
Nonselective
Observations

(2) Documented

(3) Undocumented

Citizen vs.
noncitizens

Documented
vs. undoc.

All three
groups

19
0.58

20
0.58

20
0.59

<0.001
0.470

0.505
0.678

<0.001
0.707

0.08
0.30
0.33
0.29
0.03
0.03
0.08
---0.50

0.25
0.28
0.28
0.18
0.03
0.02
1
0.93
0.07
<0.01
0.60

0.23
0.34
0.28
0.15
0.02
0.02
1
---0.58

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.194
<0.001

0.030
<0.001
0.856
<0.001
0.136
0.148

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.149
<0.001

---<0.001

---0.075

---<0.001

0.65
0.15
0.05
0.15
76
0.05
0.37

0.77
0.04
0.02
0.17
77
0.04
0.35

0.75
0.03
0.03
0.19
77
0.05
0.30

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.002
<0.001

0.008
0.650
0.001
0.066
0.078
0.001
<0.001

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

0.06
0.29
0.25
0.40

0.07
0.25
0.23
0.45

0.05
0.23
0.20
0.52

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

<0.001
0.057
0.009
<0.001

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

43,159

16,107

1,808

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New
York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts. High school GPA refers to the CUNY college admissions average, which is a standardized measure of
students’ high school grade point averages on a scale of 0 to 100. College competitiveness level according to the Barron’s Profile of American Colleges.

Table 2: The Impact of the Tuition Increase on Undocumented Students’ Attainment

A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

(1) Senior college
students

(2) Community
college students

-0.065
(0.012)**
-0.029
(0.013)*

-0.012
(0.015)
-0.006
(0.013)

Test of equality (p- value)

0.005

0.561

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.83

0.73

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-8%
-3%

-2%
-1%

61,481

51,090

-0.913
(0.176)**
-0.547
(0.180)**

-0.426
(0.145)**
-0.327
(0.192)+

0.033

0.558

Observations
B. Credits attempted
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002
Test of equality (p- value)
Fall 2001 undocumented mean

9.4

6.5

-10%
-6%

-7%
-5%

61,481

51,090

-0.763
(0.159)**
-0.511
(0.156)**

-0.435
(0.125)**
-0.368
(0.160)*

0.165

0.627

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

8.4

5.7

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-9%
-6%

-8%
-6%

61,481

51,090

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations
C. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002
Test of equality (p- value)

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Reported coefficients are interactions between an indicator for whether a student is an
undocumented noncitizen at college entry and Spring 2002 and undocumented status with post-Spring 2002. All regressions
also include controls for age at entry, high school GPA (set to zero if missing), an indicator for whether a student’s high
school GPA is missing, indicators for race/ethnicity (Black, Hispanic, or White) and gender, an indicator for initial degree
program (associate’s versus bachelor’s degree), indicators for whether the student was a single parent, needed remediation,
was undocumented, or was disabled at entry, semester fixed effects, institution by cohort fixed effects, and cohort-specific time
trends. The sample of senior college students includes those who initially enrolled in Baruch, Brooklyn, City, Hunter, John
Jay, Queens, Lehman, City College of Technology, Staten Island, or York Colleges. The sample of community college students
include those who initially enrolled in Borough of Manhattan, Bronx, Hostos, Kingsborough, LaGuardia, or Queensborough
Community Colleges. Student by semester observations are dropped following degree receipt.

31

Table 3: Robustness of Estimated Impacts on Reenrollment
(1) Student fixed
effects

(2) Larger window
(+/- 4 semesters)

(3) Smaller window
(+/- 2 semesters)

-0.058
(0.013)**
-0.019
(0.015)

-0.064
(0.012)**
-0.024
(0.014)+

-0.060
(0.011)**
-0.024
(0.014)+

Test of equality (p -value)

0.007

0.006

0.006

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.83

0.83

0.83

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-7%
-2%

-8%
-3%

-7%
-3%

61,481

73,768

45,777

-0.011
(0.018)
-0.005
(0.016)

-0.009
(0.015)
0.004
(0.014)

0.003
(0.017)
0.008
(0.015)

Test of equality (p -value)

0.578

0.288

0.662

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.73

0.73

0.73

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-2%
-1%

-1%
1%

0.4%
1%

51,090

61,711

38,077

A. Senior college students
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations
B. Community college students
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional control variables and definitions of senior and community college
samples. Student fixed effects models also include student fixed effects. The column (2) sample is limited to students who were
enrolled in the fall 2001 semester. The column (3) sample includes student by semester observations from four semesters before
and after the policy change while the column (4) sample excludes student by semester observations more than two semesters
before/after the policy change. Student by semester observations are dropped following degree receipt.

32

Table 4: Robustness of Estimated Impacts on Credits Earned
(1) Student fixed
effects

(2) Larger window
(+/- 4 semesters)

(3) Smaller window
(+/- 2 semesters)

-0.673
(0.170)**
-0.378
(0.187)*

-0.738
(0.166)**
-0.412
(0.156)*

-0.737
(0.165)**
-0.497
(0.161)**

Test of equality (p -value)

0.141

0.082

0.212

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

8.4
-8%
-5%

8.4
-9%
-5%

8.4
-9%
-6%

61,481

73,768

45,777

-0.479
(0.147)**
-0.399
(0.186)*

-0.439
(0.130)**
-0.269
(0.159)

-0.285
(0.162)+
-0.139
(0.190)

Test of equality (p -value)

0.568

0.257

0.310

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

5.7
-8%
-7%

5.7
-8%
-5%

5.7
-5%
-2%

51,090

61,711

38,077

A. Senior college students
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations
B. Community college students
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 3 notes for description of specifications. Student by semester observations are dropped
following degree receipt.

33

Table 5: The Impact of the Tuition Increase on the Attainment of Enrolled Undocumented Students
(1) Senior college
students

(2) Community
college students

-0.065
(0.014)**

-0.018
(0.019)

-0.007
(0.011)

0.002
(0.012)

<0.001

0.289

0.90
-7%
-1%

0.85
-2%
0.2%

47,747

33,513

Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002 or later

-0.175
(0.172)

-0.592
(0.171)**

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

-0.322
(0.174)+

-0.558
(0.216)*

Test of equality (p- value)

0.473

0.874

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

10.3
-2%
-3%

8.1
-7%
-7%

45,866

31,155

Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002

-0.041
(0.045)

0.014
(0.045)

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

-0.025
(0.032)

-0.007
(0.030)

Test of equality (p- value)

0.624

0.685

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

2.57
-2%
-1%

2.40
1%
-0.3%

45,817

31,141

A. Pr (enrolled t ) | enrolled t-1
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002
Test of equality (p- value)
Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations
B. Credits earned | enrolled

Observations
C. GPA | enrolled

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional control variables and definitions of senior and community college
samples. Student by semester observations are dropped following degree receipt. Panel A sample conditions on enrollment in
semester t − 1. Panels B and C samples condition on enrollment in semester t.

34

Table 6: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase by Gender
Senior college students

Community college students

(1) Female (2) Male

Test of eq.
(p- value)

-0.073
-0.054
(0.016)** (0.018)**

0.447

0.011
(0.018)

-0.046
(0.023)+

0.032

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.035
(0.016)*

-0.020
(0.019)

0.515

0.012
(0.015)

-0.032
(0.023)

0.113

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.84

0.83

0.75

0.70

35,290

26,191

30,379

20,711

-0.881
(0.209)**

-0.591
(0.280)*

0.422

-0.385
(0.184)*

-0.518
(0.277)+

-0.548
(0.172)**

-0.457
(0.262)+

0.757

-0.352
(0.214)

-0.393
(0.281)

8.9

7.9

6.4

4.7

35,290

26,191

30,379

20,711

A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

Observations
B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002
Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Observations

(3) Female (4) Male

Test of eq.
(p- value)

0.731

0.911

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for description of control variables and specification.

35

Table 7: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase by Hispanic Ethnicity
Senior college students
(1)
Hispanic
A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

(2) Nonhispanic

-0.083
-0.058
(0.024)** (0.015)**

Community college students

Test of eq.
(p- value)

(1)
Hispanic

(2) Nonhispanic

Test of eq.
(p- value)

0.414

-0.031
(0.028)

-0.004
(0.015)

0.333

0.280

-0.019
(0.028)

-0.001
(0.017)

0.606

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

0.002
(0.031)

-0.037
(0.015)*

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.83

0.84

0.71

0.74

13,189

48,292

19,049

32,041

Observations
B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-1.384
-0.541
(0.318)** (0.189)**

0.025

-0.596
(0.324)+

-0.330
(0.145)*

0.487

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.583
(0.346)+

-0.482
(0.176)**

0.799

-0.952
(0.274)**

-0.033
(0.244)

0.911

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

8.1

8.6

5.1

5.9

13,189

48,292

19,049

32,041

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for description of control variables and specification.

36

Table 8: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase by Entry Year: Senior College Students
(1) 1999

(2) 2000

(3) 2001

Test of eq.
(p- value)

Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.033
(0.020)

-0.073
(0.020)**

-0.084
(0.018)**

0.132

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.002
(0.022)

-0.009
(0.022)

-0.073
(0.018)**

0.013

Test of equality (p- value)

0.119

0.011

0.549

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.68

0.79

1.00

-5%
-0.3%

-9%
-1%

-8%
-7%

21,586

24,539

15,356

-0.452

-0.937

-0.928

(0.216)*

(0.216)**

(0.354)*

A. Reenrollment

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations
B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

0.181

-0.546

-1.072

(0.271)

(0.283)+

(0.155)**

0.071

0.19

0.642

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

7.0

8.0

10.0

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-6%
3%

-12%
-7%

-9%
-11%

21,586

24,539

15,356

Test of equality (p- value):

Observations

0.224
<0.001

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking senior
college students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002
senior college entering cohorts. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors by
student in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for description of control variables and specification.

37

Table 9: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase by Entry Year: Community College Students
(1) 1999

(2) 2000

(3) 2001

Test of eq.
(p- value)

Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.017
(0.028)

-0.011
(0.030)

-0.011
(0.013)

0.979

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.002
(0.027)

-0.008
(0.020)

-0.014
(0.015)

0.921

Test of equality (p- value)

0.314

0.887

0.814

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.53

0.70

1.00

-3%
-0.4%

-2%
-1%

-1%
-1%

21,737

19,831

9,522

A. Reenrollment

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations
B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002
Test of equality (p- value)
Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations

-0.581

-0.575

-0.492

(0.194)*

(0.283)+

(0.379)

-0.213

-0.744

-0.387

(0.300)

(0.208)**

(0.533)

0.234

0.417

0.691

4.9

6.1

6.2

-12%
-4%

-9%
-12%

-8%
-6%

21,737

19,831

9,522

0.975
0.306

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking community college students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall
2002 entering cohorts. Students classified as Native American are dropped. Each column within a panel represents a separate
regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Brackets contain
p-values from test of equality of treatment variables by race/ethnicity categories. See Table 2 notes for description of control
variables and specification. All control variables are fully interacted with indicators for whether a student is Hispanic.

38

Table 10: Changes in Observed Characteristics between Affected and Unaffected Undocumented
Entry Cohorts: Senior College Students
Undocumented ˣ
2000 entrant

Undocumented ˣ
2001 entrant

Age

0.035
(0.196)

0.328
(0.250)

Female

0.025
(0.049)

0.061
(0.041)

Black

0.001
(0.042)

0.025
(0.046)

Hispanic

0.045
(0.035)

0.019
(0.037)

White

-0.031
(0.047)

-0.043
(0.048)

Single Parent

-0.006
(0.005)

0.003
(0.010)

Needs remediation

-0.023
(0.039)

-0.028
(0.037)

Disabled

-0.018
(0.019)

-0.026
(0.018)

High school GPA

0.843
(0.828)

0.657
(0.681)

Missing hs GPA

-0.005
(0.009)

-0.004
(0.007)

NYC public high school

0.019
(0.035)

0.036
(0.028)

GED

-0.026
(0.018)

-0.000
(0.014)

0.731

0.274

Dependent var:

Test of joint sig. (p- val.)
Observations

9,798

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking senior
college students from New York belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2001 or Fall 2002 through Fall 2005 entering cohorts.
Each cell displays the coefficient on the interaction between undocumented status and belong to a cohort that entered between
Spring 2002. All models include controls for undocumented status, entry cohort, and cohort linear time trends, allowed to vary
by documentation status. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses.

39

Table 11: Impacts of the Tuition Increase on Cumulative Credits Earned and Degree Receipt:
Senior College Students
Degree Receipt:
1. Cumulative
credits earned 2. Any degree
3. AA/AS

4. BA/BS

A. All senior college students
Undocumented ˣ 2000 entrant
Undocumented ˣ 2001 entrant
Undocumented mean (1999)
Impact in % change: 2000 cohort
Impact in % change: 2001 cohort
Observations

-2.37
(3.69)
-7.01
(3.08)*

-0.030
(0.047)
-0.104
(0.047)*

-0.001
(0.026)
-0.042
(0.028)

-0.020
(0.041)
-0.086
(0.043)+

73.9
-3%
-9%

0.48
-6%
-22%

0.13
-1%
-32%

0.40
-5%
-22%

9,798

9,798

9,798

9,798

-5.07
(4.78)
-8.28
(4.47)+

-0.017
(0.062)
-0.099
(0.064)

0.011
(0.018)
0.009
(0.016)

-0.026
(0.063)
-0.119
(0.064)+

84.4
-6%
-10%

0.55
-3%
-18%

0.04
28%
23%

0.52
-5%
-23%

6,190

6,190

6,190

6,190

2.24
(4.67)
-5.78
(3.69)

-0.045
(0.052)
-0.109
(0.050)*

-0.003
(0.044)
-0.119
(0.044)*

-0.018
(0.040)
-0.038
(0.030)

58.8
4%
-10%

0.39
-12%
-28%

0.26
-1%
-46%

0.22
-8%
-17%

3,608

3,608

3,608

3,608

B. Bachelor's degree-seeking
Undocumented ˣ 2000 entrant
Undocumented ˣ 2001 entrant
Undocumented mean (1999)
Impact in % change: 2000 cohort
Impact in % change: 2001 cohort
Observations
C. Associate's degree-seeking
Undocumented ˣ 2000 entrant
Undocumented ˣ 2001 entrant
Undocumented mean (1999)
Impact in % change: 2000 cohort
Impact in % change: 2001 cohort
Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking senior
college students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State and belonged to the Fall 1999 through Fall
2001 entering cohorts. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by
cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Reported coefficients are interactions between an indicator for whether a
student is an undocumented noncitizen and belonging to either the 2000 or 2001 entry cohort. See Table 2 notes for description
of additional control variables.

40

Appendix A

Additional Figures and Tables

41

Table A.1: Characteristics of Students by Citizenship and Documentation Status at Entry: Senior College Students
Noncitizens

Tests of equality (p -value)

(1) Citizens

42

Age
Female
Race/ethnicity:
Asian/Pacific Islander
Black
Hispanic
White
Single parent
Disabled
Foreign-born
Permanent resident
Visa-holder
Refugee
Need any remediation
High school type:
NYC public
NYC private
GED
High school GPA (0-100)
Missing high school GPA
Bachelor's degree program
Initial institution selectivity:
Very competitive
Competitive
Less/noncompetitive
Observations

(2) Documented

(3) Undocumented

Citizen vs.
noncitizens

Documented
vs. undoc.

All three
groups

19
0.58

19
0.57

19
0.58

0.01
0.509

0.835
0.619

0.035
0.711

0.10
0.28
0.29
0.33
0.02
0.03
0.08
---0.33

0.30
0.26
0.21
0.23
0.01
0.01
1
0.94
0.06
0
0.42

0.26
0.33
0.25
0.16
0.01
0.02
1
---0.38

<0.001
0.007
<0.001
<0.001
0.128
<0.001

0.004
<0.001
0.002
<0.001
0.633
0.293

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.283
<0.001

<0.001

0.039

<0.001

0.69
0.18
0.06
78
0.02
0.61

0.86
0.05
0.07
80
0.02
0.63

0.85
0.04
0.06
80
0.02
0.62

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.002

0.179
0.446
0.741
0.488
0.663
0.395

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.005

0.09
0.48
0.43
25,999

0.13
0.45
0.42
8,919

0.1
0.47
0.42
876

<0.001
<0.001
0.119

0.038
0.208
0.835

<0.001
<0.001
0.291

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering
cohorts who initially enrolled in a senior college. See Table 1 notes for additional details.

Table A.2: Characteristics of Students by Citizenship and Documentation Status at Entry: Community College Students
Noncitizens

Tests of equality (p -value)

(1) Citizens

43

Age
Female
Race/ethnicity:
Asian/Pacific Islander
Black
Hispanic
White
Single parent
Disabled
Foreign-born
Permanent resident
Visa-holder
Refugee
Need any remediation
High school type:
NYC public
NYC private
GED
High school GPA (0-100)
Missing high school GPA
Observations

(2) Documented

(3) Undocumented

Citizen vs.
noncitizens

Documented
vs. undoc.

All three
groups

21
0.59

21
0.60

21
0.60

<0.001
0.107

0.377
0.931

<0.001
0.273

0.06
0.33
0.38
0.22
0.04
0.04
0.09
---0.76

0.19
0.31
0.38
0.13
0.04
0.02
1
0.93
0.07
<0.01
0.83

0.20
0.35
0.31
0.14
0.03
0.03
1
---0.77

<0.001
<0.001
0.036
<0.001
0.065
<0.001

0.270
0.012
<0.001
0.353
0.053
0.480

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.032
<0.001

---<0.001

---<0.001

---<0.001

0.60
0.10
0.28
72
0.08

0.66
0.02
0.30
74
0.06

0.65
0.02
0.30
75
0.09

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.005

0.477
0.287
0.772
<0.001
0.011

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.001

17,160

7,188

932

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY undergraduate degree-seeking students belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering
cohorts who initially enrolled in a community college. See Table 1 notes for additional details.

Table A.3: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase on Attainment by Initial Degree Program:
Senior College Students
(1) Bachelor's
degree-seeking

(2) Associate's
degree-seeking

Test of eq.
(p -value)

-0.071
(0.014)**

-0.054
(0.020)*

0.455

-0.042
(0.015)**

0.001
(0.022)

0.087

Test of equality (p- value)

0.007

0.070

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

0.88
-8%
-5%

0.77
-7%
0.1%

38,674

22,807

-0.912
(0.226)**

-0.914
(0.299)**

0.995

-0.494
(0.213)*

-0.637
(0.346)+

0.724

Test of equality (p- value)

0.048

0.273

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

10.5
-9%
-5%

7.5
-12%
-8%

38,674

22,807

-0.862
(0.228)**

-0.603
(0.221)*

0.414

-0.469
(0.180)*

-0.586
(0.297)+

0.731

Test of equality (p- value)

0.077

0.950

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

9.6
-9%
-5%

6.6
-9%
-9%

38,674

22,807

A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations
B. Credits attempted
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations
B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
from New York belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts who initially enrolled in Baruch, Brooklyn, City,
Hunter, John Jay, Queens, Lehman, City College of Technology, Staten Island, or York Colleges. Each column within a panel
represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +
p<0.1. Reported coefficients are interactions between an indicator for whether a student is an undocumented noncitizen at
college entry and Spring 2002 and undocumented status with post-Spring 2002. See Table 2 notes for additional details.

44

Table A.4: Robustness of Estimated Impacts on Attainment to Excluding BMCC
(1) Community
college students
A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.008
(0.022)

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

0.0003
(0.017)

Test of equality (p- value)

0.512

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.73

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002
Observations

-1%
0.04%
35,723

B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.478
(0.169)**

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.392
(0.191)+

Test of equality (p- value)

0.644

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

5.8

Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

-8%
-7%

Observations

35,723

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts,
excluding BMCC students. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution
by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional details.

45

Table A.5: Robustness of Estimated Impacts on Attainment of Enrolled Students to Excluding BMCC
(1) Community
college students
A. Pr (enrolled t ) | enrolled t-1
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

0.001
(0.031)

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

0.029
(0.016)+

Test of equality (p- value)

0.283

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % change: spring 2002
Impact in % change: post-spring 2002

0.77
0.1%
4%

Observations

19,948

B. Credits earned | enrolled
Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002 or later

-0.595
(0.241)*

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

-0.643
(0.239)*

Test of equality (p- value)

0.858

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

8.3
-7%
-8%

Observations

21,745

C. GPA | enrolled
Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002

-0.013
(0.057)

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

-0.003
(0.039)

Test of equality (p- value)

0.848

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

2.33
-1%
-0.1%

Observations

21,737

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts,
excluding BMCC students. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution
by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 5 notes for additional details.

46

Table A.6: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase on Attainment of Enrolled Students
by Initial Degree Program: Senior College Students
(1) Bachelor's
degree-seeking

(2) Associate's Test of eq.
degree-seeking (p -value)

A. Pr (enrolled t ) | enrolled t-1
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.067
(0.015)**

-0.061
(0.027)*

0.836

-0.013
(0.011)

0.010
(0.022)

0.341

Test of equality (p- value)

0.002

0.02

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

0.92
-7%
-1%

0.88
-7%
1%

32,165

15,582

Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.148
(0.234)

-0.284
(0.226)

0.689

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.093
(0.153)

-0.916
(0.352)*

0.029

Test of equality (p- value)

0.834

0.022

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

11
-1%
-1%

8.8
-3%
-10%

31,275

14,591

Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.064
(0.059)

0.014
(0.054)

0.317

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

-0.039
(0.042)

0.012
(0.038)

0.369

Test of equality (p- value)

0.547

0.959

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

2.68
-2%
-1%

2.36
1%
1%

31,242

14,575

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002

Observations
B. Credits earned | enrolled

Observations
C. GPA | enrolled

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts
who initially enrolled in Baruch, Brooklyn, City, Hunter, John Jay, Queens, Lehman, City College of Technology, Staten Island,
or York Colleges. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by
cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional control variables. Student by semester
observations are dropped following degree receipt. Panel A sample conditions on enrollment in semester t − 1. Panels B and C
samples condition on enrollment in semester t.

47

Table A.7: The Impact of the Tuition Increase on the Attainment of Enrolled Undocumented Students:
Student Fixed-Effects Models
(1) Senior college
students

(2) Community
college students

Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002 or later

-0.223
(0.178)

-0.647
(0.149)**

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

-0.295
(0.194)

-0.630
(0.230)*

Test of equality (p- value)

0.747

0.936

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

10.3
-2%
-3%

8.1
-8%
-8%

45,866

31,155

Undocumented ˣ Spring 2002

-0.018
(0.041)

0.035
(0.038)

Undocumented ˣ Post-Spring 2002

0.010
(0.034)

0.005
(0.043)

Test of equality (p- value)

0.347

0.629

Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Impact in % Change - Spring 2002
Impact in % Change - Post-Spring 2002

2.57
-1%
0.4%

2.40
1%
0.2%

45,817

31,141

A. Credits earned | enrolled

Observations
B. GPA | enrolled

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts
and were enrolled in semester t. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors
(institution by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional control variables
and definitions of senior and community college samples. All regressions include student fixed-effects. Student by semester
observations are dropped following degree receipt.

48

Table A.8: Selection into Exit in Spring 2002: Senior College Students
(1) Cumulative
GPA

(2) Cumulative
credits earned

0.208
(0.145)

2.493
(1.180)*

Fall 2001 undocumented mean

1.99

18

Impact in % change: spring 2002

10%

14%

4,291

4,291

Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking senior
college students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002
entering cohorts and exited from college in semester t. Dependent variable is cumulative GPA or cumulative credits earned at
the time of exit. Each column represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. See Table 2 notes for additional control variables. Student by semester observations are dropped
following degree receipt.

49

Table A.9: Heterogeneity in the Impact of the Tuition Increase by Race/Ethnicity
Senior college students
1. Asian 2. Black 3. Hisp. 4. White

Community College Students
5. Asian 6. Black 7. Hisp. 8. White

-0.064 -0.055 -0.083 -0.037
(0.021)** (0.023)* (0.024)** (0.032)

0.015
(0.027)

A. Reenrollment
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

[0.757]
Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002 -0.005
(0.020)

-0.026
(0.023)

Observations

-0.031 -0.063
(0.028) (0.026)*

[0.066]

0.002
-0.057
(0.031) (0.029)+

-0.005
(0.029)

0.017
(0.023)

[0.438]
Fall 2001 undocumented mean

0.007
(0.022)

-0.019
(0.028)

-0.031
(0.032)

[0.647]

0.88

0.77

0.83

0.91

0.76

0.73

0.71

0.72

18,194

16,605

13,189

13,455

9,590

15,795

19,049

6,550

B. Credits earned
Undocumented ˣ spring 2002

-0.407 -0.604 -1.384 -0.439
(0.306) (0.284)* (0.318)** (0.392)

-0.218
(0.308)

[0.102]

[0.855]

Undocumented ˣ post-spring 2002 -0.650 -0.238 -0.583 -0.418
(0.302)* (0.305) (0.346)+ (0.357)

0.096
(0.337)

[0.837]
Fall 2001 undocumented mean
Observations

-0.307 -0.596 -0.460
(0.204) (0.324)+ (0.509)
-0.091 -0.952
0.048
(0.286) (0.274)** (0.387)
[0.134]

9.3

7.6

8.1

9.6

5.8

5.9

5.1

6.3

18,194

16,605

13,189

13,455

9,590

15,795

19,049

6,550

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking students
who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2002 entering cohorts.
Students classified as Native American are excluded due to their small group size. Each column within a panel represents a
separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Brackets
contain p-values from test of equality of treatment variables by race/ethnicity. See Table 2 notes for description of control
variables and specification.

50

Table A.10: Changes in Observed Characteristics between Affected and
Unaffected Undocumented Entry Cohorts: Community College Students
Undocumented ˣ
2000 entrant

Undocumented ˣ
2001 entrant

Age

-0.345
(0.347)

-0.085
(0.420)

Female

0.021
(0.043)

-0.027
(0.042)

Black

-0.002
(0.052)

0.028
(0.052)

Hispanic

0.033
(0.063)

0.008
(0.068)

White

-0.042
(0.021)+

-0.071
(0.030)*

Single Parent

-0.022
(0.013)+

-0.034
(0.013)*

Needs remediation

0.006
(0.029)

0.002
(0.036)

Disabled

-0.017
(0.014)

-0.022
(0.013)+

High school GPA

-2.154
(2.190)

-3.032
(1.783)+

Missing hs GPA

0.020
(0.030)

0.035
(0.024)

NYC public high school

-0.017
(0.045)

0.005
(0.047)

GED

-0.006
(0.042)

0.009
(0.045)

<0.001

<0.001

Dependent var:

Test of joint sig. (p- val.)
Observations

8,120

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking community college students from New York belonging to the Fall 1999 through Fall 2001 or Fall 2002 through Fall 2005 entering
cohorts. Each cell displays the coefficient on the interaction between undocumented status and belong to a cohort that entered
between Spring 2002. All models include controls for undocumented status, entry cohort, and cohort linear time trends, allowed
to vary by documentation status. Clustered standard errors (institution by cohort) in parentheses.

51

Table A.11: Impacts of the Tuition Increase on Cumulative Credits Earned and Degree Receipt:
Community College Students
Degree Receipt:
1. Cumulative
credits earned 2. Any degree
3. AA/AS

4. BA/BS

Undocumented ˣ 2000 entrant

-1.86
(2.65)

-0.041
(0.031)

-0.018
(0.025)

-0.016
(0.026)

Undocumented ˣ 2001 entrant

-0.30
(2.64)

0.0001
(0.031)

0.018
(0.027)

-0.029
(0.027)

50.0
-4%
-1%

0.37
-11%
0.03%

0.33
-5%
5%

0.12
-13%
-24%

8,120

8,120

8,120

8,120

Undocumented mean (1999)
Impact in % change: 2000 cohort
Impact in % change: 2001 cohort
Observations

Source: CUNY administrative data. Notes: Sample includes first-time CUNY noncitizen undergraduate degree-seeking community college students who earned a high school diploma or GED from New York State and belonged to the Fall 1999 through
Fall 2001 entering cohorts. Each column within a panel represents a separate regression. Clustered standard errors (institution
by cohort) in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Reported coefficients are interactions between an indicator for
whether a student is an undocumented noncitizen and belonging to either the 2000 or 2001 entry cohort. See Table 2 notes for
description of additional control variables.

52

