                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION:
                                     A MODERN PRIMER

                                            Alex Edmans
                                            Xavier Gabaix

                                        Working Paper 21131
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21131


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2015




We thank Steven Durlauf (the editor), two anonymous referees, Taylor Begley, David Dicks, Steve
Kaplan, Robert Miller, Yuliy Sannikov, Fenghua Song, Luke Taylor, David Yermack, and especially
Pierre Chaigneau for helpful comments, and Deepal Basak, Olivia Domba, and Jan Starmans for valuable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alex Edmans and Xavier Gabaix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Executive Compensation: A Modern Primer
Alex Edmans and Xavier Gabaix
NBER Working Paper No. 21131
April 2015
JEL No. D86,G34

                                            ABSTRACT

This article studies traditional and modern theories of executive compensation, bringing them together
under a unifying framework. We analyze assignment models of the level of pay, and static and dynamic
moral hazard models of incentives, and compare their predictions to empirical findings. We make
two broad points. First, traditional optimal contracting theories find it difficult to explain the data,
suggesting that compensation results from "rent extraction" by CEOs. In contrast, more modern theories
that arguably better capture the CEO setting do deliver predictions consistent with observed practices,
suggesting that these practices need not be inefficient. Second, seemingly innocuous features of the
modeling setup, often made for tractability or convenience, can lead to significant differences in the
model's implications and conclusions on the efficiency of observed practices. We close by highlighting
apparent inefficiencies in executive compensation and additional directions for future research.


Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu

Xavier Gabaix
New York University
Finance Department
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, 9th floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
xgabaix@stern.nyu.edu
1.       Introduction
There is considerable debate on executive compensation in both the public arena and academia.
This debate spans several important topics in economics, such as contract theory, corporate
…nance, corporate governance, labor economics, and income inequality. One side is the “rent
extraction”view, which claims that current compensation practices sharply contrast the predic-
tions of traditional optimal contracting models (e.g. Holmstrom (1979)). Thus, contracts are
not chosen by boards to maximize shareholder value, but instead by the executives themselves
to maximize their own rents. This perspective, espoused most prominently by Bebchuk and
Fried (2004), has been taken very seriously by both scholars and policymakers, and led to major
regulatory changes. In the U.S., the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) mandated
increased disclosure of compensation in 2006, and say-on-pay legislation was passed as part of
Dodd-Frank in 2007. In 2013, the European Union capped bankers’ bonuses at the level of
their salary, or twice their salary if shareholders agree. In the same year, the SEC passed a
rule requiring …rms to disclose the ratio of Chief Executive O¢ cer (“CEO”) pay to median
employee pay, and Switzerland held an ultimately unsuccessful referendum to limit CEO pay
to twelve times the pay of the lowest worker.
    The “optimal contracting”view reaches a di¤erent conclusion. While it acknowledges stan-
dard agency models are inconsistent with practice, it argues that such models do not capture
the speci…cs of the CEO setting, since they were created as frameworks for the principal-agent
problem in general. For example, CEOs have a very large e¤ect on …rm value compared to
rank-and-…le employees. Thus, in a competitive labor market, it may be optimal to pay high
wages to attract talented CEOs, and implement high e¤ort from them even though doing so
requires paying a premium.1 Newer optimal contracting models aim to capture the speci…cs
of the CEO employment relationship, and do indeed generate predictions consistent with the
data. Under this perspective, regulation will do more harm than good.
    This article critically assesses the rent extraction vs. optimal contracting debate, by ana-
lyzing newer models of executive compensation and evaluating the extent to which they can
explain observed practices. In particular, while recent theories have used di¤erent frameworks
and focused on di¤erent dimensions of the contracting problem, we present a tractable unifying
model to bring together the conclusions of this large literature, starting with classic theories and
then moving to modern ones. In Section 2 we begin by analyzing the determinants of the level
of pay, starting with neoclassical production models of the …rm and then moving to modern
assignment models. These assignment models yields empirical predictions for how CEO pay
varies cross-sectionally between …rms of di¤erent sizes, and over time as the size of the average
…rm in the economy changes.
    Having determined the level of pay, we then move to incentives. In Section 3 we consider a
     1
     A simple model can justify high CEO pay simply by assuming a high level for the reservation utility, which
is an exogenous parameter. Modern assignment models endogenize the reservation utility.



                                                      2
static moral hazard model where the CEO takes an action that improves expected …rm value,
starting in Section 3.1 with the risk-neutral case and moving to risk aversion in Section 3.2.
While this setting appears quite standard, we will show that seemingly innocuous features of
the modeling setup, often made for convenience or tractability (e.g. the choice between additive
or multiplicative utility and production functions, and binary or continuous actions) can lead to
signi…cant di¤erences in the model’s implications –and thus conclusions as to whether observed
practices are consistent with theory. We also discuss various frameworks that researchers can
use to yield tractable solutions to the contracting problem, and the appropriate empirical
measure of incentives. Section 3.3 embeds the moral hazard model into a market equilibrium
to generate additional empirical implications, and Section 3.4 discusses the evidence. Section
3.5 considers the case of multiple signals. In contrast to the Holmstrom (1979) informativeness
principle, CEO pay in reality depends on industry shocks outside his control, which Bebchuk
and Fried (2004) argue is strong evidence that contracting is suboptimal. We show that the
theory does not unambiguously predict that industry shocks should be …ltered out due to other
considerations in a CEO setting that are absent from Holmstrom (1979). Section 3.6 allows
the CEO to a¤ect the volatility as well as mean of …rm value, by choosing the …rm’s risk.
It discusses how options can encourage “good” risk-taking, and debt-based compensation can
deter “bad”risk-shifting if the …rm is levered.
    Section 4 moves to a multi-period model. A dynamic setting poses several challenges absent
from a single-period model: contracts that are initially optimal may lose their incentive e¤ect
over time, the CEO can take myopic actions that boost short-term returns at the expense
of long-run value, and he may undo the contract by private saving. In addition to these
complications, a dynamic setting provides the principal with additional opportunities: she can
provide incentives through the threat of termination, and base the CEO’s pay on returns in
previous as well as current periods.
    Each section will compare the empirical predictions of the theories with the evidence.
Broadly speaking, we will argue that many, but not all, features of observed contracts that
are frequently criticized are actually consistent with e¢ ciency. However, empirical correlations
cannot be interpreted as de…nitive proof of the optimal contracting view, given the di¢ culties
in identifying causality. Section 5 highlights apparent ine¢ ciencies in executive compensation,
as well as open questions for future research. Section 6 concludes.
    This article aims to di¤er from existing surveys of executive compensation. Core, Guay, and
Larcker (2003), Jensen and Murphy (2004) and Frydman and Jenter (2010) focus largely on the
empirical evidence. Murphy (2013) provides a historical perspective and discusses the role of
institutional constraints. Edmans and Gabaix (2009) focus exclusively on recent theories and
use verbal descriptions rather than a formal model. Our main contribution is to study both
traditional and modern contracting theories, with a particular attention to the role of modeling
choices, and combine their …ndings into a single unifying framework. As with any survey, we are
forced to draw boundaries and thus the analysis of asymmetric information focuses on moral


                                               3
hazard rather than adverse selection as the former literature is more extensive. For learning
models of CEO contracts, we refer the interested reader to Harris and Holmstrom (1982),
Gibbons and Murphy (1992), Holmstrom (1999), Hermalin and Weisbach (1998, 2012), Taylor
(2010, 2013), and Garrett and Pavan (2012).


2.     The Level of Pay
Trends in the level of pay are perhaps the most commonly cited statistic in support of the
rent extraction view. The median CEO in the S&P 500 earned $9.6 million in 2011 (Murphy
(2013)), which is substantially higher than in other countries and represents a sixfold increase
since 1980. In contrast, the pay of the average worker has risen much more slowly. Figures
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that CEO pay was 350 times that of the average
worker in 2013, compared to 40 times in 1980 according to the Economic Policy Institute.
Thus, the rapid increase in executive compensation may have contributed signi…cantly to the
recent rise in income inequality (Piketty and Saez (2003), Piketty (2014)), and has potential
political economy implications. Bebchuk and Fried (2004) argue that this increase is a result
of rent extraction by CEOs. Supporting this argument, Bebchuk, Cremers, and Peyer (2011)
show that the fraction of CEO pay relative to total pay across the top-…ve executives is linked
to lower …rm value, pro…tability, and returns to acquisition announcements. We study the
extent to which rises in pay over time can be explained by optimal contracting models. In this
section, we abstract from agency problems (which later introduce in Section 3) and study the
pay required to attract the CEO to a …rm.


2.1.    Talent as a factor of production
One approach to determining the level of pay is to view the CEO as a factor of production
separate from standard employees. Let the production function be

                                        V = F (K; L; T ) ;

where V is …rm value and the factors of production are units of capital K, number of workers
L (“labor”), and number of managers T . Each manager is paid a wage wT = @F        @T
                                                                                      : his pay is
determined by the production function, and changes in pay result from shifts in technology. This
is the perspective of most economic theories on the aggregate production function and supply
of talent (see Goldin and Katz (2009) and Acemoglu and Autor (2012) for recent surveys). In
particular, labor economists use this perspective to compare the wages of, say, college graduates
vs. high-school dropouts.
    The Lucas (1978) theory of the …rm specializes the model to apply to the pay of a single
CEO, rather than several managers. The variable T now refers to the CEO’s level of human


                                                4
capital (i.e. his talent) rather than the number of managers. A CEO with talent T hires capital
and labor2 , and maximizes:

                                  WT = max F (K; L; T )                 wL L       rK;                     (1)
                                            K;L


where wL and r are the prices of labor and capital, and the surplus WT is the CEO’s pay.
Consider the Cobb-Douglas production function
                                                                   K           L
                                                       K                L
                                       V =T       T
                                                                                   ;                       (2)
                                                        K                L


where T , K , and L represent the shares of output that go to the CEO, capital, and labor,
respectively, under perfect competition. We assume T + K + L = 1 (constant returns to
                                                                 V
scale). The …rst-order condition of (1) with respect to K is K K   = r i.e. KK = Vr . Optimizing
over labor likewise yields LL = Vw . Substituting into the production function (2) gives:

                                              K                L
                                        V             V                   1
                          V =T     T
                                                                   =           T       T
                                                                                           V1   T
                                                                                                    :
                                        r             wL               r K wLL

Solving for V , we have:

                                            V = (r     K
                                                        w L ) 1= T T                                       (3)
                                                      KV        LV
                                            K=           ;L =       :
                                                      r         wL

   From (3), a more talented CEO runs a larger …rm, in part because he hires more capital
and labor: V; K; L are all linear in T . His pay is given by

                                       WT = V         rK       wL K =          T V:                        (4)

    The model generates the qualitative prediction that CEO pay, WT ; is increasing in …rm
size, because a larger …rm generates more surplus. It also generates the quantitative prediction
that his pay scales linearly with …rm size. Various empirical studies con…rm the qualitative
prediction that CEO pay is increasing in …rm size3 : Baker, Jensen and Murphy (1988, p.609)
call this relationship “the best documented empirical regularity regarding levels of executive
compensation.” However, the quantitative prediction that pay is linear in …rm size is contra-
dicted by the data. The above papers …nd that CEO pay increases as a power function of
…rm size WT      S , where a typical elasticity is ' 1=3. Hence, the Lucas model needs to be
re…ned. This is what assignment models do, to which we now turn.
   2
      An alternative formulation is for capital to hire the CEO and labor. In competitive markets, the identity
of the principal is immaterial. Here, we follow the Lucas (1978) formulation for ease of exposition.
    3
      See, e.g., Roberts (1956), Baker, Jensen and Murphy (1988), Barro and Barro (1990), Cosh (1975), Frydman
and Saks (2005), Joskow et al. (1993), Kostiuk (1990), Rose and Shepard (1997), and Rosen (1992).


                                                           5
2.2.      Assignment models
Gabaix and Landier (2008) present a market equilibrium model of CEO pay. A continuum of
…rms and potential CEOs are matched together. Firm n 2 [0; N ] has a “baseline” size S (n)
and CEO m 2 [0; N ] has talent T (m). Low n denotes a larger …rm and low m a more talented
CEO: S 0 (n) < 0, T 0 (m) < 0. n (m) can be thought of as the rank of the …rm (CEO), or a
number proportional to it, such as its quantile of rank.
   We consider the problem faced by one particular …rm. At t = 0, it hires a CEO of talent
T (m) for one period. The CEO’s talent increases …rm value according to

                                     V = S (n) + CT (m) S (n) ;                                           (5)

where C parametrizes the productivity of talent and the elasticity of talent with respect to
…rm size. If = (<) 1, the model exhibits constant (decreasing) returns to scale.
   We now determine equilibrium wages, which requires us to allocate one CEO to each …rm.
Let w (m) denote the equilibrium wage of a CEO with index m. Firm n, taking the market
wage of CEOs as given, selects CEO m to maximize its value net of wages:

                                     max CS (n) T (m)              w (m) :
                                      m


   The competitive equilibrium involves positive assortative matching, i.e. m = n, and so
w (n) = CS (n) T 0 (n). Let wN denote the reservation wage of the least talented CEO (n = N ).
 0

Hence we obtain the classic assignment equation (Sattinger (1993), Terviö (2008)):
                                            Z   N
                              w (n) =               CS (u) T 0 (u) du + wN :                              (6)
                                            n

    Speci…c functional forms are required to proceed further. We assume a Pareto …rm size
distribution with exponent 1= : S (n) = An . Using results from extreme value theory,
Gabaix and Landier (2008) use the following asymptotic value for the spacings of the talent
distribution: T 0 (n) = Bn 1 . These functional forms give the wage in closed form, taking
the limit as n=N ! 0:

          Z   N
                          +   1             A BC               (    )        (   )         A BC       (    )
w (n) =           A BCu           du+wN =                  n            N            +wN          n            :
          n
                                                                                      (7)
   To interpret equation (7), we consider a reference …rm, for instance the median …rm in
the universe of the top 500 …rms. Denote its index n , and its size S(n ) = An . Using




                                                       6
S (n) = An       , we derive:

             A BC          (      )       A BC                       1=
                                                                              (           )
  w (n) =             n               =              A1= S (n)
                 =                                          =
             A       BC               =       (S (n ) n )       BC                =               n BC           =           =
         =                S (n)           =                          S (n)            =                  S(n )       S (n)       :

Finally, we obtain the “dual scaling equation”for CEO pay:

                                                                     =                =
                                          w (n) = D (n ) S(n )            S (n)               ;                                  (8)

where D (n ) = Cn T 0 (n ) = (          ) is a constant independent of …rm size. Similar to Lucas
(1978), equation (8) yields the qualitative cross-sectional prediction that CEO pay is increasing
in …rm size. However, the intuition is di¤erent: here the prediction arises because large …rms
hire the most talented CEOs, who command the highest wages. Moreover, equation (8) yields
a di¤erent quantitative prediction. It predicts a pay-…rm size elasticity of =       = . Gabaix
and Landier (2008) calibrate using = 1 (a Zipf’s law for …rms, as in Axtell (2001)) and = 1
(constant returns to scale). Since there is no clear a priori value for , they set = 2=3 to yield
the empirical pay-size elasticity of = 1=3, which contrasts Lucas’s (1978) prediction of = 1.
Baranchuk, MacDonald, and Yang (2011) extend the model to endogenize …rm size and show
that the pay-size relationship is stronger when industry conditions are favorable, as talented
CEOs are not only paid a greater premium but also optimally grow their …rms to a larger size.
    In addition, equation (8) shows that pay increases with the size of the average …rm in
the economy S (n ). Since a CEO’s talent can be applied to the entire …rm, when …rms are
larger, the bene…ts from a more talented CEO are higher in dollar terms, and so there is more
competition for talent. This is a similar “superstars” e¤ect to Rosen (1992). Moreover, the
model’s closed form solutions yield quantitative predictions. Average …rm size increased sixfold
between 1980 and 2011. When both S (n ) and S (n) rise by a factor of 6, CEO pay should rise
by a factor of 6 [ = + (          = )] = 6 = 6, as has been the case.4 The relevant benchmark
against which to compare the level of CEO pay is not the pay of the average worker, or pay of
CEOs in the past, but his current contribution to the …rm. This in turn depends on variables
such as …rm size and talent; while the latter is di¢ cult to measure, the pay of the average
worker is unlikely to be a determinant. Thus, assignment models suggest that regulation to
mandate disclosure of the ratio of CEO pay to median employee pay may not be useful, as
median employee pay is not the relevant benchmark.
    However, the empirical evidence is not unambiguously in favor of assignment models. Nagel
(2010) raises sample selection concerns and suggests alternative methodologies, but Gabaix,
Landier, and Sauvagnat (2014) conclude that the results are robust to these changes. While
   4
    Gabaix, Landier, and Sauvagnat (2014) provide an empirical update, with slight methodological changes.
The main conclusions are robust to those changes.



                                                                7
Gabaix and Landier (2008) can fully explain the growth in CEO pay from 1980 to the present,
Frydman and Saks (2010) …nd that median CEO pay was relatively constant between the
1940s and early 1970s despite …rm size increasing over this period. Gabaix and Landier (2008)
discuss potential explanations for this apparent discrepancy. One is that the supply of talent
greatly increased, which creates a downward pressure on CEO wages; quantifying the impact of
increased supply on wages would be a useful direction for future research. Another possibility
is that the U.S. CEO market in that early period was similar to the Japan CEO market today,
where CEOs are typically developed in-house rather than hired externally.
     In addition, because both …rm size and CEO pay have trended upwards since the 1970s, it is
di¢ cult to interpret the relationship as causal. Even if causal, the positive correlation between
pay and …rm size cannot be interpreted as de…nitive evidence in support of assignment models,
since it is also potentially explainable by an (as yet unwritten) rent extraction model. For
example, large …rms may have more resources, allowing the CEO is able to extract more salary.
Alternatively, Dicks (2012) shows that the correlation can arise if poor governance causes a small
fraction of …rms to overpay for talent, which then forces all others to overpay as well in order to
remain competitive. This channel is also predicted by Gabaix and Landier (2008); see Bereskin
and Cicero (2013) for supportive evidence. While these alternative explanations would generate
the qualitative prediction that pay is positively correlated with …rm size and average …rm size,
it is not yet clear whether they can generate empirically consistent quantitative predictions.
     Another concern is that assignment models predict a reassignment of CEOs as relative
…rm size changes. While external poaching of CEOs has increased in recent years, it is still
relatively rare: Cremers and Grinstein (2015) …nd that 63% of new CEOs are insiders. Similarly,
it does not appear to be the case that large changes in …rm size (e.g. a …rm undertaking
a large acquisition) are accompanied by changes in the acquiring CEO for non-disciplinary
reasons. This low mobility can be generated by a simple extension of assignment models to
incorporate frictions, such as a cost of …ring the CEO or …rm-speci…c human capital.5 Writing
and calibrating such a model would be valuable.
     The level of CEO pay has implications not only for shareholders of the …rm in question,
but also the broader issue of income inequality: Piketty (2014, p. 302) …nds that “the vast
majority (60 to 70 percent, depending on what de…nitions one chooses) of the top 0.1 percent
of the income hierarchy in 2000-2010 consists of top managers.” Kaplan and Rauh (2010) put
the rise in CEO pay in the context of income growth in other highly-paid occupations such
as law, hedge funds, private equity, and venture capital. They …nd that CEO pay in public
…rms has risen signi…cantly more slowly than these other occupations. Bakija, Cole, and Heim
(2012) use restricted data from income tax statistics and con…rm these results for public …rms
   5
     In addition, Cremers and Grinstein (2015) …nd the relationship between pay and …rm size di¤ers little
across industries according to the proportion of outsider CEOs in the industry. They interpret this proportion
as a potential measure of competition for CEO talent. However, this proportion may re‡ect small frictions
that cause a …rm to choose an insider CEO on the margin, but are not large enough to meaningfully a¤ect
equilibrium pay.


                                                      8
– for example, the percentage of non-…nance salaried executives in the top 1% of the income
distribution fell from 21.0% in 1979 to 11.3% in 2005. Across their overall sample, which mostly
contains private …rms, they …nd that executives, managers, and …nancial professionals account
for 70% of the increase in the share of national income going to the top 0.1% between 1979 and
2005. Since agency problems are likely much lower in private …rms due to close monitoring by
the private equity owner, one interpretation is that agency problems may have not contributed
to increased income inequality. However, such a conclusion is tentative without a model, since
general equilibrium e¤ects can be important for the overall level of pay.
    Moving to other explanations for high CEO pay, Section 3 discusses how agency problems
may lead to the CEO being paid a premium for the disutility of e¤ort and the risk imposed by
incentives. Other papers point to the changing nature of the employment relationship. Hermalin
(2005) argues that tighter corporate governance increases both the level of e¤ort that the CEO
must exert and the risk of dismissal, and so managers demand greater pay as a compensating
di¤erential. Indeed, Peters and Wagner (2014) show that CEO turnover risk is signi…cantly
positively associated with pay, but reject an entrenchment model in which powerful CEOs
enjoy both lower turnover risk and high pay. Their identi…cation strategy focuses on industry
volatility, which (after controls) is unlikely to a¤ect CEO pay other than through turnover
risk. In Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006), CEOs specialize in knowledge acquisition and
problem solving, leaving routine production tasks to lower-level employees. Recent increases
in communication technologies (e.g. email) allow the CEO to specialize more on skilled tasks,
thus increasing his pay. Frydman (2013) and Murphy and Zabojnik (2007) argue that the
increasing importance of transferable, rather than …rm-speci…c, human capital increases pay
through expanding CEOs’outside options.
    The above explanations – talent, agency, and the changing nature of the CEO’s job – are
part of the optimal contracting view. To test this view more broadly, Cronqvist and Fahlenbrach
(2013) study the e¤ect on compensation of …rms transitioning from public to private ownership.
Since the private equity sponsor’s concentrated stake gives it the incentives and control rights
to set pay optimally, compensation in private …rms should be closer to the optimal contracting
benchmark. Salary and bonuses actually rise upon going private, inconsistent with the notion
that CEOs of public …rms are overpaid. Indeed, Kaplan (2012) reports that over the past three
decades, executive pay in closely-held …rms has outpaced that in public companies.
    In addition to the optimal contracting and rent extraction views, a third perspective is that
institutional constraints or practices may have contributed to the rise of pay. Murphy (2013)
discusses the role of tax policy, accounting rules, and disclosure requirements – for example,
the Clinton Administration’s $1 million salary cap led to many …rms increasing salary to $1
million. Shue and Townsend (2015) note that …rms tend to grant the same number of options
each year. Thus, when stock prices rise, the value of options increases which, together with
downward rigidity in salaries and bonuses, leads to overall pay levels rising in the 1990s and
early 2000s. While this friction is indeed signi…cant in the short run, its e¤ect on long-run


                                               9
outcomes is less clear –similar to economics more broadly, where pricing frictions (e.g. menu
costs) are important in the short-run but less so in the long-run.


3.       Static Incentives
We now turn from determining the level of pay to the CEO’s incentives. This section considers a
single-period moral hazard model, which we extend to multiple periods in Section 4. This setting
has been widely covered in textbooks (e.g. Bolton and Dewatripont (2005), Tirole (2005))
and earlier surveys (Prendergast (1999)), but typically with additive production functions and
preferences, and often a binary e¤ort level. We will show that multiplicative speci…cations,
which may be particularly relevant for a CEO setting, lead to quite di¤erent conclusions for the
best empirical measure of incentives and how incentives should vary cross-sectionally between
…rms. We will also show that the use of a continuous vs. binary action space, as well as
the speci…cation of noise before vs. after the action, also lead to signi…cant di¤erences in the
model’s results.
    We start with a standard principal-agent problem applied to an executive compensation
setting. The principal (board of directors on behalf of shareholders) hires an agent (CEO) to
run the …rm. The production function is given by V (a; S; "), which is increasing in a and S.
We specialize this to
                                     V = S + b (S) a + ":                                    (9)

  We consider an all-equity …rm for simplicity and discuss leverage in Section 3.6. The variable
a 2 [0; 1) is an action taken by the agent that improves expected …rm value but is personally
costly. Examples include e¤ort (low a represents shirking), project choice (low a involves
selecting value-destructive projects that maximize private bene…ts), or rent extraction (low a
re‡ects cash ‡ow diversion.) We typically refer to a as “e¤ort” for brevity. The variable " is
mean-zero noise, with interval support on ("; "), where the bounds may be in…nite.6 Shortly
after the agent takes his action, noise is realized, and then …nal …rm value V is realized. Firm
value is observable and contractible, but neither e¤ort nor noise are individually observable.
    The function b (S) measures the e¤ect of e¤ort on …rm value for a …rm of size S. One
possibility is b (S) = b, which yields V (a) = S + ba + ": an additive production function
where the e¤ect of e¤ort on …rm value is independent of initial …rm size. This speci…cation is
appropriate for a perk consumption decision, if the amount of perks that can be consumed is
independent of …rm size. For example, buying a $10 million corporate jet reduces …rm value
by $10 million, regardless of S. Another is b (S) = bS, which yields V (a) = S (1 + ba) + ": a
multiplicative production function where the e¤ect of …rm value is linear in …rm size. Many
CEO actions can be “rolled out” across the entire …rm and thus have a greater e¤ect in a
     6
     For simplicity, we assume that S is su¢ ciently large, or the probability of low " is su¢ ciently small, that V
is non-negative almost surely and so we do not need to complicate the model with non-negativity constraints.



                                                        10
larger company, such as a change in strategy or a program to improve production e¢ ciency. A
multiplicative speci…cation is also appropriate for a rent extraction setting, if there are greater
resources to extract in a larger …rm.7
    The agent is paid a wage c (V ) contingent upon …rm value. (Note that c refers to actual
pay, in contrast to w which refers to the expected wage). We always assume limited liability
on the principal (c (V ) V ): she cannot pay out more than total …rm value. In some versions
of the model we will also assume limited liability on the agent (c (V ) 0). He has reservation
utility of w 0 and his objective function is given by:

                                       E [U ] = E [u (v (c)    g (a))] :                                   (10)

The function g represents the cost of e¤ort, which is increasing and weakly convex. u is the
utility function and v is the felicity8 function which denotes the agent’s utility from cash; both
are increasing and weakly concave. g, u, and v are all twice continuously di¤erentiable. The
objective function (10) contains functions for both utility and felicity to maximize generality.
One common assumption is v(c) = c so that E [U ] = E [u (c g (a))], in which case the cost of
e¤ort is pecuniary, i.e. can be expressed as a subtraction to cash pay. This is appropriate if
e¤ort involves a …nancial expenditure or the opportunity cost of forgoing an alternative income-
generating activity. Another is u (x) = x, which yields E [v (c) g (a)], where the cost of e¤ort
is separable from the bene…ts of cash. This speci…cation is reasonable if e¤ort involves disutility,
or forgoing leisure or private bene…ts.
    Both of the above speci…cations represent additive preferences. E¤ort of a reduces the
agent’s utility by 12 ga2 in utils (dollars) in the …rst (second) speci…cation. A third speci…cation
is v (c) = ln c, in which case (10) becomes E u ln ce g(a) . This speci…cation corresponds
to multiplicative preferences, where the cost of e¤ort is increasing in c. Here, private bene…ts
are a normal good: the utility they provide is increasing in consumption, consistent with the
treatment of most goods and services in consumer theory. This speci…cation is also plausible
under the literal interpretation of e¤ort as forgoing leisure: a day of vacation is more valuable
to a richer CEO, as he has more wealth to enjoy during it. Thus, the CEO’s expenditure on
leisure and private bene…ts rises in proportion to his wealth. Multiplicative preferences are
also commonly used in macroeconomic models (e.g. Cooley and Prescott (1995)) to generate
realistic income e¤ects. In particular, they are necessary for labor supply to be constant over
time as the hourly wage rises.9
    7
      See Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez, and Wolfenzon (2010) for empirical evidence that CEOs have the same
percentage e¤ect on …rm value regardless of …rm size.
    8
      We note that the term “felicity” is typically used to denote one-period utility in an intertemporal model.
We use it in a non-standard manner here to distinguish it from the utility function u.
    9
      When the hourly wage rises, working becomes preferable to leisure (the substitution e¤ect). With multi-
plicative preferences, the rise in the wage increases the agent’s labor endowment income and thus demand for
leisure (the income e¤ect), which exactly o¤sets the substitution e¤ect. With additive preferences, there is no
income e¤ect, and so leisure falls to zero as the wage increases.



                                                      11
   The principal is assumed to be risk-neutral, since shareholders are typically well-diversi…ed.
Her program is given by:

                                max E [V (a)       c (V (a))] s.t.                                     (11)
                                c( );a

                                E [u (v (c (V (a)))      g (a))]      w                                (12)
                               a 2 arg max E [u (v (c (V (b
                                                          a)))            g (b
                                                                             a))] :                    (13)
                                          b
                                          a


She chooses the e¤ort level a and contract c (V )10 to maximize (11), expected …rm value minus
the expected wage, subject to the agent’s individual rationality or participation constraint
(“IR”, (12)) and incentive compatibility constraint (“IC”, (13)).
    We begin with a …rst-best benchmark, which leads to a simple optimal contract that is the
same across all …rms and thus does not have the potential to explain observed contracts. We
then explore two departures from the …rst-best which generate a meaningful contract that does
yield empirical predictions. The …rst is limited liability, which only leads to small variations
in the optimal contract across …rms. The second is risk aversion (Section 3.2) which leads to
much richer implications. Section 3.3 embeds the contracting problem in a market equilibrium
to generate additional empirical implications. We compare all implications to the data in
Section 3.4.
    Under the …rst-best, e¤ort is observable. Let a be the e¤ort level that the principal wishes
to implement. She can simply direct the agent to exert e¤ort a , and so we can ignore the IC
(13). It is easy to show that the agent is given a constant wage c (V ) = c, as this leads to
e¢ cient risk-sharing. The IR (12) yields c w + g (a ). This will bind in the optimal contract,
and so the principal maximizes
                                     E [V (a )] g (a ) w:                                   (14)

This de…nes the …rst-best e¤ort level as

                                              g 0 (aF B ) = b (S) :                                    (15)

The principal trades o¤ the marginal increase in …rm value from e¤ort, b (S), with the agent’s
marginal cost, g 0 (aF B ). Thus, aF B maximizes total surplus. In turn, aF B is decreasing in the
convexity of the cost of e¤ort. It is also increasing in …rm size S if b (S) is increasing in S, since
e¤ort then has a greater dollar e¤ect in a larger …rm.
   We now turn to a setting in which e¤ort is unobservable and the IC (13) must be imposed.
We …rst assume a risk-neutral agent, before moving to risk aversion.
  10
    Here, we focus on deterministic contracts, so that there is a one-to-one mapping between …rm value V and
compensation c. An even more general model allows for stochastic contracts, where …rm value of V leads to a
random amount c. Gjesdal (1982), Arnott and Stiglitz (1988), and Edmans and Gabaix (2011b) derive su¢ cient
conditions for random contracts to be suboptimal, allowing the focus on deterministic contracts.




                                                       12
3.1.    Risk-Neutral Agent
We …rst consider risk neutrality and additive preferences. We have u (x) = x and v (c) = c so
the participation and incentive constraints (12) and (13) specialize to

                                  E [c (V )]       g (a)       w                            (16)
                                 a 2 arg max E [c (V )]             g (b
                                                                       a) :                 (17)
                                               b
                                               a


   Grossman and Hart (1983) show that the contracting problem can be solved in two stages,
which correspond to the principal’s two choice variables. She …rst chooses the contract c (V )
that implements a given action a at least cost, and then the optimal a taking into account
the cost of the contract c (V ) needed to implement each action a . Starting with the …rst stage,
the …rst-order condition of the agent’s e¤ort choice (17) is given by

                                    E [c0 (V ) b (S)] = g 0 (a ) .                          (18)

Rogerson (1985), Jewitt (1988), and Carroll (2012) give conditions under which the …rst-order
condition is su¢ cient, and so the IC (17) can be replaced by the …rst-order condition (18),
which greatly simpli…es the problem. Throughout this paper, we assume that these conditions
are satis…ed, so that the …rst-order approach is valid.
    Given risk neutrality and unlimited liability, there is no loss of generality in focusing on
a linear contract of the form c (V ) = + V , where is the …xed wage and is the agent’s
percentage stake in …rm value. Then, using (18), optimal incentives are given by

                                                       g 0 (a )
                                                   =            :                           (19)
                                                        b (S)

and so the implemented e¤ort level is given by

                                        a = g0         1
                                                           ( b (S)) :

    Empiricists typically measure the CEO’s incentives to improve …rm value, i.e. to exert e¤ort
a. Equation (19) shows how the optimal measure of incentives depends on how we specify the
production function. When it is additive (b (S) = b), then we have a = g 0 1 ( b). The
optimal measure of incentives is , the agent’s percentage stake in …rm value V . This measure
corresponds to the dollar change in pay for a one dollar change in …rm value (“$-$ incentives”)
and is used by Demsetz and Lehn (1985) and Jensen and Murphy (1990), among others.
    Hall and Liebman (1998) argue that most CEO actions have a multiplicative e¤ect on …rm
value. With a multiplicative production function (b (S) = bS), we have a = g 0 1 ( bS), in which
case the optimal measure is S, the CEO’s dollar equity stake. This measure corresponds to the
dollar change in pay for a one percentage point change in …rm value (“$-% incentives”). Thus,


                                                       13
while it is common to assume an additive production function for simplicity, researchers should
think carefully about how to specify these functions as this choice has important implications
for the relevant measure of incentives –a point …rst noted by Baker and Hall (2004). Moreover,
if CEO e¤ort has a multiplicative e¤ect on …rm value, then CEO incentives are a quantitatively
much more important issue than his level of pay, even though the latter receives much greater
attention in the media. While a $9.6 million salary is substantial compared to average worker
pay, relative to a $10 billion …rm it constitutes 0.1% of …rm value. In contrast, if incentives are
insu¢ cient to induce the CEO to implement a major restructuring or reject a bad acquisition,
the losses to shareholders could run into several percentage points.
    Before moving to the second stage of Grossman and Hart (1983), we demonstrate the e¤ect of
multiplicative preferences, as studied by Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009), while retaining
risk neutrality for now. In the general objective function (10), this corresponds to u (x) = ex
and v (c) = ln c, which yields
                                         U = E ce g(a) :

    We normalize a = 0, and so the t = 0 stock price (net of CEO pay) is S.11 In (9) we have
b (S) = bS, i.e. a multiplicative production function, so that …rm value at t = 1 is given by

                                            V (a) = S (1 + ba) + ":

The IR is given by E [cja = a ] = w, which yields:

                              w = [cja = a ] =       + E [V ja = a ] =             + bS:

If the CEO exerts e¤ort a, his utility is:

                                                   g(a)                                   g(a)
                         E [U (a)] = E c (a) e             = ( + E V (a)) e
                                                                  g(a)                             g(a)
                                    = ( + S (1 + ba)) e                  = (w + Sba) e
                                                 Sb                                Sb
                                    =w 1+           a e         g(a)
                                                                       = weln(1+   w  )
                                                                                      a     g(a)
                                                                                                   :
                                                 w

The IC is a 2 arg maxa E [U (a)]. At a = 0, this yields EU 0 (0) = 0, i.e.

                                                          g 0 (a ) w
                                                   =                 ;                                    (20)
                                                               bS
and so the implemented e¤ort level is given by

                                                                 bS
                                               a = g0      1
                                                                         :
                                                                 w
  11
       For simplicity, we assume that initial …rm size S is net of the expected wage w.




                                                           14
The model implies that the relevant measure of incentives is wS , i.e. the CEO’s dollar equity
stake scaled by his annual pay, or alternatively the fraction of total pay w that is in equity.
Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009) call this measure “scaled wealth-performance sensitivity”.
It corresponds to the percentage change in pay for a one percentage point change in …rm value
(“%-% incentives”, i.e. the elasticity of pay to …rm value), as used by Murphy (1985), Gibbons
and Murphy (1992), and Rosen (1992).
    Using I , II , and III , respectively, to denote %-%, $-$, and $-% incentives, we have:

                                      I     @c 1          ln Pay
                                          =      =                                            (21)
                                            @r w      ln Firm Value
                                   II       @c 1          $Pay
                                          =      =                                            (22)
                                            @r S     $Firm Value
                                  III       @c          $Pay
                                          =    =                 :                            (23)
                                            @r     ln Firm Value
where r = V =S 1 is the …rm’s stock market return. Section 3.3 will predict how the three
incentive measures scale with …rm size and Section 3.4 will test these predictions. These tests
will shed light on whether utility and production functions are additive or multiplicative, and
thus the optimal measure of incentives.
    We now solve for the second stage of Grossman and Hart (1983), i.e. the optimal e¤ort
level, returning to the case of additive preferences. With unlimited liability, the principal can
always adjust …xed pay so that the participation constraint (16) binds. Thus, his expected
pay is E [c (V )] = w + g (a ), just as in the …rst-best, and so the principal’s objective function
remains (14). As a result, she implements the …rst-best e¤ort level, de…ned by (15). Using (15)
and (18), the optimal contract satis…es

                                          E [c0 (V ) b (S)] = b (S) .                         (24)

With a linear contract, this yields        = 1 and so the optimal contract is given by

                                           c (V ) =    + V , where                            (25)

                                      = w + g (a )         S    b (S) a .                     (26)

    The principal e¤ectively “sells” the …rm V to the agent for an up-front fee of       , chosen
so that the participation constraint (16) binds. Since the agent bene…ts one-for-one from any
increase in …rm value, he fully internalizes the bene…ts of e¤ort and the …rst-best e¤ort level
aF B is achieved. The level of incentives is “one size …ts all”: regardless of the cost or utility
function, we have = 1. There are no interesting comparative statics on how the contract
di¤ers between …rms.
    In the above framework, the e¤ort level aF B is chosen endogenously and so the principal
implements whatever e¤ort level is implied by = 1. One simple way to obtain meaningful


                                                      15
contracts that do di¤er across …rms is to consider a binary e¤ort decision, a 2 fa; ag, where
the principal implements a, as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier
(2009), Biais et al. (2010), and the textbook of Tirole (2005). A similar speci…cation is a
continuous but bounded action space, a 2 [a; a], where again the principal wishes to implement
a. The upper bound re‡ects the fact that there may be a limit to the number of actions that a
CEO can take to increase …rm value. The high e¤ort level a represents full productive e¢ ciency,
rather than working 24 hours a day. In a cash ‡ow diversion model, full productive e¢ ciency
corresponds to zero stealing; in a project selection model, it corresponds to taking all positive-
NPV projects while rejecting negative-NPV ones; in an e¤ort model, it corresponds to the CEO
not deliberately refraining from an action that will improve …rm value because he prefers to
shirk. Then, from equations (19) and (20), the optimal incentive level is b (S) = g 0 (a) if utility
is additive and b(S)
                   w
                      = g 0 (a) if utility is multiplicative.12 Thus, the optimal level of incentives
($-$, $-%, or %-% depending on the model speci…cation) is increasing in the cost of e¤ort g 0 (a).
Incentives are higher in …rms with greater agency problems, rather than one-size …ts all.
    The …rst-best is still achieved in the …xed-action setting. In reality, the …rst-best cannot
be achieved for two reasons. First, the agent may be subject to limited liability (c (V )         0).
Under contract (25), the agent will receive a negative payo¤ if V is su¢ ciently low, violating
limited liability. Put di¤erently, the agent may not have enough cash to buy the …rm. Second,
he may be risk-averse and demand a premium for bearing the risk associated with …rm value V .
We explore these two departures in turn and show that they both lead to non-trivial contracts.
    Innes (1990) studies the case of limited liability and risk neutrality. The optimal contract
is no longer linear and so we return to a general contract c (V ). He considers two versions
of the model. In the …rst, the only restriction on the contract is limited liability on both
the principal and agent, 0        c (V )    V . To keep the proof simple, we normalize w and set
g(0) to 0, although these assumptions are not necessary. Denote by f (V; a) the probability
density function of V 2 [0; V ] conditional on e¤ort a and assume that it satis…es the monotone
likelihood ratio property (“MLRP”), i.e.

                                                fa (V; a)
                                                f (V; a)

is strictly increasing in V .
  12
     When a is a boundary action, the IC becomes an inequality and a continuum of contracts will implement
a = a. We choose the contract that involves the minimum amount of incentives, as this is optimal for any
non-zero level of risk aversion, and so the IC continues to bind.




                                                   16
   The principal’s problem is given by
                                                       Z    V
                                            max                 (V            c(V ))f (V; a )dV
                                               c( )        0
                                                       Z    V
                                           s.t.                 c(V )f (V; a )dV                g (a )        w                                     (27)
                                                        0
                                            Z      V
                                                       c(V )fa (V; a )dV = g 0 (a )                                                                 (28)
                                               0

                                           0           c(V )             V:                                                                         (29)

   Note that for all contracts c( ) satisfying the IC (28), we have
      Z    V                                                    Z    V                                         Z      V
               c(V )f (V; a )dV            g(a )                         c(V )f (V; 0)dV           g(0) =                 c(V )f (V; 0)dV      0;
       0                                                        0                                                 0


where the …rst inequality arises because a maximizes the agent’s utility if the IC (28) is satis…ed,
and the …nal inequality is due to the agent’s limited liability, i.e. c(V ) 0. Thus, the IC (28)
implies the IR (27) and so we can ignore the latter. We thus have the following Lagrangian:
                         Z                                                             Z                                           !
                                 V                                                         V
                  L=                 (V   c(V ))f (V; a )dV +                                  c(V )fa (V; a )dV             g 0 (a ) ;
                             0                                                         0


which can be rewritten as
                    Z    V                                                                        Z     V
                                                              fa (V; a )
               L=            c(V )f (V; a )                1+                              dV +             V f (V; a )dV          g 0 (a ):
                     0                                        f (V; a )                             0


Pointwise optimization with respect c (V ), subject to the limited liability constraint (29), yields
the following contract                   (
                                             0 if ffa(V;a
                                                      (V;a )
                                                           )
                                                               < 1
                                c (V ) =                            :                           (30)
                                             V if ffa(V;a
                                                       (V;a )
                                                             )
                                                                  1


                                                                                b such that
Due to MLRP, fa (V; a )=f (V; a ) is strictly increasing. Thus, there exists an X
                                                                              (
                                                                                           b
                                                                                  0 if V < X
                                                           c (V ) =                           ;                                                     (31)
                                                                                  V if V   Xb

      b is the largest X that satis…es the IC (28), which can be rewritten:
where X
                                                       Z    V
                                                                    V fa (V; a )dV = g 0 (a ):
                                                           X


   Contract (31) is a “live-or-die” contract: the agent receives the entire …rm value V if it


                                                                                  17
exceeds a threshold X, b and zero otherwise. The intuition is that the tails of the distribution
are most informative about whether the agent has exerted e¤ort. Thus, the optimal contract
punishes the agent as much as possible for left-tail realizations of V , and rewards him as much
as possible for right-tail realizations of V . With limited liability on the agent, he can receive
no less than 0 for low outputs; with limited liability on the principal, she can pay no more than
the entire …rm value V for high outputs.
    A potentially unrealistic feature of contract (31) is that it is discontinuous: when V rises
from Xb " to X,  b the principal’s payo¤ falls from X b " to 0. Thus, the principal may wish to
exercise her control rights on the …rm to “burn”output from X    b to Xb " to increase her payo¤.
Alternatively, since the agent’s pay rises more than one-for-one around this threshold, he may
wish to borrow on his own account to increase output from X    b " to X   b because the gain in his
payo¤ will exceed the amount he must repay. To deter both actions, the second version of the
Innes (1990) model also assumes a monotonicity constraint: the principal’s payo¤ cannot fall
with …rm value (V c(V ) is nondecreasing in V ), and so the agent’s pay cannot increase more
than one-for-one with …rm value. Following similar steps to above, the optimal contract is very
similar except that at the new cuto¤ X   e < X,b the contract jumps from 0 not to V , but only to
V X, e since this is the highest payo¤ that does not violate the monotonicity constraint. This
yields the following contract:
                                                   (
                                                       0 if V < X e
                                        c (V ) =                          ;                                (32)
                                                       V X   e if V   e
                                                                      X

      e is again the largest X that satis…es the IC (28), which can be rewritten
where X
                                  Z   V
                                          (V   X) fa (V; a ) dV = g 0 (a ) :
                                    X


    Contract (32) is a standard call option, where the agent receives zero if V falls below a
threshold X, and the residual V          Xe otherwise. The intuition is similar to contract (30):
for low output (V < X),   e the agent receives the lowest possible payo¤ (0); for high output
(V > X),e he gains one-for-one with any increase in V which is the maximum possible gain
without violating monotonicity.
    Contract (32) implies not only that the CEO should be paid exclusively with options, but
also that his wealth-performance sensitivity is 1 (for V > X)    e – i.e. he gains dollar-for-dollar
with any increase in …rm value above X.    e 13 Thus, the only source of variation between CEOs
is the strike price X.e It is easy to show that, when the marginal cost of e¤ort c0 (a ) rises, the
strike price falls in order to increase the delta of the option and maintain the agent’s incentives.
  13
     If there are x existing shares outstanding and the CEO is given options on y shares, his share of …rm value
    y
is x+y  if he exercises all his options. Thus, strictly speaking, he must be given in…nite options to obtain a
wealth-performance sensitivity of 1.



                                                          18
Hence, even though the optimal contract is no longer trivial, this model does not capture much
of the cross-sectional variation in real-life CEO contracts.
    In reality, while CEOs are often paid with options in practice, they also receive salary,
bonuses, and stock. Moreover, they often have very few shares compared to the number of
shares outstanding, meaning that they gain far less than dollar-for-dollar with any increase
in …rm value. This wealth-performance sensitivity di¤ers widely across …rms, which the above
model does not capture. We now incorporate risk aversion, which leads to the optimal sensitivity
being below 1 and di¤ering across CEOs. In addition to the strength of incentives, these models
will also derive predictions for the optimal shape of contracts –whether they should be linear
or convex, and thus whether they should comprise stock or options.


3.2.     Risk-Averse Agent
3.2.1.   Holmstrom-Milgrom Framework

Returning to the case of unlimited liability, another route to a meaningful contract is to have
a risk-averse agent. Under the general utility function (10), and returning to general (rather
than linear) contracts, the agent’s …rst-order condition is given by:

                             E [u0 ( ) (v 0 (c) c0 (V ) b (S)   g 0 (a ))] = 0.                 (33)

Even assuming a given implemented action a , the contracting problem remains di¢ cult because
equation (33) only requires the contract to satisfy the agent’s incentive constraint on average.
Even in the simplest case in which u is linear, the agent’s average expected marginal bene…t
from e¤ort, E [v 0 (c) c0 (V ) b (S)], must equal the (known) marginal cost of e¤ort, g 0 (a ). There
are many potential contracts that will satisfy the incentive constraint on average, and so the
problem is complex because the principal must solve for the one contract out of this continuum
that minimizes the expected wage. (The problem is more complex if u is non-linear).
    Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987, “HM”) showed that the contracting problem becomes sub-
stantially simpler if four assumptions are made. First, the agent exhibits exponential utility,
so u (x) = e x , where is the coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion. Second, the cost of e¤ort
is pecuniary, so v (c) = c. Third, the noise " is Normal, i.e. "          N (0; 2 ). Fourth, they
consider a multi-period model where the agent chooses his e¤ort every instant in continuous
time. Under these assumptions, HM show that the optimal contract is linear, i.e. c = + V ,
and that the problem is equivalent to a single-period static problem. The intuition is that a
linear contract subjects the agent to a constant incentive pressure irrespective of the history
of past performance. This result suggests that incentives should be implemented purely with
stock, and not non-linear instruments such as options.




                                                     19
   The principal’s problem becomes:

                                max E [V c]                                                  (34)
                                      h                 1
                                                                    i
                                s.t. E e [c             2
                                                          ga2   ]            e       w
                                                                                             (35)
                                                    h                   1
                                                                                 i
                                a 2 arg max E             e [c          2
                                                                           a2
                                                                          gb     ] :         (36)
                                            b
                                            a


Substituting for c =   + V and V = S + b (S) a + ", the agent’s objective function simpli…es
to:
                                                        b
                                                        c(a)
                                                e              ;                             (37)

where b  c (a) = + (S + b (S) a) 21 ga2 2 2 2 is his utility from the contract. It comprises
of the expected wage + (S + b (S) a), minus the cost of e¤ort 21 ga2 , minus the risk premium
   2 2
2
        that the agent requires. This risk premium is increasing in the agent’s risk aversion ,
       2
risk , and incentives . The agent maximizes (37) by selecting

                                                        b (S)
                                            a =               :                              (38)
                                                          g

His e¤ort choice is independent of risk 2 and risk aversion , since noise is additive. It is also
independent of the …xed wage , since exponential utility removes wealth e¤ects. Thus, can
be adjusted to satisfy the agent’s participation constraint without a¤ecting his incentives.
    Plugging (38) into the principal’s objective function (34) and setting the participation con-
straint (35) to bind, the optimal level of incentives is

                                                         1
                                        =                               2:                   (39)
                                             1+g             b(S)


    Optimal incentives are a trade-o¤ between two forces. A sharper contract increases e¤ort
a = b(S)g
           and thus …rm value, but also increases disutility 12 ga2 and the risk premium 2 2 2 .
Thus, is decreasing in risk aversion and risk 2 as these augment the risk premium required.
The e¤ect of the cost of e¤ort g is more nuanced. On the one hand, …xing a , the required
                     a g
incentives are = b(S)     and is increasing in g. On the other hand, when e¤ort is costlier to
implement (g is higher), the optimal e¤ort level a is lower. The second e¤ect dominates: when
e¤ort is costlier, an increase in leads to a smaller rise in e¤ort, and so the optimal falls.
(Since the bene…t of e¤ort b has the opposite e¤ect of the cost of e¤ort g, we discuss only the
latter throughout).
    To …nd …xed pay , we set the participation constraint to bind (b  c (a) = w). This yields

                                                1 ( b (S))2                       2 2
                                =w       S                  +                            :
                                                2     g       2



                                                    20
    The comparative statics for are ambiguous (see Appendix A). On the one hand, a higher
cost of e¤ort g, higher risk aversion , and higher risk 2 increase the required …xed pay as
a compensating di¤erential (i.e. to ensure the IR remains satis…ed). On the other hand, these
changes also reduce the optimal level of incentives (from (39)), which lowers the risk premium.
    The HM framework is attractive for a number of reasons. First, it derives (rather than
assumes) a linear contract as being optimal. Second, it solves for not only the optimal contract
to implement a given e¤ort level, but also the optimal e¤ort level, i.e. both stages of Grossman
and Hart (1983). Solving for the optimal e¤ort level is valuable not so much because empiricists
test the model’s predictions for the e¤ort level (which is hard to observe), but –as will be made
clear shortly –endogenizing the e¤ort level leads to di¤erent predictions for the contract (which
is observed). Third, the …xed salary does not a¤ect the agent’s e¤ort choice. Thus, changes
in reservation utility can be simply met by varying , without changing incentives.
    However, HM stressed that a number of assumptions were necessary for their linearity result:
exponential utility, a pecuniary cost of e¤ort, Normal noise, and continuous time. Hellwig and
Schmidt (2002) show that linearity continues to hold in discrete time under two additional
assumptions: the principal does not observe the time path of pro…ts (only the total pro…t in
the …nal period), and the agent can destroy pro…ts before he reports them to the principal. In
Appendix B we discuss the role played by the …rst three assumptions.

3.2.2.   Alternatives to Holmstrom-Milgrom

The HM model has proven extremely in‡uential due to its tractability. Given the bene…ts of
tractability, researchers have attempted to achieve tractability in other settings. We explore
these alternative models here.
    In HM, the e¤ort level a = b(S) g
                                        is chosen endogenously. As described in Section 3.1, an
alternative speci…cation is for the principal to implement a …xed target action a. The optimal
contract is now b (S) = ga b
                             , which leads to very di¤erent empirical implications. Now, the level
                          b(S)
of incentives b (S) (or w with multiplicative utility) arises from the desire to induce e¤ort
a, and not any trade-o¤ with disutility or risk. Thus, only the …rst e¤ect of g exists –a higher
cost of e¤ort raises the incentives required to induce a – and so incentives are increasing in
g, in contrast to HM. It is also increasing in the target e¤ort a, but independent of and 2 ,
since the contract is not determined by any trade-o¤ with these parameters. Thus, if the …xed
action model accurately represents reality, it has the attractive practical implication that the
contract does not depend on the agent’s risk aversion, which is typically hard to observe. It
thus o¤ers a potential explanation for why real-world contracts do not seem as complicated and
contingent on as many details of the environment as standard contract theories would suggest.
For example, Section 3.4 shows that there is no systematic relationship between incentives and
risk; the textbook of Bolton and Dewatripont (2005, p158) notes that “what is surprising is the
relative simplicity of observed managerial compensation packages given the complexity of the
incentive problem”. These details do not matter because the contract is determined by the need

                                               21
to induce e¤ort a, rather than a trade-o¤ with risk. In addition, we now have unambiguous
predictions for how increases in risk 2 and risk aversion a¤ect the level of pay. There is
now only the direct e¤ect, that pay rises as a compensating di¤erential, but no indirect e¤ect
because these parameters do not a¤ect the optimal e¤ort level.
    Whether the endogenous or …xed action model is more realistic depends on the setting. In
many cases, the endogenous action case is more accurate as principals choose to implement less-
than-full e¤ort to save on wages. For example, a factory boss may only require a production
operative to work an eight-hour day, to avoid paying overtime. However, for CEOs, a …xed
action may be more appropriate. Edmans and Gabaix (2011b) show that, if CEO e¤ort has a
multiplicative e¤ect on …rm value, implementing full productive e¢ ciency a is optimal if the
…rm is large enough. (The result also holds for any increasing function b (S)). The bene…ts
of e¤ort are a function of …rm size; the cost of e¤ort (a higher wage to compensate for risk
and disutility) is a function of the CEO’s reservation wage w. Thus, if S is su¢ ciently large
compared to w, the bene…ts of e¤ort dominate the trade-o¤ and it is optimal to induce full
productive e¢ ciency regardless of g, or 2 . For example, in a $10bn …rm, if implementing
e¤ort level a     rather than a reduces …rm value by only 0:1%, this translates into $10m. If
the CEO salary is $10m, even if salary can be reduced by 50% by allowing the CEO to exert
only a     , implementing a remains optimal. Indeed, the structural estimation of Margiotta
and Miller (2000) …nds that the costs of inducing e¤ort are substantially less than the bene…ts.
The …xed action model more likely applies to CEOs than rank-and-…le employees, who have a
limited e¤ect on …rm value.
    The overall point that we would like to stress is not that one model is superior to the other.
Di¤erent models apply to di¤erent scenarios. Rather, we wish to highlight how a contract-
ing model’s empirical implications hinge critically on the assumptions – whether we specify
multiplicative versus additive production or preference functions, or a …xed versus continuous
implemented action. Sometimes, researchers may assume a binary action space or additive
functions out of convenience, but this modeling choice can lead to vastly di¤erent predictions.
    The framework of Edmans and Gabaix (2011b, “EG”) provides another way to obtain
tractable contracts, without the need to assume exponential utility, a pecuniary cost of e¤ort,
or Normal noise. It considers the implementation of a given e¤ort level a , i.e. the …rst stage
of Grossman and Hart (1983), and thus is particularly applicable to CEOs where a = a if the
…rm is large. EG specify the noise " as being realized before, rather than after the action a
is taken. This timing is also featured in models in which the agent observes total cash ‡ow
before deciding how much to divert (e.g., Lacker and Weinberg (1989), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin,
and Rochet (2007), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007)), and in which he observes the “state of
nature”before choosing e¤ort (Harris and Raviv (1979), Sappington (1983), Baker (1992), and
Prendergast (2002)). Note that this timing assumption does not render the CEO immune to
risk, because noise is unknown when he signs his contract. EG also show that the contract
retains the same form in continuous time, where noise and e¤ort occur simultaneously. This


                                               22
consistency suggest that, if underlying reality is continuous time, it is best approximated in
discrete time by modeling noise before e¤ort.
    The timing assumption allows for signi…cant tractability. Since the noise is known when the
agent takes his action, we can remove the expectation from his objective function (10) to yield:

                                 u (v (c (S + b (S) a + "))        g (a)) :                    (40)

In turn, u ( ) also drops out. The speci…c form of u is irrelevant – since it is monotonic, it is
maximized by maximizing its argument. This yields the …rst-order condition:

                    v 0 (c (S + b (S) a + ")) c0 (S + b (S) a + ")b (S) = g 0 (a ) :           (41)

This …rst-order condition must hold for every possible ", i.e., state-by-state, rather than simply
on average. This pins down the slope of the contract: for all ", the agent must receive a marginal
felicity of g 0 (a ) for a marginal increase in V . Thus, for all V , the contract must satisfy:

                                  v 0 (c (V )) c0 (V ) b (S) = g 0 (a ) :

Integrating over 0 to V , we obtain in felicity units:

                                                     g 0 (a )
                                      v (c (V )) =            V + k,
                                                      b (S)

for an integration constant k. This yields, in dollar terms,

                                                 1   g 0 (a )
                                    c (V ) = v                V +k                             (42)
                                                      b (S)

The constant k is chosen to make the participation constraint bind, i.e.

                                        g 0 (a)
                                E u             V +k      g (a )       = w:                    (43)
                                        b(S)

    There is a unique optimal contract. The slope is chosen so that the incentive constraint
(41) holds state-by-state, and the scalar k is chosen so that the participation constraint binds.
    Equation (42) shows that the optimal contract is typically non-linear. Even though the
noise is known when the agent takes his action, it is not irrelevant because it has the potential
to undo the agent’s incentives. If " is high, V and thus c will already be high; a high reservation
wage w increases the required constant k and thus c, and so has the same e¤ect. If the agent
exhibits diminishing marginal felicity (i.e., v is concave), he has lower incentives to exert e¤ort.
Put di¤erently, the agent does not face risk (as " is known) but distortion (as " a¤ects his e¤ort
incentives). HM assume that the cost of e¤ort is in …nancial terms so that – like the bene…t
of e¤ort –it also declines with ", and so incentives are unchanged with a linear contract. EG

                                                     23
instead address distortion by the shape of the contract: it is convex, via the v 1 transformation.
If noise is high, the contract gives a greater number of dollars for each incremental unit of …rm
value (c0 (V )), to o¤set the lower marginal felicity of each dollar (v 0 (c)). Therefore, the marginal
felicity from e¤ort remains v 0 (c)c0 (V ) b (S) = g 0 (a ), and incentives are preserved regardless of
w or ". Allowing for convex contracts removes the need to assume a pecuniary cost of e¤ort.
In contrast, if v is convex, the contract is concave.
    The contract is linear in two special cases. The …rst is a pecuniary cost of e¤ort, as in
                                                0 (a )
HM: when v(c) = c, we have c (V ) = gb(S)              V + k. With an additive production function
( = 0), the CEO’s dollar incentives are linear in the …rm’s dollar value V ; with a multiplicative
production function ( = 1), they are linear in the …rm’s percentage return VS . The former
result echoes Lacker and Weinberg (1989), who also feature a pecuniary cost of e¤ort and
an additive production function. They show that the optimal contract to deter all cash ‡ow
diversion (the analogy of a = a) is piecewise linear. The second case is v (c) = ln c, i.e.
                                                                0 (a )
multiplicative preferences. The contract is ln c (V ) = gb(S)          V + k, and so log pay is linear in
     V
V ( S ) with an additive (multiplicative) production function. In both cases, the framework
delivers linear contracts without requiring exponential utility or Normal noise. More broadly,
the framework allows for contracts that are convex and concave, rather than purely linear as
in HM –thus, tractability can be achieved without linearity –and shows what determines the
optimal curvature or linearity of the contract: the form of v ( ).
    Equation (42) also clari…es the parameters that do and do not matter for the contract’s
functional form. It depends only on the felicity function v and the cost of e¤ort g. The functional
form is independent of the utility function u, the reservation utility w, and the distribution of
the noise ", i.e. the contract can be written without reference to these parameters. These
parameters will still a¤ect the contract’s slope via their impact on the scalar k. However,
the contract’s slope as well as its functional form are independent of u, w, and " in the cases
of v (c) = c and v (c) = ln c, where it depends only on g 0 (a ). This “detail-independence”
contrasts with standard agency models where the contract depends on many speci…c features
of the setting.14
    The above framework allows for tractable contracts with fewer restrictions on the utility
function, cost of e¤ort, and noise distribution, as well as non-linear contracts. This tractability
allows it to be used in dynamic models with private saving (Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and
Sannikov (2012)) and assignment models with moral hazard under risk aversion (Edmans and
Gabaix (2011a)). However, it has a number of disadvantages. It requires the assumption that
noise precedes the action; while applicable in some settings (e.g. a cash ‡ow diversion model),
it may not apply to others. It also assumes a …xed implemented action a , which again may
only apply in some settings (e.g. a CEO of a large …rm). The goal of this article is to provide
a range of modeling frameworks, each of which may be applicable under di¤erent conditions.
  14
    Chassang (2013) derives contracts that are relatively independent of the environment (i.e. the probability
space), in a risk-neutral setting.


                                                     24
    We have so far considered two models that yield tractable contracts at the cost of some
assumptions. Other papers do not aim to achieve a tractable analytical solution, but instead
to calibrate the optimal contract, and so use fewer assumptions. Perhaps the most commonly
used framework for calibration involves constant relative risk aversion (“CRRA”) utility and
lognormal …rm value, studied by Lambert, Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991), Hall and Murphy
(2000, 2002), Hall and Knox (2004), and others. We present here the version calibrated in
Dittmann and Maug (2007). End-of-period …rm value is given by
                                                                   2            p
                                 VT = V0 (a) exp         R             T +"         T ;
                                                                  2

where " N (0; 1) and V0 satis…es V00 > 0 and V000 < 0. They assume that a contract is composed
of salary , shares, and options (as a fraction of shares outstanding) with strike price X
and maturity T .15 Both shares and options are paid out at the end of the period; salary
is paid out at the start. The CEO begins with non-…rm wealth W0 , which is invested at the
risk-free rate R. His end-of-period wealth is then given by

                              cT = ( + W0 )eRT + VT +                  maxfVT       X; 0g:

                                                                                             c1
In the general utility function (10), we have u (x) = x and v (cT ) = 1T , where                        is the
parameter of relative risk aversion. Thus, the CEO’s preferences are given by

                                                          c1T
                                            U (cT ; a) =               g(a):
                                                         1

Assuming risk-neutral pricing, the CEO’s end-of-period pay (change in wealth) is given by

                                   T   = eRT + VT +               maxfVT       X; 0g:

with expected present value

                                                   RT
                                       0   = E[e        T]   =    + V0 + BS;

where BS denotes the Black-Scholes value of the option. They solve for the …rst stage of
Grossman and Hart (1983), in which the principal wishes to implement action a , and so her
  15
       In an additional analysis, Dittmann and Maug (2007) also solve for the optimal unrestricted contract.




                                                             25
problem is given by

                                min    0   =    + V0 + BS
                                 ; ;

                                s.t. E[U (WT ; a )]       U;
                                   a = arg max E[U (WT ; a)]
                                           a2[0;1)

                               + W0        0,    0         1;      0




    Dittmann and Maug (2007) calibrate this model to a sample of 598 US CEOs. In particular,
they study whether it is more e¢ cient to incentivize the CEO with stock or options. Since
options are riskier, $1 of options is worth less to the CEO than $1 of stock, rendering them
less e¤ective in meeting the CEO’s participation constraint. On the other hand, $1 of options
provides greater incentives than $1 of stock, rendering them more e¤ective in meeting his
incentive constraint. They …nd that the …rst e¤ect is dominant, suggesting that the optimal
contract should involve only stock and not options. This prediction is shared with Holmstrom
and Milgrom (1987) who predict linear contracts, although in a di¤erent setting. Moreover,
when they drop the restriction that the contract must be piecewise linear (i.e. consist of salary,
stock, and options), they …nd that the optimal nonlinear contract is concave.
    In contrast to both frameworks, option compensation is widespread in the U.S. One in-
terpretation, consistent with Bebchuk and Fried (2004), is that the use of options indicates
rent extraction: since options did not have to be expensed until 2006, they constitute “stealth
compensation” not noticed by shareholders. Indeed, Murphy (2013) discusses how accounting
rules and disclosure requirements a¤ect the mix of stock vs. options. For example, the use of
options fell substantially after FAS 123(R) mandated that their value be expensed; previously,
options did not need to be expensed if they were at-the-money. However, Dittmann, Maug,
and Spalt (2010) show that options can be rationalized if the CEO is loss-averse: since options
provide downside protection, they are particularly valuable to a loss-averse agent. Moreover, as
we will discuss in Section 3.6, if the agent chooses …rm risk in addition to e¤ort, options may
be useful to induce him to take value-adding risky projects.


3.3.    Incentives in Market Equilibrium
Section 3 has thus far taken the reservation wage w as given. We now endogenize w using
the assignment model of Gabaix and Landier (2008) to study how CEO incentives vary across
…rms in market equilibrium. We use the Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009) framework of a
risk-neutral CEO, multiplicative preferences and a …xed target action, as in Section 3.1, with
a = a. We will show that even this simple model leads to predictions consistent with empirical


                                                     26
…ndings. (Edmans and Gabaix (2011a) extend the model to risk aversion.)
   From (20), we have = Sw where = g 0 (a ). The …xed salary is chosen so that the IR
binds, i.e. = w      S = w (1  ). Thus, the CEO in …rm n is given a …xed salary , and
 S worth of shares, with:

                                           n Sn     = w (n) ;                                             (44)
                                              n     = w (n) (1    );                                      (45)

where w (n) is given by equation (8) from Gabaix and Landier (2008). Thus, a fraction of
the equilibrium wage is paid in equity, and the remainder is paid in cash.
   We can now solve for the three incentive measures in equations (21)-(23) in terms of model
primitives:

                                                I
                                                    = / S0                                                (46)
                                               II     w          1
                                                    =   /S                                                (47)
                                                      S
                                              III
                                                    = w/S ;                                               (48)

    Equation (20) earlier suggested that, in a multiplicative model, the optimal incentive mea-
sure is I (%-% incentives) since it a¤ects the implemented e¤ort level. Equations (21)-(23)
illustrate a related advantage: in a multiplicative model, I is independent of …rm size and
thus comparable across …rms of di¤erent size. Intuitively, since e¤ort has a percentage e¤ect on
both …rm value and CEO utility, it is %-% incentives that are relevant. Comparability across
…rms of di¤erent size is useful to study which …rms are incentivized more or less than their
peers. For example, a passive investor who believes that incentives are not fully priced in the
market may wish to invest in a stock with high CEO incentives; an activist investor may wish
to target a …rm with low incentives. However, if the CEO of a large …rm has $2m of equity and
the CEO of a smaller …rm has $1m of equity, we cannot immediately conclude which CEO is
better incentivized as dollar equity holdings should optimally increase with …rm size. Relatedly,
comparability is valuable for boards or compensation consultants undertaking benchmarking
analyses. 16
    While %-% incentives should be independent of size, with =             = = 1=3 as in Gabaix
and Landier (2008), $-$ incentives should have a …rm-size elasticity of       1 = 2=3. If e¤ort
has a multiplicative e¤ect on …rm value, it has a higher dollar e¤ect in a larger …rm, and so
a lower equity stake is needed to induce e¤ort. In addition, $-% incentives should have an
elasticity of = 1=3. Larger …rms hire more talented CEOs who command higher wages. Since
the bene…ts of shirking are higher, given multiplicative preferences, a higher dollar equity stake
is needed to induce e¤ort. In Section 3.4, we will compare these predictions to the data.
  16
     By analogy, fund managers are compared according to their risk-adjusted percentage returns, rather than
dollar returns, as the former is comparable across funds of di¤erent size (assuming constant returns to scale).


                                                        27
    Turning to the strength of incentives, the $-$ incentives measured by Jensen and Murphy
(1990) are given by II = I wS . Since …rm size S is substantially larger than the CEO’s wage w,
$-$ incentives should be low. Because …rms are so large, the dollar bene…ts of e¤ort are much
greater than the disutility cost to the CEO, and so only a small equity stake is needed to induce
e¤ort. Another strand of research justi…es low $-$ incentives by pointing out the disadvantages
of strong incentives. Lambert, Larcker, and Verrecchia (1991) show that a high equity stake
may induce the CEO to take ine¢ ciently low risk. Benmelech, Kandel, and Veronesi (2010)
assume that equity incentives vest in the short-term, since long-term incentives expose the
CEO to risks outside his control. Then, the CEO may conceal information that his investment
opportunities have declined to keep the current stock price high, even though disclosing such
information will allow him to e¢ ciently disinvest. In a similar vein, Peng and Roell (2008,
2014) and Goldman and Slezak (2006) demonstrate that high-powered incentives, that vest in
the short term, can encourage the manager to expend …rm resources to manipulate the stock
price upwards.


3.4.    Empirical Analyses
We now turn to tests of the empirical predictions of these models. The …rst set of tests study
the level of incentives. Motivated by traditional additive models, Jensen and Murphy (1990)
estimate $-$ incentives and showed that the CEO loses only $3.25 for every $1,000 loss in …rm
value, an e¤ective equity stake of only 0.325%. They interpreted this stake as too low to be
reconciled with optimal contracting, and thus concluded that CEOs are “paid like bureaucrats”.
However, such a conclusion hinges critically on whether we believe CEO e¤ort has additive or
multiplicative e¤ects on …rm value and CEO utility. $-$ incentives are the relevant measure
only in an additive model. As discussed above, in a multiplicative model, %-% incentives are
relevant and $-$ incentives should optimally be low.
                                                               ag          1
    Separately, theory predicts that incentives should be b(S)    or              2 , but parameters
                                                                      1+g ( b(S) )
such as the cost of e¤ort g are di¢ cult to quantify. Thus, it is di¢ cult to evaluate whether
quantitative …ndings on the level of incentives are consistent with e¢ ciency. Haubrich’s (1994)
calibration suggests that the seemingly low incentives found by Jensen and Murphy (1990)
can be optimal if the CEO is su¢ ciently risk-averse, but attaches wide con…dence intervals to
his conclusion given the di¢ culties in calibration. The structural estimation of Margiotta and
Miller (2000) also …nds that low incentives are su¢ cient to induce e¤ort given the multiplicative
e¤ect of e¤ort on …rm value.
    Given the di¢ culties of quantifying parameters such as g to calculate the optimal level
of incentives, incentive theories are typically tested instead in terms of their cross-sectional
predictions – whether they vary with parameters such as S, g, and 2 as predicted. Note
that it is important for empirical tests to study the precise measure of incentives predicted by
the theory. For example, if the theory is a multiplicative model that predicts how the dollar


                                                28
equity stake S varies with g, , and 2 , studying the percentage equity stake will not be a
precise test of the model as these parameters may vary with …rm size S. In addition, equation
(39) implies that with a multiplicative production function (b (S) = S), the relevant measure of
risk is S , the volatility of the …rm’s percentage returns; with an additive production function
( = 0) it is the , the volatility of the …rm’s dollar returns.
    Starting with size, Jensen and Murphy (1990) found that $-$ incentives are even lower in
large …rms, perhaps because governance is particularly weak in these …rms. As discussed above,
Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009) show that, under a multiplicative model, CEO e¤ort
has a larger dollar e¤ect in a bigger …rm, and so a smaller equity stake is required to induce
e¤ort. They quantitatively predict a …rm-size elasticity of 2=3, consistent with their empirical
…nding of 0:60. Similarly, they …nd that $-$ incentives are independent of …rm size and $-%
incentives have a size-elasticity of 1=3, both as predicted. Thus, a model with multiplicative
utility and production functions quantitatively explains the size-scalings of incentives. While
these results are consistent with incentives being set optimally and the true model indeed being
multiplicative, they could also be consistent with a non-multiplicative model and suboptimal
incentive setting.
    We now turn to HM’s prediction that incentives are decreasing in risk . While Lambert
and Larcker (1987), Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), and Jin (2002) indeed …nd a negative
relationship, Demsetz and Lehn (1985), Core and Guay (1999), Oyer and Schaefer (2005), and
Coles, Daniel, and Naveen (2006) document a positive relationship, and Garen (1994), Yermack
(1995), Bushman, Indjejikian, and Smith (1996), Ittner, Larcker, and Rajan (1997), Conyon
and Murphy (1999), Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier (2009), and Cheng, Hong, and Scheinkman
(2015) show either no relationship or mixed results. Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) and Jin
(2002) study the volatility of dollar returns, and the other papers study percentage returns.
Thus, the empirical evidence points to a weak relationship between risk and incentives. The
…xed action model provides a potential explanation: risk is second-order compared to the
bene…ts of e¤ort – it is incentive considerations, not risk considerations, that a¤ect the slope
of the contract.17
    The prediction that is decreasing in risk aversion is harder to test as risk aversion is
unobservable. Becker (2006) uses data on CEO wealth, available in Sweden, as a (negative)
proxy for risk aversion under the assumption of decreasing absolute risk aversion. As predicted,
he …nds that wealth is positively related to both $-$ and %-% incentives.18 In addition, wealth
can a¤ect incentives through channels other than risk aversion. In the EG model, where the
  17
      Prendergast (2002) provides another explanation for the weak relationship between risk and incentives.
When uncertainty is low, principals assign tasks to agents and directly monitor them. When uncertainty is high,
they delegate tasks to agents and incentivize them through output. His model applies principally to rank-and-…le
employees, since day-to-day monitoring of the CEO by directors is more limited.
   18
      While HM assume CARA utility and so risk aversion is independent of wealth, the model of Sannikov
(2008), analyzed in Section 4.2, generally predicts that incentives fall with risk aversion by the same intuition
as in HM. His model allows for general utility functions, and thus absolute risk aversion to be decreasing in
wealth.


                                                       29
contract is not driven by a trade-o¤ with risk aversion, the CEO’s outside option w may include
consuming his existing wealth. Higher wealth increases w and thus the constant k (equation
(43)), which in turn augments incentives (equation (42)). Intuitively, if the CEO is wealthier,
his marginal utility from money is lower, and so greater incentives are required to induce him
to work.
    The theories also derive predictions for expected pay E [c], often referred to as the level
of pay. As discussed, …rm risk and disutility have an ambiguous e¤ect on the level of pay in
the HM model, but increase it in the …xed action model due to the required compensating
di¤erential. Garen (1994) shows that pay is insigni…cantly increasing in …rm risk as measured
by dollar volatility, and insigni…cantly decreasing in percentage volatility. Cheng, Hong, and
Scheinkman (2015) …nd a signi…cant positive relationship with percentage volatility for …nancial
…rms. Gayle and Miller (2009) show theoretically and empirically that larger …rms are more
complex to manage, and so CEOs require greater pay in return. In addition, greater agency
problems in large …rms necessitate higher equity incentives and thus more pay as a risk premium.
Conyon, Core, and Guay (2011) and Fernandes, Ferreira, Matos, and Murphy (2013) compare
CEO pay in the U.S. to the rest of the world, and show that the pay premium to U.S. CEOs
can be explained by the greater risk that they bear, rather than rent extraction. The structural
estimation of Gayle, Golan, and Miller (2015) …nds that the risk premium can explain over 80%
of the pay di¤erential between small and large …rms. It arises both because large …rms require
greater incentives to address moral hazard, and also because stock returns are a poorer signal
of e¤ort in large …rms.


3.5.    Multiple Signals
The analysis has thus far studied the sensitivity of the manager’s pay to the performance of
his own …rm. Here, we study the extent to which it should depend on other signals, such as
industry and market conditions. We …rst demonstrate the Holmstrom (1979) informativeness
principle. This principle considers the case in which, in addition to …rm value V , the principal
has access to an additional contractible signal z (such as the performance of peers) and studies
the extent to which CEO pay c should depend on z. The joint density function is given by
f (V; z; a), and the principal’s problem is:
                                    Z Z           V
                          max                         (V   c(V; z))f (V; z; a )dV dz        (49)
                           c( ; )       z     0
                                 Z Z         V
                          s.t.                    u(c(V; z))f (V; z; a )dV dz     g(a )     (50)
                                 z 0
                          Z     Z V
                                            u(c(V; z))fa (V; z; a )dV dz = g 0 (a )         (51)
                            z       0




                                                              30
Denote by and the Lagrange multipliers for the IR (50) and IC (51), respectively. Pointwise
optimization yields the following condition for the optimal contract c(V; z):

                                           1                  fa (V; z; a )
                                                     =    +
                                      u0 (c(V; z))            f (V; z; a )

for all (V; z). Hence, assuming that 6= 0 (i.e. the IC binds), the contract c(V; z) is not a
function of z if and only if the likelihood ratio fa (V; z; a )=f (V; z; a ) does not depend on z, i.e.

                                           fa (V; z; a )
                                                         = h(V; a ):                                        (52)
                                           f (V; z; a )

for some function h. Condition (52) holds if and only if V is a su¢ cient statistic for fV; zg
with respect to a = a .19 Thus, any signal z, no matter how noisy, that provides information
incremental to V on the agent’s e¤ort choice, should be included in the contract.
    The most common application of the informativeness principle to CEO pay is relative per-
formance evaluation (“RPE”). Speci…cally, peer performance is informative about the degree
to which high …rm value V is due to high e¤ort or good luck. Conventional wisdom is that
RPE is very rarely used in reality. Aggarwal and Samwick (1999) and Murphy (1999) show
that CEO pay is determined by absolute, rather than relative performance, and Jenter and
Kanaan (2015) …nd an absence of RPE in CEO …ring decisions. However, Gong, Li, and Shin
(2011) argue that these conclusions arise from identifying RPE based on an implicit approach
– assuming a peer group (e.g. one based on industry and/or size) and relevant performance
measures, and studying whether those performance measures for that peer group a¤ect CEO
pay. These may assumptions lead to measurement error that biases downwards the estimated
use of RPE. Gong et al. study the explicit use of RPE, based on the disclosure of peer …rms and
performance measures mandated by the SEC in 2006. They …nd that 25% of S&P 1500 …rms
explicitly use RPE. Still, the practice is not widespread, and Bebchuk and Fried (2004) argue
that the rarity of RPE is a key piece of evidence in support of the rent extraction view. Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2001) demonstrate that pay-for-luck is strongest in poorly-governed …rms,
consistent with the view that it is ine¢ cient.
    There are several potential justi…cations for the rarity of RPE. The …rst is to consider it
in context: there is little indexation of wage contracts in the economy in general, even though
it would not only allow for more precise signals to satisfy the incentive constraint, but also
aid in satisfying the participation constraint. For example, indexing wages to variables such
as in‡ation, growth, or the business cycle would help ensure that workers’reservation utility
is always met. The lack of indexation for CEOs is consistent with its absence for rank-and-…le
  19
     Condition (52) is required to be satis…ed only for e¤ort level a = a ; it may be that the likelihood ratio
depends on z for a di¤erent a 6= a . We thus say that (52) holds if and only if V is a su¢ cient statistic for
fV; zg with respect to a = a . Holmstrom (1979) assumes that condition (52) is satis…ed either for all a or no
a, and so he shows that the contract is a function of z if and only if V is a su¢ cient statistic for fV; zg with
respect to a (rather than a = a ).


                                                         31
employees. Since these employees are unlikely to have in‡uence over the contract designers, it
is unlikely that the lack of indexation represents rent extraction. The deeper reasons for the
general absence of indexation are still unclear, but a potential explanation is preference for
simplicity and ‡exibility in contracting.
    Second, Dittmann, Maug, and Spalt (2013) show that the indexation of options can destroy
incentives. Since an indexed option is in the money only if the stock price rises high enough
to outperform the benchmark, indexation is tantamount to increasing the strike price of an
option and reducing the drift rate of the underlying asset. Both e¤ects reduce the option’s
delta and thus his incentives. To preserve incentives, additional equity must be given, and their
calibration shows that full indexation of all options would increase compensation costs by 50%
on average. If …rms choose the optimal proportion of options to index, average compensation
costs would only fall by 2.3%, and 75% of …rms would choose zero indexation. They show
that indexing stock also has little bene…t. Chaigneau, Edmans, and Gottlieb (2015a) similarly
show that indexation can reduce incentives in the Innes (1990) framework of risk neutrality
and limited liability, which allows for an optimal contracting approach. Third, Oyer (2004)
shows that, if equity is forfeited upon departure, it induces the agent to stay with the …rm.
Since non-indexed equity is more valuable in high market conditions, when the outside option
is also higher, its retention power increases precisely when retention concerns are greatest.
Fourth, Gopalan, Milbourn, and Song (2010) argue that not indexing an executive to industry
performance induces him to choose the …rm’s industry exposure optimally.
    In addition to signals about peer performance, the informativeness principle implies that
any informative signal, no matter how noisy, should be in the optimal contract. In reality,
in addition to …rm value, CEO pay may depend on accounting performance measures (such
as sales growth, return-on-assets, and earnings per share growth) through their impact on
discretionary bonuses, as well as subjective evaluations by principals (e.g. Cornelli, Kominek,
and Ljungqvist (2013)). However, CEO pay does not appear to depend on non-accounting
performance measures such as surveys on intangible assets (e.g. customer satisfaction, brand
strength, and employee engagement) and the number of patent citations. These all potentially
provide information over and above that contained in the stock price, since the stock market
does not immediately capitalize intangibles.
    However, as stressed by Holmstrom (1979), the informativeness principle as derived assum-
ing no constraints on the contract.20 In reality, contracting constraints do exist, such as limited
liability. Chaigneau, Edmans, and Gottlieb (2015b) show that the informativeness principle
may not hold under limited liability. In the standard Innes (1990) framework, the agent re-
ceives zero below a threshold and gains one-for-one above the threshold, which is the maximum
possible without violating the agent’s monotonicity constraint (if imposed) or principal’s lim-
   20
     This observation also explains why Dittmann, Maug, and Spalt (2013) …nd that indexation may destroy
value. In reality, contracts consist of a restricted set of securities –salary, bonus, shares, and options –but the
optimal contract is very far from piecewise linear (see, e.g., Dittmann and Maug (2007)).



                                                        32
ited liability (if monotonicity is not imposed). Since constraints on the contract are binding
almost everywhere, the principal’s ability to use the signal is severely restricted. If low …rm
value V is accompanied by a low signal z, she cannot punish the agent further without violating
limited liability as he is already receiving zero. Her only degree of freedom is on the level of
the threshold, and so a signal is only valuable if it a¤ects the optimal cuto¤.
    This result suggests that the common practice of paying agents for luck is not necessarily
suboptimal. If a …rm su¤ers a catastrophe, the manager is typically paid zero, regardless of
whether it was down to bad luck (e.g. poor industry performance) or shirking. In reality,
instances of “pay for luck” typically concern very good or very bad outcomes – for example,
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) consider how CEO pay varies with spikes and troughs in the
oil price, and Jenter and Kanaan (2014) …nd that peer-group performance does not a¤ect CEO
…ring decisions –but additional signals are only valuable for moderate outcomes. However, it
does not explain why signals on non-accounting performance are not used in normal times, i.e.
outside of …ring considerations.


3.6.    Risk-Taking
Thus far, the CEO takes an action that changes the …rm’s expected value, but has no direct
e¤ect on its risk. In Smith and Stulz (1985), the agent takes a single action that reduces risk
via hedging. If the agent is risk averse, he will engage in excessive hedging; in an CEO context,
this corresponds to turning down positive-NPV risky projects. They show how options address
this issue, since their convexity counterbalances the concavity of the agent’s utility function.
Dittmann and Yu (2011) calibrate a model where the CEO chooses both e¤ort and risk, and
show that it can explain the mix of stock and options found empirically. However, Carpenter
(2000) and Ross (2004) show theoretically that options may not increase the manager’s risk-
taking incentives: while an option has “vega” (positive sensitivity to volatility), it also has
“delta” (positive sensitivity to …rm value). This, a risk-averse manager may wish to reduce
volatility in the value of the …rm and thus his options. Shue and Townsend (2013) evaluate this
theoretical debate empirically by showing that exogenous increases in options, resulting from
their multi-year grant cycles, lead to an increase in risk-taking.
    The above models consider “good”risk-taking that improves …rm value. However, the CEO
may also have incentives to engage in “bad”risk-taking that reduces …rm value. In particular, in
a levered …rm, an equity-aligned manager may undertake a project even if it is negative-NPV,
because shareholders bene…t from the upside but have limited downside risk due to limited
liability (Jensen and Meckling (1976)). Anticipating this, creditors will demand a high cost of
debt and/or tight covenants, to the detriment of shareholders.
    Edmans and Liu (2010) show that a potential solution to such risk-shifting is to compensate
the CEO with debt as well as equity. (Such debt is referred to as “inside”debt, as it is owned
by the manager rather than outside creditors.) Previously proposed remedies for risk-shifting


                                               33
include bonuses for achieving solvency, or salaries and private bene…ts that are forfeited in
bankruptcy (e.g. Brander and Poitevin (1992)). These instruments are sensitive to the incidence
of bankruptcy, but if bankruptcy occurs, they pay zero regardless of liquidation value. In
contrast, inside debt yields a positive payo¤ in bankruptcy, proportional to the recovery value.
Thus it renders the manager sensitive to …rm value in bankruptcy, and not just the incidence
of bankruptcy – exactly as desired by creditors – and thus reduce the cost of raising debt, to
the bene…t of shareholders. Indeed, recent empirical studies have shown that CEOs hold a
substantial amount of inside debt through de…ned bene…t pensions and deferred compensation.
These are unsecured obligations which yield an equal claim with other creditors in bankruptcy,
and thus constitute inside debt. For example, Sundaram and Yermack (2007) show that GE’s
Jack Welch had over $100 million of inside debt when he retired in 2001.
    Since traditional contracting theories typically advocate only the use of equity, and disclosure
of pensions and especially deferred compensation was limited prior to a 2007 SEC disclosure
reform, Bebchuk and Fried (2004) argue that inside debt constitutes “stealth compensation
through retirement bene…ts”. However, the risk deterrence story suggests that inside debt
can be consistent with optimal contracting. The disclosure of signi…cant inside debt positions
following the SEC reform led to an increase in bond prices (Wei and Yermack (2011)), and
is associated with lower bond yields and fewer covenants (Anantharaman, Fang, and Gong
(2014), using personal state income taxes as an instrument for inside debt). Debt-aligned
executives manage the …rm more conservatively as measured by the …rm’s lower distance to
default (Sundaram and Yermack (2007)), and lower stock return volatility, R&D expenditures
and …nancial leverage (Cassell, Huang, Sanchez, and Stuart (2012), also using the income tax
instrument). Indeed, the alignment of executives with debt has gathered pace in the recent
crisis. In 2010, American International Group tied 80% of highly paid employees’pay to the
price of its bonds, and 20% to the price of its stock, and UBS and Credit Suisse have since
started paying bonuses in bonds. The Liikanen Report of the European Commission and the
Federal Reserve have advocated debt-like compensation to curb excessive risk-taking. However,
even if the above studies can be interpreted as showing causal e¤ects of inside debt on risk-
taking and borrowing conditions, they do not study whether shareholders bene…t overall, nor
whether alternative solutions to risk-shifting would be superior.
    In Smith and Stulz (1985), the …rm is unlevered so there are no risk-shifting concerns; the
contract contains options but no debt. In Edmans and Liu (2010), the CEO is risk-neutral
so there is no problem of inducing him to take “good” risk; the contract contains debt, but
not options. For future research, it would be interesting to incorporate both leverage and risk
aversion into a model of both e¤ort and risk-taking, to study the optimal mix of salary, stock,
options, and debt.




                                                34
4.     Dynamic Incentives
This section analyzes dynamic models of moral hazard. In reality, CEOs are employed for
several years. A dynamic setting leads to additional questions, such as how to spread the
rewards for good performance over time, how the level and sensitivity of pay vary over time,
and when the CEO quits or is …red. We start in Section 4.1 with a tractable discrete-time model
that yields closed-form solutions, at the cost of some assumptions. In Section 4.2 we move to
a continuous-time model which typically yields numerical solutions, but allows for departures
and terminations.


4.1.     Dynamic Incentives: A Simple Discrete Time Model
We present here the discrete-time version of the Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and Sannikov (2012)
model, which uses the EG framework to yield tractable solutions. In every period t, the CEO
takes …rst observes noise "t and then takes action at , which a¤ects terminal (period-T ) …rm
value as follows
                                               PT
                                      VT = Se s=1 (as +"s ) :
                                                          Pt
We assume that a signal about it, Vt = Se s=1 (as +"s ) , is contractible. The incremental infor-
mation contained in Vt over and above that contained in Vt 1 can be summarized by the stock
“return”
                                rt = ln Vt ln Vt 1 = at + "t

where, as in EG, the CEO observes the noise "t before he takes his action at . Also in every
period t, the principal pays the CEO yt (r1 ; :::; rt ) which may depend on the entire history
of returns. The agent consumes ct and saves (yt ct ) (which may be positive or negative) at
the continuously compounded risk-free rate R. He lives for T periods and retires after period
L T .21
    The agent’s lifetime utility is:

                                 X
                                 T
                                           t
                           U=          e       u (ct ; at ) ;        u (c; a) = ln c   g(a)             (53)
                                 t=1


where is the agent’s discount rate, i.e. his impatience. His per-period utility function u (c; a) =
ln c g (a) corresponds to (10) with v (c) = ln c and u (x) = x, i.e. multiplicative preferences.
The agent’s reservation utility is w.
    The principal is risk-neutral and so her objective function is expected discounted terminal
  21
    In the model, the principal replaces the CEO with a new one and continues to contract optimally, but this
assumption can easily be weakened.




                                                                35
…rm value, minus expected pay:
                                                            "                                   #
                                                                                X
                                                                                T
                                                                     RT                   Rt
                                     max                   E e            VT          e        yt .            (54)
                          (at ;t=1;:::L);(yt ;t=1;:::T )
                                                                                t=1


She wishes to implement a target action sequence (at ).
    There are two constraints to consider. The …rst is the e¤ort constraint (“EF”), which ensures
that the CEO does not wish to deviate from (at ). We consider a local deviation in the action
at after history (r1 ; : : : rt 1 ; "t ): The e¤ect on CEO utility should be zero:

                                                           @U @rt   @U
                                          0 = Et                  +    :
                                                           @rt @at @at

                                             t
Since @rt =@at = 1 and @U=@at = e                ua (ct ; at ), the EF constraint (evaluated at at = at ) is

                                          @U                t
                           EF : Et            =e                ua (ct ; at ) if at 2 (0; a)                   (55)
                                          @rt
                                          @U                t
                                   Et          e                ua (ct ; at ) if at = a
                                          @rt

for t L.
    The second constraint is the private savings constraint (“PS”), which ensures that the CEO
consumes his income in period t, i.e. ct = yt , so that he has no incentive to save privately. If
the CEO saves a small amount
                           h i dt in period
                                        h      tiand invests it until t + 1; his utility increases to
                            @U
the leading order by Et @c    t
                                 dt + Et @c@U
                                            t+1
                                                 eR dt . To deter private saving or borrowing, this
change should be zero to the leading order,

                                                                    uc (ct+1 ; at+1 )
                                   PS : 1 = Et eR                                     ;                        (56)
                                                                       uc (ct ; at )

that is, the consumption Euler equation should hold. If the CEO cannot engage in private saving
(e.g. because the principal can observe saving), then instead the inverse Euler equation (“IEE”)
holds, as is standard in agency problems with additively separable utility (e.g. Rogerson (1985)
and Farhi and Werning (2012)). This is given by

                                                                1        uc (ct ; at )
                                   IEE : 1 = Et                                                                (57)
                                                            eR        uc (ct+1 ; at+1 )

   We next present the solution (a heuristic proof is in Appendix A). For simplicity, we assume
a constant target action (at = a , which may correspond to full productive e¢ ciency a). The
contract is given by:
                                                X
                                                t
                                ln ct = ln c0 +     ( s rs + ks ) ;                         (58)
                                                                s=1



                                                             36
where   s   and ks are constants. The sensitivity                s   is given by
                                (
                                         g 0 (a )
                                    1+e +:::+e (T   s)   for s        L;
                        s   =                                                                (59)
                                    0 for s > L:

If private saving is impossible, the constant ks ensures that the IEE (57) holds:

                                          ks = R          ln E ess (a      +")
                                                                                     :       (60)

If private saving is possible, ks ensures that the PS constraint (61) holds:

                                                                        s (a   +")
                                          ks = R + ln E es                                   (61)

   The closed-form solutions allow transparent economic implications. Equation (58) shows
that time-t income should be linked to the return not only in period t, but also in all previous
periods. Therefore, increases in rt boost log pay in the current and all future periods equally.
Since the CEO is risk-averse, it is e¢ cient to reward for good performance over the future to
achieve consumption smoothing: the “deferred reward”principle. This result was …rst derived
by Lambert (1983) and Rogerson (1985), who consider a two-period model where the agent
only chooses e¤ort.
   We now consider how contract sensitivity changes over time. Equation (59) shows that, in
an in…nite-horizon model (T ! 1), the sensitivity is constant and given by

                                           t   =    = 1          e      g 0 (a ) :           (62)

This is intuitive: the contract must be su¢ ciently sharp to compensate for the disutility of
e¤ort, which is constant. The sensitivity to the current-period return is decreasing in the
discount rate – if the CEO is more impatient (higher ), it is necessary to reward him today
more than in the future.
     If T is …nite, equation (59) shows that t is increasing over time: the “increasing incentives
principle”. When there are fewer periods over which to spread the reward for e¤ort, the current-
period reward (@ut =@at = t ) must increase to keep the lifetime increase in utility @U=@at
constant. Other moral hazard models predict increasing incentives through di¤erent channels.
In contrast, Gibbons and Murphy (1992) generate an increasing current sensitivity because the
lifetime increase in utility @U=@at rises over time to o¤set falling career concerns. In Garrett
and Pavan (2015), the current sensitivity rises over time because @U=@at increases to minimize
the agent’s informational rents. Here, @U=@at is constant since we have no adverse selection
or career concerns; instead, the increase in @ut =@at stems from the reduction in consumption
smoothing possibilities as the CEO approaches retirement.
     While t depends on the model horizon, it is independent of whether private saving is


                                                            37
possible –this possibility only a¤ects kt . Since private saving does not a¤ect the agent’s action
and thus …rm returns, the sensitivity of pay to returns is unchanged. From (58), the possibility
of private saving alters the time trend in the level of pay. The log expected growth rate in pay
is ln E [ct =ct 1 ] = kt + ln E e t rt .
    If private saving is impossible, substituting for kt using (60) yields

                                                        ct
                                               ln E               =R          ,
                                                       ct    1


which is constant over time. If and only if the CEO is more patient than the aggregate economy
( < R), then the growth rate is positive, as is intuitive. If private saving is possible, (61) yields

                                    ct                                 t rt                t rt
                           ln E               =R            + ln E[e          ] + ln E[e          ]:
                                  ct     1

                                                                                                           2
In the limit of small time intervals (or, equivalently, in the limit of small variance of noise                ),
this yields
                                           ct
                                   ln E        =R        + t2 t2 :
                                          ct 1
Thus, the growth rate of consumption is always higher when private saving is possible. This
faster upward trend means that the contract e¤ectively saves for the agent, removing the need
for him to do so himself. This result is consistent with He (2012), who …nds that the optimal
contract under private saving involves a wage pattern that is non-decreasing over time.22 The
model thus predicts a positive relationship between pay and tenure, consistent with the common
practice of seniority-based pay. Moreover, the growth rate depends on the risk to which the
CEO is exposed, which is in turn driven by his incentives and …rm volatility . This is
intuitive: greater risk increases the CEO’s motive to engage in precautionary saving (since,
with CRRA utility, u000 (c) > 0), and so a rapidly-rising level of pay is necessary to remove the
need for him to save privately. Furthermore, in a …nite-horizon model, t is increasing over time
and so the growth rate of consumption rises with tenure, that is, pay accelerates over time.
    To illustrate the economic forces behind the contract, we now present a simple numerical
example with T = 3, L = 3, = 0, at = a , and g 0 (a ) = 1. From (59), the contract is:
                                                     r1
                                             ln c1 =    + 1;
                                                     3
                                                     r1 r2
                                             ln c2 =    + + 2;
                                                     3    2
                                                     r1 r2 r3
                                             ln c3 =    + + +                     3;
                                                     3    2  1
  22
    Lazear (1979) has a back-loaded wage pattern for incentive, rather than private saving considerations (the
agent is risk-neutral in his model). Since the agent wishes to ensure he receives the high future payments, he
induces e¤ort to avoid being …red. Similarly, in Yang (2009), a back-loaded wage pattern induces agents to
work to avoid the …rm being shut down.



                                                             38
              P
where t = ts=1 ks . An increase in r1 leads to a permanent increase in log consumption –it
rises by r31 in all future periods. In addition, the sensitivity @ut =@at increases over time, from
1=3 to 1=2 to 1=1. The total lifetime reward for e¤ort @Ut =@at is a constant 1 in all periods.
    We now consider T = 5, so that the CEO lives after retirement. The contract is now
                                              r1
                                    ln c1 =        +   1;                                        (63)
                                              5
                                              r1     r2
                                    ln c2 =        +        +   2;
                                              5      4
                                              r1     r2      r3
                                    ln c3 =        +        +   +     3;
                                              5      4       3
                                              r1     r2      r3
                                    ln c4 =        +        + +       4;
                                              5      4       3
                                              r1     r2      r3
                                    ln c5 =        +        + +       5:
                                              5      4       3
Since the CEO takes no action from t = 4, his pay does not depend on r4 or r5 . However, it
depends on r1 , r2 , and r3 as his earlier e¤orts a¤ect his wealth, from which he consumes.
    We …nally extend the basic model to allow the agent to engage in short-termism, and
study how this possibility a¤ects the optimal contract. Short-termism is broadly de…ned to
encompass any action that increases current returns at the expense of future returns –scrapping
positive-NPV investments (see, for example, Stein (1988)) or taking negative-NPV projects that
generate an immediate return but weaken long-run value (such as sub-prime lending), earnings
management, and accounting manipulation.
    At time t, in addition into an e¤ort and savings decision, the manager can also take a myopic
action mt;i that increases the current return to rt0 = rt +Mi (mt;i ) where Mi is a concave function.
The CEO also chooses a “release lag” i, which is the number of periods before the negative
consequences of myopia become evident. The maximum possible release lag is H                  T L.
                                                                 0
Myopia at t with release lag i reduces the return at t + i to rt+i = rt+i mt;i , and leaves other
                       0
returns unchanged (rt+s    = rt+s for s 6= 0; i). Let Mi = Mi0 (0) 2 [0; 1) denote the marginal
ine¢ ciency of manipulation at release lag i.
    If the …rm is su¢ ciently large, the principal will wish to implement zero manipulation, i.e.
mt;i = 0 8 t. If the agent engages in a small myopic action mt;i 0 at time t, his utility changes
to the leading order by
                                     @U                    @U
                                 Et        Mmt;i Et             mt;i :
                                     @rt                  @rt+i
This should be weakly negative for all small mt;i                0. Hence, we obtain an additional No
Manipulation (“NM”) constraint:

                                              @U                      @U
                                 NM : Et          Mi            Et                               (64)
                                              @rt                    @rt+i

for t   L: The optimal contract is now as above, with the additional constraint (64).


                                                    39
   We apply this constraint to the 5-period model of equation (63), with H = 1. The optimal
contract now changes to:
                                         r1
                               ln c1 =        +   1;                                          (65)
                                         5
                                         r1     r2
                               ln c2 =        +        +    2;
                                         5      4
                                         r1     r2      r3
                               ln c3 =        +        +   + 3;
                                         5      4       3
                                         r1     r2      r3 M1 r4
                               ln c4 =        +        + +       +   4;
                                         5      4       3     2
                                         r1     r2      r3 M1 r4
                               ln c5 =        +        + +       +   5:
                                         5      4       3     2
     Even though the CEO retires at the end of t = 3, his income depends on r4 , otherwise
he would have an incentive to boost r3 at the expense of r4 . Thus, the CEO should retain
equity in the …rm even after retirement. For a general maximum release lag of H, the CEO
should be sensitive to …rm returns until period L + H, i.e. retain equity in the …rm for H years
after retirement. This result formalizes the verbal argument of Bebchuk and Fried (2004),
who advocate escrowing the CEO’s equity to deter him from in‡ating the stock price before
retirement and then cashing out. For example, Angelo Mozilo, the former CEO of Countrywide
Financial, made $129 million from stock sales in the 12 months prior to the start of the subprime
crisis. Indeed, in the aftermath of the crisis, banks such as Goldman Sachs and UBS have been
increasing vesting horizons. An alternative remedy proposed is to use clawbacks, i.e. pay
executives bonuses for good short-term performance, but rescind them if the performance ends
up being reversed in the long-term. However, the legality of such clawbacks is unclear, and even
if legally possible, they may be costly to implement. Lengthening the vesting period of equity
so that rewards are not paid out prematurely in the …rst place may be a superior solution.
     The sensitivity to r4 depends on the e¢ ciency of earnings in‡ation M1 ; in the extreme,
if M1 = 0, myopia is impossible and so there is no need to expose the CEO to returns after
retirement. The contract is unchanged for t         3, that is, for the periods in which the CEO
works. Even under the original contract, there is no incentive to in‡ate earnings at t = 1 or
t = 2 because there is no discounting, and so the negative e¤ect of myopia on future returns
reduces the CEO’s lifetime utility by more than the positive e¤ect on current returns increases
it. With discounting, incentives increase even faster over time than in the absence of a myopia
problem. The higher sensitivity to future returns ensures that myopia causes the CEO to lose
enough in the future to counterbalance the e¤ect of discounting.
     The contracts in (63) and (65) can be implemented in a simple manner. Each year, the
manager’s annual pay is escrowed into an “Incentive Account”, a proportion t of which is
invested in stock and the remainder in cash, so his %-% incentives equal t given by (59). If
the stock price declines, so that the fraction of stock falls below t , cash in the account is used
to buy stock to replenish his incentives. Every year, a fraction of the account vests and is paid


                                                       40
to the manager, but the remainder remains escrowed to deter myopia. Zhu (2014) shows that
“bonus banks”, introduced in practice by the consulting …rm Stern Stewart, are a similar way
to deter myopia. Bonuses for short-term performance are deposited into the “bonus bank”,
rather than immediately paid to the manager, and only a fraction is paid each period. Poor
performance in one period, which may be caused by a myopic action in a previous period, wipes
out previously accrued bonuses.
    The advantage of the above framework is that it yields closed-form solutions that make the
economic intuition transparent. However, it comes at the cost of a number of assumptions.
First, as in the EG model, it assumes a …xed target action and that the noise precedes the
action, which may be reasonable in some settings but not others. Second, it assumes a …xed
retirement date T and does not allow for quits or …rings beforehand, which is an important
limitation in a CEO setting.


4.2.    Dynamic Incentives in Continuous Time
This section presents the continuous-time model of Sannikov (2008) which allows for quits and
…rings, as well as the implemented e¤ort level to be endogenized. At every instant t, the agent
takes action at and consumes ct ; the framework rules out private saving so we do not distinguish
between income and consumption. His expected lifetime utility at date t is
                                            Z    1
                                                          (s t)
                                U t = Et             e            u (cs ; as ) ds :          (66)
                                             t


It is the “promised utility”that the agent will obtain if he exerts the path of e¤orts recommended
by the principal. This path of e¤orts is given by an adapted process (at ).
     The principal uses the same discount rate , and her expected utility is:
                                            Z
                                                         (s t)
                                Qt = Et          e               (dVt    ct ) ds ;           (67)

where dVt is the evolution of …rm value, assumed to be:

                                           dVt = at dt + dZt .                               (68)

    To derive the optimal contract, we …rst recall two basic lemmas from stochastic calculus,
proven in Appendix A.
                                                   R1
    Martingale representation theorem. If Ut = Et t e (s t) Ks ds for some adapted process
Kt , then
                                dUt = ( Kt + Ut ) dt + t dZt ;                           (69)

where   t   is some adapted process.



                                                         41
   Hamilton-Jacobi Bellman (“HJB”) equation. If
                                                   Z       1
                                                                     (s t)
                        Q (x) = sup Et                         e             f (xs ; Cs ) ds j xt = x
                                 (Cs )s   t            t


for some control variable Ct and stochastic process xt with dxt =                                         (xt ; Ct ) dt +   (xt ; Ct ) dZt ,
then Q ( ) satis…es:

                                                                     1
                  0 = sup f (x; C)            Q (x) + Q0 (x) (x; C) + Q00 (x)                                  2
                                                                                                                   (x; C)             (70)
                        C                                            2

   Using the martingale representation theorem (69), the agent’s utility process can be written:

                                dUt = ( u (ct ; at ) + Ut ) dt +                             t     dZt

for some process t that represents the sensitivity of the contract (equation (69) yields a process
 t , and we set t = t = ). On the equilibrium path, dVt = at dt + dZt , so the contract is:


                            dUt = ( u (ct ; at ) + Ut ) dt +                         t   (dVt       at dt) :                          (71)

The intuition is as follows. Ut represents an “account” which contains the lifetime utility
promised to the agent. If the principal provides instantaneous utility to the agent, the account
falls by u (ct ; at ) as less utility is owed in the future. If …rm value is higher than expected
(dVt at dt > 0), the account rises in value. Otherwise, it grows at a rate (the Ut term).
    We now move to the agent’s IC. If the agent chooses action at , his utility is

                                          max u (ct ; at ) dt + dUt (at )
                                              at


i.e., he receives u (ct ; at ) today, and will receive continuation utility of dUt (at ) later. Given (68)
and (71), we have
                                  dUt = t at dt + terms independent of at ,

which yields the IC
                                     at 2 arg max u (ct ; at ) +                          t at :
                                                           a

The …rst-order condition yields:
                                                   t   =           ua (ct ; at ) ,                                                    (72)

i.e. incentives t are determined by ct and at .
    Turning to the principal’s problem, the state variable for the HJB stochastic process is
xt = Ut , the agent’s promised utility. The principal’s value function is Q (xt ). Using (72), the




                                                                   42
HJB equation (70) is, for all x,

                                                                        1
                0 = max a        c      Q (x) + Q0 (x) [ u (c; a) + x] + Q00 (x) ua (c; a)2               (73)
                      c;a                                               2

This gives an ordinary di¤erential equation for Q (x). From this, the optimal c and a are
implicitly determined by:

                                                       1
                             1       Q0 (x) uc (c; a) + Q00 (x) @c ua (c; a)2 = 0                         (74)
                                                       2
                                                       1 00
                            1        Q (x) ua (c; a) + Q (x) @a ua (c; a)2 = 0:
                                      0
                                                                                                          (75)
                                                       2
    We now need to specify the boundary conditions. The agent’s per-period reservation utility
is w, and so he accepts the contract only if Ut       w= . Let Q0 (x) = u ( ; 0) 1 ( w) =V + A
denote the cost of providing this to agent when the agent exerts zero e¤ort, where A is the
present value of the principal’s outside option, e.g. his surplus from hiring a new agent. The
agent is employed if and only if his promised utility is x 2 [xL ; xH ], with the following matching
and smooth pasting conditions:

                            Q (x) = Q0 (x) ; Q0 (x) = Q00 (x) for x = xL ; xH :                           (76)

Hence, the problem is characterized by the ODE (73), xL , and xH . At xL , the agent is ter-
minated because of poor performance. At xH , he is terminated because he has become too
expensive to incentivize. Intuitively, as the agent’s promised utility increases, his marginal
utility of money falls, and so it is harder to incentivize him.
    We have four unknowns, xL ; xH , and the two degrees of freedom associated with a second-
order ODE (given a value x , the ODE is described by two parameters, Q (x ) and Q0 (x )).
We also have four equations (76). Hence, the problem yields a solution.
    To sum up, the principal solves the problem as follows. Given her value function Q, she
…nds the optimal action and consumption from the …rst-order conditions (74) and (75). These
in turn determine the optimal incentives from (72), and the agent’s utility is given by (71).
    This problem is quite complex, and typically the solutions are numerical.23 Here, we repro-
duce a result from Sannikov (2008):24
  23
      One closed-form solution is the one in the Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and Sannikov (2012) setup, with a
constant a (e.g. a = aH ) and no outside opportunity (w = 1). With log utility (u (c; a) = ln c g (a))
and r = , the reader can verify that c (x) = Derx , Q (x) = Aerx + B for some constants A; B; D. With
                                                1
constant relative risk aversion (u = ce g(a)        = (1   )), the solution has the form c = Dx1=(1 ) ; Q (x) =
   1=(1  )
Ax         + B. The resulting contracts are described in Section 4.1. Otherwise, the only known solutions are
numerical.
   24
      We are in the process of adapting this …gure to change notation as follows: W ! w; F (W ) ! Q (x),Wgp !
xH :




                                                       43
    While the numerical results depend somewhat on the utility function, for the speci…cation in
Figure 1, when promised utility rises, consumption increases. As a result, e¤ort falls: the mar-
ginal utility of additional consumption is low and so stronger monetary incentives are required
to induce e¤ort. Since the agent is now expensive to incentivize, the optimal e¤ort level falls.
Other variables have non-monotonic relationships with promised utility. One important open
question would be to take these theoretical models to the data, and determine which functional
form best describe the world. The absence of analytical solutions renders comparative statics
relatively di¢ cult to obtain. In many situations, greater risk aversion reduces incentives, for the
same intuition as Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) –incentives are more costly as they require
the agent to be paid a greater risk premium.
    Sannikov’s (2008) methodology has since been used in executive compensation applications.
He (2012) extends the model to allowing for private saving. In standard models without private
saving (e.g. Rogerson (1985)), the optimal wage pro…le is front-loaded, but such a pro…le will
induce the agent to engage in a joint deviation of shirking and saving. He shows that the wage
pro…le is back-loaded, to deter such private saving. He also …nds that pay does not fall upon
poor performance but exhibits a permanent rise after a su¢ ciently good performance history.
This downward rigidity is also predicted by Harris and Holmstrom (1982), but through a quite
di¤erent channel. Their model features two-sided learning about the agent’s ability rather than
moral hazard. Downward rigidity in wages insures the agent against negative news about his
ability, while wage rises after positive news ensure that he does not quit.25
  25
     DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) use the Sannikov (2008) framework to study optimal capital structure and
show that it can be implemented with standard securities – a credit line, long-term debt, and outside equity.
Since the agent always holds equity, the model focuses on …nancing rather than executive compensation.




                                                     44
4.3.     Empirical Analyses
We now turn to tests of the empirical predictions of dynamic models. Lambert (1983), Roger-
son (1985), and Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and Sannikov (2012) predict the “deferred reward
principle”: …rm performance should a¤ect future as well as current pay due to consumption
smoothing considerations. Indeed, Boschen and Smith (1995) show that …rm performance has
a much greater e¤ect on the NPV of future pay than current pay. Gibbons and Murphy (1992)
…nd support for the “increasing incentives principle”, that incentives rise over time. This result
is consistent with both consumption smoothing possibilities and career concerns falling with
tenure. In addition to incentives, Murphy (1986) …nds that pay increases over time, consistent
with models which predict a backward-loaded wage pattern to remove incentives for private
saving. However, to our knowledge, predictions that the growth rate in pay depends on the
level of incentives and …rm risk are as yet untested.
    Turning to the predictions regarding termination, many models predict termination after
poor performance, to deter shirking ex ante, e.g. DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo
and Fishman (2007), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (2007), and Sannikov (2008).26 In
particular, the …rst three models feature limited liability, which reduces the principal’s ability to
punish poor performance …nancially, thus leading to a role for termination. In some cases, such
as Sannikov (2008), termination also arises after very good performance as the agent becomes
too expensive to incentivize. However, historically, dismissals have been relatively rare. Murphy
and Zabojnik (2007) and Jensen and Murphy (2004) report turnover rates of 10% per year in
the 1970s and 1980s, which increased only to 11% in the 1990s. Taylor’s (2010) learning
model shows that the low rate of dismissals can only be justi…ed if the costs to shareholders
of turnover exceed $200 million. Turning to turnover-performance sensitivity, Coughlan and
Schmidt (1985), Jensen and Murphy (1990), Warner, Watts, and Wruck (1988), and Weisbach
(1988) …nd that turnover probability is decreasing in performance but the economic magnitude
is small. Jensen and Murphy (1990) estimate that a CEO who performs in line with the market
over 2 years has a 11.1% dismissal probability; underperforming by 50% in each year increases
this probability only to 17.5%. Thus, even under the aggressive assumption that the CEO
receives no severance package and is unable to …nd alternative employment until retirement,
Jensen and Murphy (1990) estimate that incentives from dismissal are equivalent to an equity
stake of 0.03%.
    Moreover, incentives from dismissal are even lower if the CEO is granted severance pay.
In contrast to most theories, which advocate that pay should be weakly monotonic in …rm
performance, CEOs are often given severance packages upon departure. Yermack (2006) …nds a
mean contracted severance pay of $0.9 million, with a mean discretionary amount of $4.5 million;
  26
     Note that termination after poor performance is typically not subgame-perfect, so moral hazard models
assume that the …rm can commit to terminate the CEO. Learning models predict subgame-perfect termination
after poor performance, as such performance signals low managerial quality (e.g. Jovanovic (1979), Taylor
(2010), and Garrett and Pavan (2012)).



                                                   45
the respective maximums are $36.1 and $121.1 million, suggesting that these packages can be
substantial. Their usage is especially prevalent among dismissed CEOs compared to those who
voluntarily retire, and thus appears to reward CEOs for failure. However, a closer look at the
data suggests that the vast majority of “severance pay” does not stem from compensation for
loss of employment, but instead items such as unvested restricted shares, unexercised stock
options, and accrued pension bene…ts, which were promised and contractually obligated to the
CEO under any state of nature. For example, out of Henry McKinnell’s much-criticized $180m
severance package from P…zer, $78m was deferred compensation ($67m contributed plus $11m
interest), $82m was the present value of his pension plan, and $8m was from stock options.
Thus, only an incremental $11m was due to the loss of employment.27 Furthermore, some
theories predict that severance pay can be optimal. Almazan and Suarez (2003) show that it
can induce the CEO to leave voluntarily when a more able replacement is available; Inderst and
Mueller (2008) demonstrate that it can deter a CEO from entrenching himself by concealing
negative information that would lead to his dismissal. One example is to induce the CEO to
accept a takeover bid, which typically yields a substantial premium to shareholders. Manso
(2011) shows that severance pay is valuable to induce the CEO to explore new technologies
rather than merely exploit existing ones. In the aforementioned model of He (2012), severance
pay leads to a backward-loaded wage pattern that is robust to private savings.
    Recent studies of CEO turnover have uncovered higher rates. Kaplan and Minton (2011) ag-
gregate both internal (board-driven) and external (through takeover and bankruptcy) turnover
and …nd that total annual turnover was 17.4% over 1998-2005. A one standard-deviation fall
in the industry-adjusted stock return is associated with a 3.4% increase in the likelihood of
turnover. This …gure is 2.1% for industry performance and 1.8% for the performance of the
overall market. Jenter and Lewellen (2014) …nd a total turnover rate of 11.8% per year of
which they estimate 4.1-4.5 percentage points (35-38% of the total) are performance-induced,
i.e. would not have occurred had performance been good.
    Thus, more recent evidence suggests that the threat of job loss from poor performance is
signi…cant. While these results support the prediction that …ring occurs upon poor performance,
they do not support the prediction that it is also prompted by good performance. In addition,
moral hazard models typically do not yield quantitative predictions for what the rate of …ring
or the sensitivity of …ring to performance should be, making it di¢ cult to assess whether the
observed …ndings are optimal.28
  27
     We thank David Yermack for this example.
  28
     Taylor (2010) derives quantitative predictions for the rate of …ring as a function of the cost of turnover to
shareholders, but in a learning model.




                                                       46
5.     Open Questions
5.1.    Apparent Ine¢ ciencies in Executive Compensation
Thus far, we have argued that many features of executive compensation that are frequently
criticized may yet be consistent with e¢ cient contracting. Examples include the level of pay,
low $-$ incentives, the negative relationship between incentives and …rm size, the use of stock
rather than options, the lack of relative performance evaluation, and the use of severance
pay and inside debt. However, this empirical consistency does not prove that compensation
practices are e¢ cient. As discussed earlier, the positive correlation between pay and …rm size is
also consistent with rent extraction, and may arise because a third omitted variable drives both;
similar concerns surround other empirical …ndings consistent with optimal contracting models.
In addition, even accepting the empirical correlations discussed in this paper as supportive of
optimal contracting in general, there remain several features of compensation that could be
improved upon.
    First, empirical studies uncover results for the average …rm. However, even if compensation
is e¢ cient on average, there may still be several individual cases of rent extraction. For example,
while the theories discussed in Section 4.3 may be able to justify the mean level of severance
pay, their forces are unlikely to be strong enough to rationalize extreme realizations, such as
the maximum discretionary award of $121.1 million. In addition, while Dittmann, Maug, and
Spalt (2013) …nd that indexation of options would not create value for the average …rm, it
would for 25% of …rms and so the absence of indexation across all …rms is di¢ cult to reconcile
with e¢ ciency.
    Second, some aspects of compensation are hidden from shareholders, which is di¢ cult to rec-
oncile with them being set in shareholders’interest. For example, Lie (2005) presents evidence
that the positive stock returns after the disclosed grant dates of executive stock options, …rst
documented by Yermack (1997), arises from backdating. Since options are typically granted
at the money, the CEO – unbeknown to shareholders – chooses the grant date in retrospect,
to coincide with days on which the stock price is low and thus justifying a low strike price.
Similarly, recent corporate scandals such as Tyco uncovered executives extracting perks that
were initially unknown to shareholders.
    Third, current schemes often fail to keep pace with a …rm’s changing conditions. While
Section 3.4 argues that the CEO’s incentives are su¢ cient in normal times to induce e¤ort,
if a company encounters di¢ culties and its stock price falls, the delta of his options decline
and so they lose much of their incentive e¤ect. One remedy used in practice is the repricing
of out-of-the-money options (Brenner, Sundaram, and Yermack (2000); Acharya, John, and
Sundaram (2000)), but this is controversial as it appears to reward the CEO for failure. Even
if the CEO is paid purely with stock (which always has a delta of 1), the problem continues
to exist as long as the bene…t of e¤ort b (S) is increasing in …rm size. Intuitively, when …rm


                                                47
size falls, the bene…ts from e¤ort are lower and so additional equity is needed to induce a given
level of e¤ort. For example, if both the production and utility functions are multiplicative, the
relevant measure is %-% incentives, the percentage of the CEO’s wealth that is comprised of
stock, and this measure falls when the stock price declines. If the utility function is additive,
the relevant measure is $-% incentives, the dollar value of the CEO’s equity, which also falls
when the stock price declines. A simple way to replenish incentives is to increase (reduce) the
portion of the CEO’s salary that is given in equity (cash) after the stock price falls; indeed,
Core and Guay (1999) show that …rms use new equity grants to move executives towards their
optimal incentive levels. Alternatively, the Incentive Account discussed in Section 4.1 involves
rebalancing the amount of the CEO’s escrowed equity and deferred cash to ensure he always has
su¢ cient equity. Critically, in both cases, unlike the repricing of options, the CEO’s additional
equity is not given for free: it is paid for by a reduction in cash. Thus, the CEO is reincentivized
without him being rewarded for failure.
    Fourth, standard measures of CEO incentives, such as those considered in Section 3, only
measure how the CEO’s wealth is a¤ected by changes to the current stock price. They do not
consider the extent to which the CEO is also aligned with the long-term stock price, i.e. the
horizon of incentives. The classic managerial myopia models of Stein (1988, 1989) show that
short-term incentives can lead to myopic actions. In a corporate context, these actions can
involve cutting R&D, reducing employee training, writing loans that may become delinquent
in the future, or expending corporate resources on earnings management. Empirical studies of
the horizon of incentives have been hindered by lack of data availability on the vesting period
of an executive’s equity, but recent studies suggest that horizons may a¤ect behavior. Gopalan,
Milbourn, Song, and Thakor (2014) use the recent change in disclosure requirements to pioneer
a measure of the “duration”of incentives, analogous to the duration of a debt security. Shorter
duration incentives are correlated with earnings management. Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen
(2015) study the quantity of equity scheduled to vest in a given year, since this amount depends
on equity grants made several years prior and is thus likely exogenous to current investment
opportunities. They …nd that vesting equity is signi…cantly negatively correlated with cuts
in R&D, advertising, and capital expenditure, and positively correlated with the likelihood
of meeting or narrowly beating earnings targets. Johnson, Ryan, and Tian (2009) show that
unrestricted stock is positively correlated with corporate fraud.
    One potential solution to the potential negative consequences of short horizons is to extend
the vesting period of equity. While the current debates surround the level of pay and the
sensitivity of pay to performance, extending the horizon of incentives may be particularly
valuable in overcoming moral hazard. However, lengthening vesting periods is not costless.
First, doing so will potentially expose the CEO to risk outside his control. Second, Laux (2012)
shows theoretically that, if the CEO forfeits unvested equity upon dismissal, he may engage in
myopic actions to avoid the risk of dismissal until his equity has vested. Third, Brisley (2006)
demonstrates that unvested equity ties up a signi…cant portion of the CEO’s wealth within the


                                                48
…rm, and thus may cause him to turn down risky, value-creating projects.
     We note that most of the potential remedies –indexation (where valuable), a crackdown on
perks, updating contracts, and lengthening vesting periods –can be implemented by sharehold-
ers (or shareholder-aligned boards) themselves, without the need for regulatory intervention.
The issue with regulation is that it is one-size-…ts-all and cannot be adapted to a …rm’s partic-
ular circumstances. For example, a minimum vesting horizon of (say) 5 years for equity may
be too short to induce investment in growth industries, and too long (thus subjecting the CEO
to excessive risk) in mature industries. Indeed, Gopalan, Milbourn, Song and Thakor (2014)
…nd that equity “duration” is longer in …rms with higher growth opportunities, long-term as-
sets, and R&D intensity, suggesting that the optimal vesting period varies according to …rm
characteristics. The recent increases in disclosure requirements, and say-on-pay legislation, are
steps in the direction of allowing shareholders to ensure the optimality of contracts, as both
give the information and ability to decide whether a given pay package is appropriate in a
particular context. Moreover, any policy to reform executive pay should not focus narrowly on
compensation alone, but recognize the systemic nature of the issue. Bolton, Scheinkman, and
Xiong (2006) show that giving power to short-term shareholders may lead to them deliberately
inducing myopia via short-term contracts. Thus, passing say-on-pay legislation alone may have
little e¤ect if shareholders do not have the incentives to set pay optimally. Encouraging share-
holders to take long-term stakes (potentially through capital gains tax policy) will align their
interests with long-run …rm value. In addition, encouraging large holdings will ensure they have
su¢ cient incentives to gather information on the …rm’s long-run value, rather than relying on
public information such as short-term pro…t.
     Regulatory intervention is, however, valuable if externalities exist. In Bénabou and Tirole
(2015), competition causes …rms to o¤er high incentives to screen for high-ability managers.
However, strong incentives also lead to managers focusing excessively on measurable tasks and
shirking on unmeasurable tasks, echoing Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991). Acharya and Volpin
(2010) and Dicks (2012) show that competition can lead to spillover e¤ects: if one …rm overpays
its workers (e.g. due to poor corporate governance), this will lead to other …rms optimally doing
so to remain competitive, even if they are well-governed.


5.2.    Underexplored Areas
We start with potential avenues for future empirical analysis, before turning to ideas for theoret-
ical research. There have been several high-impact empirical studies of executive compensation.
Since the debate about the e¢ ciency of pay concerns magnitudes, this is a …eld in which de-
scriptive statistics alone are illuminating, for example Jensen and Murphy’s (1990) and Hall and
Liebman’s (1998) seminal work on quantifying CEO incentives. Other studies have correlated
CEO pay with outcomes such as …rm value (e.g. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), McConnell
and Servaes (1990), and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999)). However, assigning causal-


                                                49
ity is very di¢ cult, as there are very few instruments for CEO incentives. Even the very basic
question of whether CEO incentives positively a¤ect …rm value has not yet been satisfactorily
answered. Thus, a …rst open question is to …nd good instruments for or quasi-exogenous shocks
to CEO pay, to allow identi…cation of the e¤ects of incentives. There have been a limited
number of attempts in this direction. Palia (2001) argues that CEO experience, education, and
age, and …rm volatility are instruments for executive compensation. Core and Larcker (2002)
study increases in stock ownership mandated by CEOs approaching the minimum levels set by
pre-announced guidelines. Shue and Townsend (2013) exploit the fact that options are granted
according to multi-year cycles as an instrument for option grants. Edmans, Fang, and Lewellen
(2015) and Edmans, Goncalves-Pinto, Wang, and Xu (2015) analyze the scheduled vesting of
equity resulting from grants made several years prior.
    Second, most empirical studies have been focused on public …rms in the U.S., given the
availability of the ExecuComp dataset. Research on compensation practices in private …rms
would be particularly useful. Since private …rms are likely closer to the optimal contracting
benchmark, due to the presence of a concentrated shareholder, such data would allow a compar-
ison with similar public …rms to assess whether pay in public …rms represents rent extraction.
For example, Cronqvist and Fahlenbrach (2013) study …rms transitioning from public to private
ownership. Additional studies investigating private …rms in general (in addition to those that
were formerly public) would be helpful. Another fruitful direction would be to study interna-
tional data and analyze the determinants of cross-country di¤erences in CEO pay. Conyon,
Core, and Guay (2011) and Fernandes, Ferreira, Matos, and Murphy (2013) are useful steps
in this direction. Moreover, while data on CEO wealth (an important determinant of both
risk aversion and the private bene…ts from shirking) is typically unavailable in the U.S., it is
sometimes available in other countries (see, e.g., Becker (2006)).
    Third, structurally estimating a dynamic moral hazard model may allow us to study ques-
tions that are di¢ cult to answer with reduced-form approaches. For example, it may allow us
to quantify several important determinants of the optimal contract that are otherwise di¢ cult
to measure empirically, such as the CEO’s risk aversion, cost of e¤ort, ability to engage in
manipulation, and desire for consumption smoothing. Relatedly, it can permit counterfactual
analyses such as the e¤ect on …rm value of changes in these parameters, or how the possibility
of myopia or short-termism changes the contract. In addition, formal joint tests of a theory’s
quantitative predictions can highlight where the theory fails, thus opening doors to future re-
search. As examples of structural approaches, Gayle and Miller (2009) study the extent to
which moral hazard can explain the rise in CEO pay. Margiotta and Miller (2000), who …nd
that …rms would su¤er large losses from not contracting optimally and also estimate the gains
that would arise in a …rst-best world where e¤ort were observable. In addition, managers only
require a small risk premium for the risk imposed by incentives – the bene…ts of incentives
substantially outweigh the costs. Gayle and Miller (2015) show that moral hazard models
in which managers can manipulate accounting reports better explain observed contracts than


                                              50
ones in which they cannot, and Gayle, Golan, and Miller (2015) decompose the sources of pay
di¤erences between large and small …rms. Page (2011) quantitatively estimates the e¤ect of
increasing CEO ownership on …rm value. Using a learning model, Taylor (2010) estimates the
cost of …ring that would rationalize observed turnover rates; a similar approach may uncover
whether …ring rates are optimal from a moral hazard perspective. Similarly, while existing tests
of the rent extraction vs. optimal contracting hypotheses typically study the cross-section, an
analysis of time-series dynamics would allow us to study whether the evolution of pay over time
is consistent with optimal contracting.
    We now move to open theoretical questions. First, most current market equilibrium models
are static. It would be useful to add a dynamic moral hazard problem where incentives can
be provided not only through contracts, but also by the threat of …ring.29 This will also
allow us to understand what causes CEOs to move between …rms. Moreover, the possibility of
turnover adds complications to a standard dynamic model of moral hazard. The classic models
of Lambert (1983) and Rogerson (1985) predict that the reduction in CEO pay caused by poor
performance should be spread out over all future periods, to optimize risk sharing. However, the
CEO may quit if future expected pay is low, reducing consumption smoothing possibilities.30
    Second, while the “rent extraction” view has been in‡uential, these arguments have been
mainly stated verbally, e.g. Bebchuk and Fried (2004). It would be particularly useful to model
the rent extraction view and compare its predictions to the data. One example is Kuhnen and
Zwiebel (2009), where the manager has freedom to extract perks, but doing so reduces pro…ts
and thus shareholders’assessment of the manager’s ability, which may lead to him being …red.
The model predicts that perk consumption is increasing in production uncertainty (since it is
easier to disguise low pro…ts as resulting from a negative shock) and the manager’s outside
option (since …ring is less of a concern). It is decreasing in uncertainty about the manager’s
ability, as then pro…ts have a greater e¤ect on shareholders’assessment of his ability and thus
their …ring decision. They …nd qualitative support for these predictions, measuring hidden
pay with stock options, restricted stock, and annual pay not declared as salary and bonus. A
further potential avenue in this line of research would be a rent extraction model that generates
quantitative predictions, and allows for a horse-race between the two viewpoints.
    Third, existing models of CEO pay are single-agent models, but CEOs work in teams where
complementarities between agents exist. As a result, their contracts a¤ect …rm value not only
directly through a¤ecting the CEO’s e¤ort, but also indirectly because the CEO’s e¤ort level
a¤ects the optimal e¤ort level set chosen by workers. This consideration in turn a¤ects the
optimal contract for the CEO. Separately, a team setting allows the study of the relative wages
of the CEO and other employees, a question that has been of interest to regulators. Edmans,
Goldstein, and Zhu (2013) analyze these issues within a CEO setting; Chen and Yoo (2001),
  29
     See Eisfeldt and Kuhnen (2013) for a market equilibrium model with CEO turnover without moral hazard.
  30
     The dynamic moral hazard models of DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007), and
Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (2007) assume risk-neutrality, and so consumption smoothing is a non-issue.



                                                      51
Kremer (1993), Winter (2004, 2006, 2010), and Gervais and Goldstein (2007) are analyses of
contracting under production complementarities in general principal-agent settings.
    Fourth, there has been substantial theoretical progress on continuous-time agency models
which allow for the contracting problem to be solved with few assumptions. However, the
empirical predictions of such models are typically less clear, given the absence of analytical
solutions, and because numerical solutions depend on the parameters chosen. Future research
may be able to identify clearer implications of these models, in particular comparative statics
on how incentives and turnover-performance sensitivity should di¤er across …rms.
    Fifth, with few exceptions, existing executive compensation models are rational. Incorpo-
rating behavioral considerations has been successful in other …elds of corporate …nance (see the
survey of Baker and Wurgler (2012)) and could be similarly fruitful here. Baker and Wurgler
(2012) divide the behavioral corporate …nance literature into two …elds – managers who are
irrational or have non-standard utility functions, and rational managers exploiting ine¢ cient
markets. As an example of the former, Dittmann, Maug, and Spalt (2010) show that incorpo-
rating loss aversion can explain the observed mix of stock and options, which standard utility
functions cannot. As an example of the latter, Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006) show
that contracts that emphasize short-term performance may be a rational response to speculative
markets. Other potential behavioral phenomena that could be incorporated into compensation
models include bounded rationality, overcon…dence (overweighting private signals and under-
weighting public signals), and optimism (overestimating one’s own managerial ability or …rm
quality).
    Finally, turning to a question for both theoretical and empirical research, we now have quan-
titative theories for the level of pay and “demand” side, given the supply of talent. However,
we know relatively little on the “supply”side. Given the substantial pay premium that top ex-
ecutives command over other skilled professions (e.g. medicine or law), it would be interesting
to study empirically the extent to which this premium results from limited supply, and if so,
explore theoretically why supply appears to remain so limited –why more people do not enter
the business profession. A related topic is to understand better the nature of the scarcity of
CEO talent, e.g. whether it stems from innate skills, experience, lack of succession planning,
and so on.31


6.        Conclusion
This article has presented a number of optimal contracting models of executive compensation
under a unifying framework. We commenced with assignment models of the CEO labor market.
More talented managers are matched with larger …rms, since their talent is scalable. Their talent
also allows them to command higher wages, leading to quantitative predictions for the cross-
  31
       For the supply of skills of general workers, see Goldin and Katz (2011).



                                                        52
sectional relationship between pay and …rm size. Since the dollar bene…ts of talent are greater
in larger …rms, the model also implies that pay should rise over time as average …rm size grows.
    We then moved to static moral hazard models, and showed that the correct empirical mea-
sure of incentives depends on whether we believe e¤ort has additive or multiplicative e¤ects on
…rm value and CEO utility. Moreover, if the e¤ect of e¤ort scales with …rm size, dollar-dollar
incentives should optimally be weaker in smaller …rms. If e¤ort is continuous and the optimal
e¤ort level is interior and endogenous, as in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987), incentives should
be increasing in the bene…ts of e¤ort and decreasing in risk, risk aversion, and the cost of ef-
fort. In contrast, if e¤ort is binary, or continuous and the principal wishes to implement full
productive e¢ ciency, risk and risk aversion do not a¤ect incentives but increase the level of
pay. The rarity of relative performance evaluation appears to contradict the Holmstrom (1979)
informativeness principle, but we discussed potential rationalizations of this practice. If the
principal aims to induce risk-taking as well as e¤ort from the CEO, the contract should be con-
vex and generally contain options, in contrast to the linear contracts advocated by Holmstrom
and Milgrom (1987).
    We …nally discussed dynamic moral hazard models. To achieve optimal risk-sharing, the
reward for good performance should be smoothed over future periods. As the CEO approaches
retirement, since there are fewer periods over which to engage in smoothing, the sensitivity of
current pay to performance should rise. If the CEO can engage in private saving, his wage
pro…le is typically backward-loaded, to remove such saving incentives.
    While each model has di¤erent features and tackles di¤erent questions, we highlight two
common themes. First, the modeling assumptions (e.g. whether preferences or production
functions are additive or multiplicative, whether actions are continuous or discrete, and whether
private saving is possible) can have signi…cant impact on the model’s predictions. Second, we
emphasize the empirical predictions of the models and compared them to the data. In particular,
observed practices that are often interpreted as evidence of rent extraction are also qualitatively,
and sometimes quantitatively, consistent with optimal contracting. However, consistency with
observed correlations does not prove that real-life practices are optimal; instead, it merely
emphasizes caution before attempting to intervene by regulation. Whether observed contracts
result from e¢ ciency or rent extraction is still an open question, and we highlight other potential
avenues for future research. We look forward to seeing this literature continue to evolve.




                                                53
   References

    Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2012. “What Does Human Capital Do? A Review
of Goldin and Katz’s The Race between Education and Technology.” Journal of Economic
Literature 50 (2): 426–463.
    Acharya, Viral V., and Paolo F. Volpin. 2010. “Corporate Governance Externalities.”
Review of Finance 14 (1): 1–33.
    Acharya, Viral V., Kose John, and Rangarajan K. Sundaram. 2000. “On the Optimality of
Resetting Executive Stock Options.”Journal of Financial Economics 57 (1): 65–101.
    Aggarwal, Rajesh K. and Andrew A. Samwick. 1999. “The Other Side of the Trade-o¤: The
Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy 107 (1): 65–105.
    Almazan, Andres, and Javier Suarez. 2003. “Entrenchment and Severance Pay in Optimal
Governance Structures.”Journal of Finance 58 (2): 519–548
    Anantharaman, Divya, Vivian W. Fang, and Guojin Gong. 2014. “Inside Debt and the
Design of Corporate Debt Contracts.”Management Science 60 (5): 1260–1280.
    Arnott, Richard, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1988. “Randomization with Asymmetric Informa-
tion.”RAND Journal of Economics 19 (3): 344–362.
    Axtell, Robert L. 2001. “Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes.” Science 293 (5536): 1818–
1820.
    Baker, George P., Michael C. Jensen and Kevin J. Murphy. 1988. “Compensation and
Incentives: Practice vs. Theory.”Journal of Finance 43 (3): 593–616.
    Baker, George P. 1992. “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement.” Journal of
Political Economy 100 (3): 598–614.
    Baker, Malcolm and Je¤rey Wurgler, “Behavioral Corporate Finance: An Updated Survey.”
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Vol. 2. New York and Oxford: Elsevier/North-Holland:
357–424.
    Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley T. Heim (2012): “Jobs and Income Growth of Top
Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality: Evidence From U.S. Tax Return Data.”
Williams College Working Paper.
    Baranchuk, Nina, Glenn MacDonald, and Jun Yang (2011): “The Economics of Super
Managers.”Review of Financial Studies 24 (10): 3321–3368.
    Bebchuk, Lucian A., K. J. Martijn Cremers, and Urs Peyer. 2011. “The CEO Pay Slice.”
Journal of Financial Economics 102 (1): 199–221.
    Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. Fried. 2004. Pay Without Performance: The Unful…lled
Promise of Executive Compensation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
    Becker, Bo. 2006. “Wealth and Executive Compensation.” Journal of Finance 61 (1):
379–397.
    Benmelech, Efraim, Eugene Kandel, and Pietro Veronesi. 2010. “Stock-Based Compensa-
tion and CEO (Dis)Incentives.”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4): 1769–1820.


                                            54
   Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2015. “Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, Screening, and
Multitasking.”Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
   Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2010. “Do CEOs
Matter?”Copenhagen Business School Working Paper.
   Bereskin, Frederick and David C. Cicero. 2013. “CEO Compensation Contagion: Evidence
from an Exogenous Shock.”Journal of Financial Economics 107 (2): 477–493.
   Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck?
The Ones Without Principals Are.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3): 901–932.
   Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and Stephane Villeneuve. 2010.
“Large Risks, Limited Liability, and Dynamic Moral Hazard.”Econometrica 78 (1): 73–118.
   Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Guillaume Plantin, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2007. “Dy-
namic Security Design: Convergence to Continuous Time and Asset Pricing Implications.”
Review of Economic Studies 74 (2): 345–390.
   Bolton, Patrick, and Mathias Dewatripont. 2005. Contract Theory (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).
   Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman and Wei Xiong. 2006. “Executive Compensation and
Short-termist Behaviour in Speculative Markets.” Review of Economic Studies 73 (3): 577–
610.
   Boschen, John F., and Kimberly J. Smith. 1995. “You Can Pay Me Now and You Can Pay
Me Later: The Dynamic Response of Executive Compensation to Firm Performance.”Journal
of Business 68 (4): 577–608.
   Brander, James A., and Michel Poitevin. 1992. “Managerial Compensation and the Agency
Costs of Debt Finance.”Managerial and Decision Economics 13 (1): 55–64.
   Brenner, Menachem, Rangarajan K. Sundaram, and David Yermack. 2000. “Altering the
Terms of Executive Stock Options.”Journal of Financial Economics 57 (1): 103–28.
   Brisley, Neil. 2006. “Executive Stock Options: Early Exercise Provisions and Risk-Taking
Incentives.”Journal of Finance 61 (5): 2487–2509.
   Bushman, Robert M., Ra¢ J. Indjejikian and Abbie Smith. 1996. “CEO Compensation:
The Role of Individual Performance Evaluation.”Journal of Accounting and Economics 21 (2):
161–193.
   Carpenter, Jennifer N. 2000. “Does Option Compensation Increase Managerial Risk Ap-
petite?”Journal of Finance 55 (5): 2311–2332.
   Carpenter, Jennifer, Richard Stanton and Nancy Wallace. 2013. “The Importance of Be-
havioral Factors in the Exercise and Valuation of Employee Stock Options,”, Working Paper.
   Carroll, Gabriel. 2012. “When Are Local Incentive Constraints Su¢ cient?” Econometrica
80 (2): 661–686.
   Cassell, Cory A., Shawn X. Huang, Juan Manuel Sanchez, and Michael D. Stuart. 2012.
“Seeking Safety: The Relation Between CEO Inside Debt Holdings and the Riskiness of Firm
Investment and Financial Policies.” Journal of Financial Economics 103 (3): 588–610.


                                            55
    Chaigneau, Pierre, Alex Edmans, and Daniel Gottlieb. 2015a. “The Value of Informativenss
for Contracting.”HEC Montreal Working Paper
    Chaigneau, Pierre, Alex Edmans, and Daniel Gottlieb. 2015b. “The Informativeness Prin-
ciple Under Limited Liability.”HEC Montreal Working Paper
    Che, Yeon-Koo, and Seung-Weon Yoo. 2001. “Optimal Incentives for Teams.” American
Economic Review 91(3): 525–541.
    Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong and José A. Scheinkman. 2015. “Yesterday’s Heroes:
Compensation and Risk at Financial Firms.”Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
    Coles, Je¤rey L., Naveen D. Daniel and Lalitha Naveen. 2006. “Managerial Incentives and
Risk-Taking.”Journal of Financial Economics 79 (2): 431–468.
    Conyon, Martin J., and Kevin J. Murphy. 2000. “The Prince and the Pauper? CEO Pay
in the United States and United Kingdom.”Economic Journal 110 (467): F640–F671.
    Conyon, Martin J., John E. Core and Wayne R, Guay. 2011. “Are U.S. CEOs Paid More
than UK CEOs? Inferences from Risk-Adjusted Pay.” Review of Financial Studies 24 (2):
402–38.
    Cooley, Thomas F., and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. “Economic Growth and Business Cy-
cles”in Thomas Cooley (ed.), Frontiers in Business Cycle Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
    Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay. 1999. “The Use of Equity Grants to Manage Optimal
Equity Incentive Levels.”Journal of Accounting and Economics 28 (2): 151–184.
    Core, John E., and David F. Larcker. 2002. “Performance Consequences of Mandatory
Increases in Executive Stock Ownership.”Journal of Financial Economics 64 (3): 317–340.
    Core, John E., Wayne R. Guay, and David F. Larcker. 2003. “Executive Equity Compen-
sation and Incentives: A Survey.”Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review
9 (1): 27–50.
    Cornelli, Francesca, Zbigniew Kominek, and Alexander Ljungqvist. 2013. “Monitoring
Managers: Does It Matter?”Journal of Finance 68 (2): 431–481.
    Coughlan, Anne T. and Ronald M. Schmidt. 1985. “Executive Compensation, Manage-
ment Turnover and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Accounting
and Economics 7 (1): 43–66.
    Cremers, K. J. Martijn, and Yaniv Grinstein. 2015. “Does the Market for CEO Talent
Explain Controversial CEO Pay Practices?”Review of Finance, forthcoming.
    Cronqvist, Henrik, and Rüdiger Fahlenbrach. 2013. “CEO Contract Design: How Do Strong
Principals Do It?”Journal of Financial Economics 108 (3): 659–74.
    DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman. 2007. “Agency and Optimal Investment
Dynamics.”Review of Financial Studies 20 (1): 151–188.
    DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2006. “Optimal Security Design and Dynamic
Capital Structure in a Continuous-Time Agency Model.”Journal of Finance 61 (6): 2681–2724.
    Demsetz, Harold, and Kenneth Lehn. 1985. “The Structure of Corporate Ownership:


                                            56
Causes and Consequences.”Journal of Political Economy 93 (6): 1155–1177.
    Dicks, David. 2012. “Executive Compensation and the Role for Corporate Governance
Regulation.”Review of Financial Studies 25 (6): 1971–2004.
    Dittmann, Ingolf, and Ernst Maug. 2007. “Lower Salaries and No Options? On the Optimal
Structure of Executive Pay.”Journal of Finance 62 (1): 303–343.
    Dittmann, Ingolf, Ernst Maug, and Oliver Spalt. 2010. “Sticks or Carrots? Optimal CEO
Compensation When Managers Are Loss-Averse.” Journal of Finance 65 (6): 2015–2050.
    Dittmann, Ingolf, Ernst Maug and Oliver Spalt. 2013. “Indexing Executive Compensation
Contracts.”Review of Financial Studies 26 (12), 3182–3224.
    Dittmann, Ingolf, and Ko-Chia Yu. 2011. “How Important Are Risk-Taking Incentives in
Executive Compensation?”Erasmus University Rotterdam Working Paper.
    Edmans, Alex, Vivian W. Fang, and Katharina A. Lewellen. 2015. “Equity Vesting and
Managerial Myopia.”London Business School Working Paper.
    Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix. 2009. “Is CEO Pay Really Ine¢ cient? A Survey of New
Optimal Contracting Theories.”European Financial Management 15 (3), 486–496.
    Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix. 2011a. “The E¤ect of Risk on the CEO Market.”Review
of Financial Studies 24 (8): 2822–2863.
    Edmans, Alex, and Xavier Gabaix. 2011b. “Tractability in Incentive Contracting.”Review
of Financial Studies 24 (9): 2865–2894.
    Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, and Augustin Landier. 2009. “A Multiplicative Model of
Optimal CEO Incentives in Market Equilibrium.” Review of Financial Studies 22 (12):4881–
4917.
    Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, Tomasz Sadzik, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2012. “Dynamic CEO
Compensation.”Journal of Finance 67 (5), 1603–1647.
    Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and John Y. Zhu. 2013. “Contracting With Synergies.”
London Business School Working Paper.
    Edmans, Alex, Luis Goncalves-Pinto, Yanbo Wang, and Moqi Xu. 2015. “Strategic News
Releases in Equity Vesting Months.”London Business School Working Paper.
    Edmans, Alex and Qi Liu. 2010. “Inside Debt.”Review of Finance 15 (1): 75–102.
    Eisfeldt, Andrea, and Camelia M. Kuhnen. 2013. “CEO Turnover in a Competitive Assign-
ment Framework.” Journal of Financial Economics 109 (2): 351–372.
    Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2012. “Capital Taxation: Quantitative Explorations
of the Inverse Euler Equation.”Journal of Political Economy 102 (3), 398–445.
    Fernandes, Nuno, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Kevin J. Murphy. 2013. “Are U.S.
CEOs Paid More? New International Evidence.”Review of Financial Studies 26 (2): 323–67.
    Frydman, Carola, and Raven Saks. 2010. “Executive Compensation: A New View From a
Long-Term Perspective, 1936-2005.”Review of Financial Studies 23, 2099–2138.
    Frydman, Carola, and Dirk Jenter. 2010. “CEO Compensation.”Annual Review of Finan-
cial Economics 2: 75–102.


                                           57
    Frydman, Carola. 2007. “Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for
Corporate Executives, 1936-2003.”Boston University Working Paper.
    Gabaix, Xavier, and Augustin Landier. 2008. “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 49–100.
    Gabaix, Xavier, Augustin Landier, and Julien Sauvagnat. 2014. “CEO Pay and Firm Size:
An Update After the Crisis.”The Economic Journal 124 (574): F40–F59
    Garen, John E. 1994. “Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory.” Journal of
Political Economy 102 (6): 1175–1199.
    Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2006. “Organization and Inequality in a
Knowledge Economy.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (4): 1383–1435.
    Garrett, Daniel, and Alessandro Pavan. 2012. “Managerial Turnover in a Changing World.”
Journal of Political Economy 102 (5): 879–925.
    Garrett, Daniel, and Alessandro Pavan. 2015. “Dynamic Managerial Compensation: On
the Optimality of Seniority-Based Schemes.”Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.
    Gayle, George-Levi and Robert A. Miller. 2009. “Has Moral Hazard Become a More
Important Factor in Managerial Compensation?”American Economic Review 99 (5): 1740–69.
    Gayle, George-Levi and Robert A. Miller. 2015. “Identifying and Testing Models of Man-
agerial Compensation.”Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
    Gayle, George-Levi, Limor Golam, and Robert A. Miller. 2015. “Promotion, Turnover, and
Compensation in the Executive Labor Market.”Econometrica, forthcoming.
    Gervais, Simon, and Itay Goldstein. 2007. “The Positive E¤ects of Biased Self-Perceptions
in Firms.”Review of Finance 11 (3): 453–496.
    Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1992. “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence
of Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence.”Journal of Political Economy 100 (3): 468–505.
    Gjesdal, Frøystein. 1982. “Information and Incentives: The Agency Information Problem.”
Review of Economic Studies 49 (3): 373–390.
    Goldin, Claudia Dale, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2009. The Race Between Education and
Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
    Goldman, Eitan, and Steve Slezak. 2006. “An Equilibrium Model of Incentive Contracts in
the Presence of Information Manipulation.”Journal of Financial Economics 80 (3): 603–26.
    Gong, Guojin, Laura Yue Li, and Jae Yong Shin. 2011. “Relative Performance Evaluation
and Related Peer Groups in Executive Compensation Contracts.” The Accounting Review 86
(3): 1007–1043.
    Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd Milbourn and Fenghua Song. 2010. “Strategic Flexibility
and the Optimality of Pay for Sector Performance.”Review of Financial Studies 23(5): 2060–98.
    Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Todd Milbourn, Fenghua Song, and Anjan V. Thakor. 2014.
“Duration of Executive Compensation.”Journal of Finance 69 (6): 2777–2817.
    Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1983. “An Analysis of the Principal-Agent
Problem.”Econometrica 51 (1): 7–45


                                             58
    Hall, Brian J., and Je¤rey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 653–691.
    Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy. 2000. “Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive Stock
Options.”American Economic Review 90 (2): 209–214.
    Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy. 2002. “Stock Options for Undiversi…ed Executives.”
Journal of Accounting and Economics 33 (1): 3–42.
    Hall, Brian J., and Thomas A. Knox. 2004. “Underwater Options and the Dynamics of
Executive Pay-to-Performance Sensitivities.”Journal of Accounting Research 42 (2): 365–412.
    Harris, Milton, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1982. “A Theory of Wage Dynamics.” Review of
Economic Studies 49 (3): 315–333.
    Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv. 1979. “Optimal Incentive Contracts with Imperfect
Information.”Journal of Economic Theory 20 (2): 231–259.
    He, Zhiguo. 2012. “Dynamic Compensation Contracts with Private Savings.” Review of
Financial Studies 25 (5): 1494–1549.
    Hellwig, Martin, and Klaus Schmidt. 2002. “Discrete-Time Approximations of the Holmstrom-
Milgrom Brownian-Motion Model of Intertemporal Incentive Provision.”Econometrica 70 (6):
2225–2264.
    Hermalin, Benjamin E. 2005. “Trends in Corporate Governance.” Journal of Finance 60
(5): 2351–2384.
    Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach. 1998. “Endogenously Chosen Boards of
Directors and Their Monitoring of the CEO.”American Economic Review 88 (1): 96–118.
    Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach. 2012. “Information Disclosure and
Corporate Governance.”Journal of Finance 67 (1): 195–233.
    Himmelberg, Charles, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia. 1999. “Understanding the
Determinants of Managerial Ownership and the Link Between Ownership and Performance.”
Journal of Financial Economics 53 (3): 353–84.
    Holmstrom, Bengt. 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics
10 (1): 74–91.
    Holmstrom, Bengt. 1999. “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective.” Re-
view of Economic Studies 66 (1): 169–181.
    Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. 1987. “Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision
of Intertemporal Incentives.”Econometrica 55 (2): 308–28.
    Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1997. “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 663–691.
    Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Mueller. 2010. “CEO Replacement Under Private Informa-
tion.”Review of Financial Studies 23 (8): 2935-2969.
    Innes, Robert D. 1990. “Limited Liability and Incentive Contracting with Ex-Ante Action
Choices.”Journal of Economic Theory 52 (1): 45–67.



                                            59
    Ittner, Christopher D., David F. Larcker, and Madhav V. Rajan. 1997. “The Choice of
Performance Measures in Annual Bonus Contracts.”The Accounting Review 72 (2): 231–255.
    Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behav-
ior, Agency Costs, and Capital Structure.”Journal of Financial Economics 3 (4): 305–360.
    Jensen, Michael C., and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Performance Pay and Top-Management
Incentives.”Journal of Political Economy 98 (2): 225–64.
    Jensen, Michael C., and Kevin J. Murphy. 2004. “Remuneration: Where We’ve Been, How
We Got to Here, What are the Problems, and How to Fix Them.”Harvard University Working
Paper.
    Jenter, Dirk and Fadi Kanaan. 2015. “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance Evalua-
tion.”Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
    Jenter, Dirk and Katharina A. Lewellen. 2014. “Performance-Induced CEO Turnover.”
Stanford University Working Paper.
    Jewitt, Ian. 1988. “Justifying the First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems.”
Econometrica 56 (5): 1177–1190.
    Jin, Li. 2002. “CEO Compensation, Diversi…cation, and Incentives.” Journal of Financial
Economics 66 (1): 29–63.
    Johnson, Shane, Harley E. Ryan and Yisong Tian. 2009. “Managerial Incentives and
Corporate Fraud: The Sources of Incentives Matter.”Review of Finance 13 (1): 115–145.
    Joskow, Paul, John R. Meyer, Nancy Rose, Andrea Shepard, and Sam Peltzman. 1993.
“Regulatory Constraints on CEO Compensation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics 1993 (1): 1–72.
    Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.” Journal of Political
Economy 87 (5): 972–90.
    Kaplan, Steven N. 2012. “Executive Compensation and Corporate Governance in the U.S.:
Perceptions, Facts, and Challenges.”Cato Papers on Public Policy 2, 99–157.
    Kaplan, Steven N., and Bernadette Minton. 2011. “How Has CEO Turnover Changed?”
International Review of Finance 12 (1): 57-87.
    Kaplan, Steven N., and Joshua Rauh. 2010. “Wall Street and Main Street: What Con-
tributes to the Rise in the Highest Incomes?”Review of Financial Studies 23 (3): 1004–1050.
    Kostuik, Peter F. 1990. “Firm Size and Executive Compensation.” Journal of Human
Resources 25 (1): 90–105.
    Kremer, Michael. 1993. “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development.”Quarterly Journal
of Economics 108 (3): 551–575.
    Kuhnen, Camelia M. and Je¤rey Zwiebel. 2009. “Executive Pay, Hidden Compensation,
and Managerial Entrenchment.”University of North Carolina Working Paper.
    Lacker, Je¤rey, and John Weinberg. 1989. “Optimal Contracts Under Costly State Falsi…-
cation.”Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1345–1363.



                                            60
    Lambert, Richard. 1983. “Long-Term Contracts and Moral Hazard.” Bell Journal of Eco-
nomics 14 (2): 441–452.
    Lambert, Richard A., and David F. Larcker. 1987. “An Analysis of the Use of Account-
ing and Market Measures of Performance in Executive Compensation Contracts.” Journal of
Accounting Research 25: 85–125.
    Lambert, Richard A., David F. Larcker, and Robert Verrecchia. 1991. “Portfolio Consider-
ations in Valuing Executive Compensation.”Journal of Accounting Research 29 (1): 129–149.
    Laux, Volker. 2012. “Stock Option Vesting Conditions, CEO Turnover, and Myopic Invest-
ment.”Journal of Financial Economics 106 (3): 513–526.
    Lazear, Edward P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political
Economy 87 (6): 1261–1284.
    Lie, Erik. 2005. “On the Timing of CEO Stock Option Awards.” Management Science 51
(5): 802–812.
    Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” Bell Journal of
Economics 9 (2): 508–523.
    Manso, Gustavo. 2011. “Motivating Innovation.”Journal of Finance 66 (5): 1823–1860.
    Margiotta, Mary M., and Robert A. Miller. 2000. “Managerial Compensation and the Cost
of Moral Hazard.”International Economic Review 41 (3): 669–719.
    McConnell, John J., and Henri Servaes. 1990. “Additional Evidence on Equity Ownership
and Corporate Value.”Journal of Financial Economics 27 (2): 595–612.
    Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny. 1988. “Management Ownership
and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Financial Economics 20 (1-2):
293–315.
    Murphy, Kevin J. 1985. “Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An Em-
pirical Analysis.”Journal of Accounting and Economics 7 (1): 11–42.
    Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. Executive Compensation, in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card
(eds.). Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3b. New York and Oxford: Elsevier/North-Holland:
2485–2563.
    Murphy, Kevin J. 2013. “Executive Compensation: Where We Are, and How We Got There”
in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz (eds.). Handbook of the Economics of
Finance. Elsevier/North-Holland.
    Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik. 2006. “Managerial Capital and the Market for CEOs.”
Working Paper, University of Southern California.
    Nagel, Gregory L. 2010. “The E¤ect of Labor Market Demand on U.S. CEO Pay Since
1980.”Financial Review 45 (4): 931–950.
    Oyer, Paul. 2004. “Why Do Firms Use Incentives That Have No Incentive E¤ects?”Journal
of Finance 59 (4): 1619–1650.
    Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2005. “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All Em-
ployees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories.”Journal of Financial Economics


                                             61
76 (1): 99–133.
    Page, Beau. 2011. “CEO Ownership and Firm Value: Evidence From a Structural Estima-
tion.”Working Paper, University of Houston.
    Palia, Darius. 2001. “The Endogeneity of Managerial Compensation in Firm Valuation: A
Solution.”Review of Financial Studies 14 (3): 735–764.
    Peng, Lin, and Ailsa Roell. 2008. “Manipulation and Equity-Based Compensation.”Amer-
ican Economic Review 98 (2): 285–290.
    Peng, Lin, and Ailsa Roell. 2014. “Managerial Incentives and Stock Price Manipulation.”
Journal of Finance 69 (2): 487–526.
    Peters, Florian S., and Alexander F. Wagner. 2014. “The Executive Turnover Risk Pre-
mium.”Journal of Finance 69 (4): 1529–1563.
    Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st century, Harvard University Press.
    Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 1-39
    Prendergast, Canice. 1999. “The Provision of Incentives in Firms.” Journal of Economic
Literature 37 (1): 7–63.
    Prendergast, Canice. 2002. “The Tenuous Trade-o¤ Between Risk and Incentives.”Journal
of Political Economy 110 (5): 1071–1102.
    Rogerson, William P. 1985. “The First Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems.”
Econometrica 53 (6): 1357–1368
    Rose, Nancy, and Andrea Shepard. 1997. “Firm Diversi…cation and CEO Compensation:
Managerial Ability or Executive Entrenchment?”RAND Journal of Economics 28 (3): 489–514.
    Rosen, Sherwin. 1992. “Contracts and the Market for Executives,”in Lars Werin and Hans
Wijkander, eds., Contract Economics. Cambridge, MA and Oxford: Blackwell, 181–211.
    Ross, Stephen A. 2004. “Compensation, Incentives, and the Duality of Risk Aversion and
Riskiness.”Journal of Finance 59 (1): 207–225.
    Sannikov, Yuliy. 2008. “A Continuous-Time Version of the Principal-Agent Problem.”
Review of Economic Studies 75 (3): 957–984.
    Sappington, David. 1983. “Limited Liability Contracts Between Principal and Agent.”
Journal of Economic Theory 29 (1): 1–21.
    Sattinger, Michael. 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings.”Journal of
Economic Literature 31 (2): 831–880.
    Shue, Kelly, and Richard Townsend. 2013. “Swinging for the Fences: Executive Reactions
to Quasi-Random Option Grants.”University of Chicago Working Paper.
    Shue, Kelly, and Richard Townsend. 2015. “Growth through Rigidity: An Explanation of
the Rise in CEO Pay.”University of Chicago Working Paper.
    Smith, Cli¤ord W., and Rene M. Stulz. 1985. “The Determinants of Firms’ Hedging
Policies.”Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20 (4): 391-405.



                                            62
    Stein, Jeremy C. 1988. “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia.” Journal of Political
Economy 46 (1): 61–80.
    Sundaram, Rangarajan and David L. Yermack. 2007. “Pay Me Later: Inside Debt and Its
Role in Managerial Compensation.”Journal of Finance 62 (4): 1551-1588.
    Taylor, Lucian A. 2010. “Why Are CEOs Rarely Fired? Evidence from Structural Estima-
tion.”The Journal of Finance 65 (6): 2051–2087.
    Taylor, Lucian A. 2013. “CEO Wage Dynamics: Estimates from a Learning Model.”Journal
of Financial Economics 108 (1): 79–98.
    Terviö, Marko. 2008. “The Di¤erence that CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach.”
American Economic Review 98 (3): 642–668.
    Tirole, Jean. 2005. The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
    Tirole, Jean. 2009. “Cognition and Incomplete Contracts.”American Economic Review 99
(1): 265–294.
    Warner, Jerold B., Ross L. Watts, and Karen H. Wruck. 1988. “Stock Prices and Top
Management Changes.”Journal of Financial Economics 20 (1-2): 461–492.
    Wei, Chenyang, and David Yermack. 2011. “Investor Reactions to CEOs’ Inside Debt
Incentives.”Review of Financial Studies 24 (11): 3813–3840.
    Weisbach, Michael. 1988. “Outside Directors and CEO Turnover.” Journal of Financial
Economics 20 (1-2): 431–460.
    Winter, Eyal. 2004. “Incentives and Discrimination.” American Economic Review 94 (3):
764–773.
    Winter, Eyal. 2006. “Optimal Incentives for Sequential Production Processes.” RAND
Journal of Economics 37 (2): 376–390.
    Winter, Eyal. 2010. “Transparency and Incentives Among Peers.” RAND Journal of Eco-
nomics 41 (3): 504–523.
    Yang, Jun. 2009. “Timing of E¤ort and Reward: Three-Sided Moral Hazard in a Continuous-
Time Model.”Management Science 56 (9): 1568–1583.
    Yermack, David. 1995. “Do Corporations Award CEO Stock Options E¤ectively?”Journal
of Financial Economics 39 (2): 237–269.
    Yermack, David. 1997. “Good Timing: CEO Stock Option Awards and Company News
Announcements.”Journal of Finance 52 (2): 449–476.
    Yermack, David. 2006. “Golden Handshakes: Separation Pay for Retired and Dmismissed
CEOs.”Journal of Accounting and Economics 41 (3): 237–256.
    Zhu, John Y. 2014. “Myopic Agency.”University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.




                                            63
A.       Longer Derivations
A.1.     Proof of two core results on dynamic incentives
   Heuristic proof of the Martingal representation theorem (69)                   We show two
proofs –one rigorous, one heuristic that shows the economic origin of the result.
   Heuristic proof. We reason by keeping the dt terms, dropping the O (dt2 ) terms.
                                   Z      1
                                                       (s t)
                      U t = Et                 e               Ks ds
                                      t
                                   Z      t+dt                                                 Z       1
                                                         (s t)                                                     (s t)
                          = Et                     e             Ks ds + Et                                    e               Ks ds
                                      t                                                            t+dt
                                                                                               Z    1
                                                                     dt                                            (s (t+dt))
                          = Kt dt + o (dt) + e                            Et Et+dt                         e                          Ks ds
                                                                                                t+dt
                                                                     dt
                          = Kt dt + o (dt) + e                            Et Ut+dt
                          = Kt dt + o (dt) + (1                               dt) (Ut + Et dUt ) + o (dt)
                          = Ut + (Kt                    Ut ) dt + Et [dUt ] + o (dt)

Hence,
                                                   0 = (Kt                    Ut ) dt + Et [dUt ]                                                        (77)

    As dUt Et [dUt ] has mean 0, and the only source of randomness is dZt ,it makes sense that
it can be written
                                   dUt Et [dUt ] = t dZt                                  (78)

for some adapted process t . Combining this with (77), we obtain (69).
    Rigorous proof. The following proof (after Sannikov 2008) is more rigorous, but a bit less
explicit about the origins of the result. De…ne
                                                                          Z       1
                                                                                          s
                                                         V1 :=                        e       Ks ds
                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                   t
and Vt = Et [V1 ]. Then, Vt is a martingale. That implies that we can write dVt =                                                             te       dZt for
                                            Rt
some adapted process t . Hence, Vt = V0 + 0 s e s dZs . On the other hand,
                                                           Z     t                                     Z       1
                                                                              s                                            s
                               Vt = Et [V1 ] =    e Ks ds + Et                                                     e           Ks ds
                                                0                                                          t
                                    Z t
                                  =     e s Ks ds + e t Ut
                                          0

             R1       (s t)
as Ut = Et   t
                  e           Ks ds. Di¤erentiating w.r.t. t, we obtain:

                                                   t                      t                        t                            t
                              dVt =       te           dZt = e                Kt dt + e                dUt             e            Ut dt


                                                                                  64
hence
                                    dUt = ( Ut              Kt ) dt + t dZt :




   Heuristic proof of the Hamilton-Jacobi Bellman (“HJB”) equation (70). The
result is standard, but here we provide a heuristic proof. We …rst ignore the maximization over
C. We have, as in (77),
                               0 = (f (xt ; Ct ) Qt ) dc + Et [dQt ]

Now, by Ito’s lemma using Qt = Q (xt ), Et [dQt ] =dt = Q0 (xt ) (xt ; C) + 12 Q00 (xt ) 2 (xt ; C).
Hence,
                                                                 1
                0 = f (xt ; Ct )  Q (xt ) + Q0 (xt ) (xt ; Ct ) + Q00 (xt ) 2 (xt ; Ct )
                                                                 2
Next, the principal will want to maximize over C the right-hand side (i.e. maximization Q (xt )),
hence (70).



A.2.     Proof of other results
    Heuristic proof of (58)-(61) See Edmans, Gabaix, Sadzik, and Sannikov (2012) for a
rigorous proof. We present a heuristic proof in a simple case that conveys the key intuition. We
consider L = T = 2 and impose the PS constraint. We wish to show that the optimal contract
is given by
                                 r1                        r1
                 ln c1 = g 0 (a ) + 1 ; ln c2 = g 0 (a )       + r2 + 1 + k2                 (79)
                                 2                          2
for some constants 1 and k2 that make the participation constraint bind.
   Step 1: Optimal log-linear contract
   We …rst solve the problem in a restricted class where contracts are log-linear, that is,

                         ln c1 =   1 r1   +   1,   ln c2 =       21 r1   +   2 r2   +   1   + k2   (80)

for some constants 1 , 21 ; 2 , 1 ; k2 . This …rst step is not necessary but clari…es the economics,
and in more complex cases is helpful to guess the form of the optimal contract.
    First, intuitively, the optimal contract entails consumption smoothing, that is, shocks to
consumption are permanent. This observation implies 21 = 1 . To prove this, the PS constraint
(61) yields
                                         c1
                              1 = E1        = e( 1 21 )r1 E1 e 2 r2 k2 :                        (81)
                                         c2
This must hold for all r1 . Therefore,        21   =   1.




                                                            65
   Next, consider total utility U :

                          U = ln c1 + ln c2             g (a1 )          g (a2 )
                              = 2 1 r1 +    2 r2        g (a1 )             g (a2 ) + 2      1   + k2 :
                                                   h         i                                   h         i
                                                       @U                                            @U
From (55), the two EF conditions are E1                @r1
                                                                    g 0 (a ) and E2                  @r2
                                                                                                                   g 0 (a ), that is,

                                   2   1    g 0 (a ) and                2      g 0 (a ) :

Intuitively (and as can be proven), the EF constraints should bind, else the CEO is exposed to
unnecessary risk. Combining the binding version of these constraints with (80) yields (79).
   Step 2: Optimality of log-linear contracts
   We next verify that optimal contracts should be log-linear. Equation (55) yields d (ln c2 ) =dr2
 0
g (a ). The cheapest contract involves this local EF condition binding, that is,

                                       d (ln c2 ) =dr2 = g 0 (a )                    2:                                                 (82)

Integrating yields the contract
                                           ln c2 =       2 r2     + B (r1 ) ;                                                           (83)

where B (r1 ) is a function of r1 , which we will determine shortly. It is the integration “constant”
of equation (82) viewed from time 2.
    We next apply the PS constraint (61) for t = 1:

                               c1      h                c1          i
                                                                                          2 r2                 B(r1 )
                     1 = E1       = E1             2 r2 +B(r1 )
                                                                         = E1 e                  c1 e                   ;               (84)
                               c2        e

Hence, we obtain
                                           ln c1 = B (r1 ) + K 0 ;                                                                      (85)

where the constant K 0 is independent of r1 . (In this proof, K 0 , K 00 and K 000 are constants
independent of r1 and r2 .) Total utility is

                      U = ln c1 + ln c2 + K 00 =                 2 r2   + 2B(r1 ) + 2K 0 + K 00 :                                       (86)

    We next apply (55) to (86) to yield 2B 0 (r1 ) g 0 (a ) : Again, the cheapest contract involves
this condition binding, that is, 2B 0 (r1 ) = g 0 (a ) : Integrating yields
                                                                        r1
                                        B (r1 ) = g 0 (a )                 + K 000 :                                                    (87)
                                                                        2
Combining (87) with (85) yields: ln c1 = g 0 (a ) r21 +                        1,   for another constant                     1.   Combining



                                                             66
(87) with (83) yields:
                                                                   r1
                                       ln c2 = g 0 (a )               + r2 +              1    + k2 ;
                                                                   2
for some constant k2 .

   Comparative statics for …xed pay . We have

                           @
                                = K (3b4 S 4              b2 gwS 2               2
                                                                                       2S + 2g 2                2
                                                                                                                    S);
                           @

where
                                                                  b2 2 S 2
                                                 K =                                       :
                                                            2 (b2 S 2 + g             2 )3

         @
Hence,    @
               > 0 if and only if

                                     3b4 S 4 + 2b2 gS 3 + 2g 2               2
                                                                                 S > b2 gS 2            2
                                                                                                            :

   Further, we have

                            @
                                 = K (3b4 S 4               b2 gS 2          2
                                                                                      2S + 2g 2                 2
                                                                                                                    S);
                            @
where
                                                                   b2 S 2
                                                  K =                          :
                                                              (b2 S 2 + g 2 )3
         @
Hence,   @
               > 0 if and only if

                                     3b4 S 4 + 2b2 gS 3 + 2g 2               2
                                                                                 S > b2 gS 2            2
                                                                                                            :

   We have
                 @
                    = Kg (b6 S 6 + 3b4 g             2
                                                         S4        2b2 g 2       2
                                                                                     S2            2
                                                                                                       S + 2g 3               2 4
                                                                                                                                    S);
                 @g

where
                                                                  b2 S 2
                                                Kg =                                           :
                                                         2g 2 (b2 S 2 + g              2 )3

         @
Hence,    @g
               > 0 if and only if

                    b6 S 6 + 3b4 g      2
                                            S 4 + 2b2 g 2      2
                                                                   S 3 + 2g 3        2 4
                                                                                           S > 2b2 g 2               2
                                                                                                                         S2     2
                                                                                                                                    :




                                                                    67
B.     Further Detail on Holmstrom-Milgrom (1987)
This section provides further details on the role played by exponential utility, a pecuniary
cost of e¤ort, and Normal noise in the Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) model. In the general
objective function (10), we now assume u (x) = x so that the cost of e¤ort is non-pecuniary,
and have a general (rather than exponential) function v ( ). We assume the contract can be
rewritten c (V ) = + z (V ) where is the …xed component of the contract and z (V ) is a
possibly non-linear function; this is without loss of generality since can be zero. The agent’s
…rst-order condition becomes

                        E [v 0 ( + y (S + b (S) a + ")) y 0 (V ) b (S)] = g 0 (a) :

    The agent’s reservation utility w a¤ects the …xed salary , which in turn has two e¤ects
on his e¤ort choice. First, it a¤ects his bene…t from e¤ort. A higher reduces the marginal
utility of money v 0 ( + z (V )) because the agent is risk averse. However, it does not a¤ect
the marginal cost of e¤ort, because e¤ort entails disutility rather than a …nancial expenditure.
Thus, with a linear contract, the optimal action will depend on . Second, it a¤ects the agent’s
attitude towards risk ". The noise realization a¤ects the agent’s bene…t from e¤ort since he is
risk-averse. For example, if noise turns out to be high, then the agent will be highly-paid even
with low e¤ort; thus, the bene…ts from working are lower: v 0 ( ) falls. Hence, the agent will
integrate over the possible noise realizations when making his e¤ort choice. Since also lies
in the marginal felicity function v 0 ( ), it a¤ects the agent’s attitude towards risk and thus his
e¤ort choice.
    To remove the …rst e¤ect, HM assume a pecuniary cost of e¤ort, which corresponds to
v (c) = c and a general u ( ) in the objective function (10). Thus, the …rst-order condition
becomes
                     E [u0 ( + z (S + b (S) a + ")) (z 0 (V ) b (S) g 0 (a))] = 0:

   Now, the marginal bene…t of e¤ort z 0 (V ) b (S) and the marginal cost of e¤ort g 0 (a) are on
the same footing: both lie inside the …nal term in parentheses. A high …xed wage reduces the
bene…t of e¤ort, but also the cost of e¤ort because this cost is in …nancial terms. However, still
a¤ects the attitude to risk since it is inside the u0 ( ) term. Thus, to remove this second e¤ect,
we also need exponential utility, u (x) = e x , so that the objective function (10) becomes

                                   ( +z(V ) g(a))                    (z(V ) g(a))
                          E    e                    =e      E    e

with …rst-order condition

                        (z(S+b(S)a+") g(a))
                E   e                         (z 0 (S + b (S) a + ") b (S)   g 0 (a)) = 0:    (88)

The …xed salary , and thus the reservation utility w, is now irrelevant. However, the contract

                                                     68
is still very di¢ cult to solve as we cannot factor out the noise ". Again, since the incentive
constraint (88) must hold only on average, there are many possible contracts that will implement
a given action a . The contract will depend critically on the distribution of noise ", which poses
important practical challenges as the noise distribution is often unknown. Only with Normal
noise are we able to calculate the expectation, since then E [e " ] = 12 2 2 .




                                               69
