NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOST IN THE CLOUDS:
THE IMPACT OF CHANGING PROPERTY RIGHTS ON INVESTMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING VENTURES
Josh Lerner
Greg Rafert
Working Paper 21140
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21140

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

Funding for this research was provided by the Computers and Communication Industry Association,
whose members can be found here, http://www.ccianet.org/index.asp?bid=11, Harvard Business School’s
Division of Research, and the Toulouse Network on Information Technology. We thank a number
of venture capital investors, seminar audiences at the National Bureau of Economic Research, the
Toulouse Network, and numerous universities, and Mark Lemley, Matt Marx, Rob Merges, Michael
Meurer, and Scott Stern, for helpful comments. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21140.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Josh Lerner and Greg Rafert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Lost in the Clouds: The Impact of Changing Property Rights on Investment in Cloud Computing
Ventures
Josh Lerner and Greg Rafert
NBER Working Paper No. 21140
May 2015
JEL No. G24,O34
ABSTRACT
Our analysis seeks to understand the impact of changing allocations of property rights on investment
in new firms. We focus on the Cartoon Network, et al. v. Cablevision decision in the U.S., which narrowed
the protection enjoyed by content creators (e.g., movie studios) and gave greater rights to downstream
technology firms, as well as decisions in France and Germany that took an opposite view. Our findings
regarding relative venture capital investment in the U.S. and Europe, across Europe, and between the
various judicial circuits of the U.S. suggest that decisions around the allocation of property rights can
have economically and statistically significant impacts on investment in innovative enterprises.

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
Greg Rafert
Analysis Group
1010 El Camino Real, Suite 310
Menlo Park, CA 94025
grafert@analysisgroup.com

1.

Introduction
The ways in which the strength and allocation of property rights can affect investment

decisions have been an enduring topic of interest (e.g., La Porta et al. [2000], Acemoglu [2003]).
The consequences of property rights are particularly critical when evaluating intellectual
property policies. An extensive theoretical literature suggests that shifts in the design of such
property right schemes—in particular, the relative protection offered to initial innovators and
those who do follow-on work—can have dramatic impacts on the rate and direction of
technological progress. For instance, if all the rewards go to the initial innovators, other firms are
unlikely to be able to access resources for follow-on innovations (e.g., Gilbert and Shapiro
[1990]; Scotchmer [2004]; Hopenhayn, et al. [2006]; and, Boldrin and Levine [2008]).
The empirical literature on the impact of changes in the nature of property rights on the
ability to finance innovation, however, remains inconclusive (see, for instance, Sakakibara and
Branstetter [2001]; Branstetter, et al. [2006]; and, Lerner [2009]). Many of the difficulties stem
from the difficulties of identifying appropriate “natural experiments.” Legislation altering
intellectual property rights is often undertaken in conjunction with other policy reforms or in
response to shifting economic circumstances. Moreover, empirical studies to date have largely
focused on the patent regime: given the long lag times between discoveries and commercial
application in many technical fields, identifying what effects may exist empirically can be
especially challenging.
The shorter time lags between the production and dissemination of creative activities and
software suggest that examining the impacts of copyright law may be more promising. From a
more practical perspective, the consequences of shifting copyright protection remains intensely

1

partisan, given the intensity of real world controversies about the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act and the proposed Stop Online Piracy Act.
This paper examines the effect of major but largely unanticipated changes in the allocation
of copyright protection on venture capital (VC) investment in cloud computing companies. In
particular, it examines the impact of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals’ decision The Cartoon
Network, et al. v. Cablevision, which was widely perceived as enhancing the property rights of
cloud computing companies relative to the content owners such as major movie studios and
publishers, a claim backed by an event study of cloud-computing firms. Meanwhile, decisions in
French and German courts took substantially narrower views of these firms’ property rights.
We focus on the impact of these decisions on VC investment because venture activity is
well documented, and has been shown to have a positive impact on growth and innovation. Thus,
while VC represents only a fraction of total investment in this industry, it is a natural setting for
understanding the impact of policy shifts.
To understand the impact of copyright protection changes on the willingness of venture
capitalists to invest in cloud computing, we employ a difference-in-difference approach,
hypothesizing that policy shifts affect investments in different geographies, sectors, and years in
varying ways. Such analyses have been widely employed in the economics literature to examine
the consequences of policy shifts.
To quantify the impact of copyright protection changes, we first analyze the effects on VC
investment in cloud computing firms of the Cablevision decision in the U.S., which narrowed the
protection enjoyed by content creators (e.g., movie studios) and gave greater rights to
downstream technology firms using this content. We anticipate that the decision eased investors’
fears about litigation entangling innovative cloud computing firms, resulting in greater

2

investments. We find that VC investment in cloud computing firms increased significantly in the
U.S. relative to the EU after the Cablevision decision, particularly in the geographies and sectors
most affected by the decision. The Cablevision decision, along with court rulings in France and
Germany, led to additional incremental investment in U.S. cloud computing firms that ranged
from $728 million to approximately $1.3 billion over the two-and-a-half years after the decision.
We then examine court rulings in France and Germany, which were perceived as moving in
the opposite direction. We look at VC investment in cloud computing firms in these countries
relative to that in other EU nations. We find that these rulings regarding the nature of copyright
protection had significant negative impacts on investment. Specifically, we find that VC
investment in cloud computing firms declined in Germany and France, relative to the rest of the
EU, after the French and German rulings.
Taken together, our findings suggest that shifts in the allocation of property rights can have
significant impacts on investment in innovative enterprises. The findings suggest that strong
upstream intellectual property rights, when combined with seeming large transaction costs that
deterred licensing, may block investment in innovative downstream technologies. At the same
time, we must acknowledge that this is a partial equilibrium analysis, which does not allow us to
assess social welfare. For instance, these decisions may have had different effects on the
willingness of incumbent firms to invest, as well as the impact on the development of new
creative works.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 justifies the use of venture
financing as an indicator, and provides background on the Cablevision decision in the U.S. as
well as on the French and German court rulings. Section 3 discusses the data used in our
analyses, Section 4 presents our results from the analysis of the Cablevision decision, and

3

Section 5 presents our results from the analysis of the French and German rulings. Section 6
concludes the paper.

2.

Background

2.1. Venture Financing as an Indicator
VC investment is an attractive measurement for several reasons.
The first rationale related to the practical nature of this measure for researchers. Venture
financing is well documented, because of the presence of institutional investors who report the
activities and performance of the funds in which they invest important due to data services such
as those operated by Dow Jones and Thomson Reuters. Moreover, venture capitalists tend to
fund young firms in well-defined areas, allowing a detailed mapping of funding by technological
area. This specificity is in contrast to large corporations, who often report an aggregate R&D or
those for broad lines of business.
Second, there is a well-documented relationship between venture capital funding,
innovation and job growth. Hellmann and Puri [2000] examine a sample of 170 recently formed
firms in Silicon Valley, including both venture-backed and non-venture-backed firms, and find
that VC financing is related to more innovative product market strategies and a significant
reduction in the time taken to bring a product to market. Kortum and Lerner [2000] examine the
relationship between venture financing and innovation at an aggregate industry level. Exploiting
the clarification the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, the U.S. Department of Labor in
the late 1970s, a policy shift that freed pensions to invest in venture capital, they show that, even
after addressing causality concerns, venture funding has a strong positive impact on innovation.
Puri and Zarutskie [2010] compare the evolution of venture-backed and non-venture-backed

4

firms using the records of the U.S. Census’s Longitudinal Business Database, and find very rapid
employment growth in venture-financed firms relative to non-venture-financed firms.
2.2. The U.S. Litigation: The Cartoon Network, et al. v. Cablevision
Section 4 focuses on a key juncture in copyright policy in the United States: the 2008
appellate decision in The Cartoon Network, et al. v. Cablevision.3 It will compare VC investment
in cloud computing in the U.S. against that in the EU (where the decision did not have bearing)
both before and after the Cablevision decision by employing a differences-in-differences
approach.
In 2006, Cablevision announced the development of a Remote Storage Digital Video
Recorder (RS-DVR). Similar in operation to a traditional recorder, the Cablevision RS-DVRs
allow customers to record, pause, and replay television content on a hard drive. Unlike
traditional DVRs, however, in which a consumer installs and uses an appliance in their own
home, the Cablevision RS-DVR was located remotely, recording to and playing back from
remote servers. When a consumer hit the “record” button on their remote, the RS-DVR would
start to record, just as if that RS-DVR were right in their living room. In response, a consortium
of U.S. television and copyright holders filed a complaint against Cablevision in May 2006 over
alleged copyright infringement.
In March 2007, the District Court declared a summary judgment against Cablevision.4 As
the appellate court subsequently narrated:
[P]laintiffs successfully argued that Cablevision’s proposed system would directly
infringe their copyrights in three ways. First, by briefly storing data in the primary
ingest buffer and other data buffers integral to the function of the RS-DVR,

3

4

The current suits being brought against DISH by major networks are another important legal matter with respect
to third-party copyright infringement is; however, we do not analyze the impact of these suits since they have
yet to be resolved.
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. v. Cablevision Sys. Corp., 478 F. Supp. 2d 607 [S.D.N.Y. 2007].

5

Cablevision would make copies of protected works and thereby directly infringe
plaintiffs’ exclusive right of reproduction under the Copyright Act. Second, by
copying programs onto … hard disks …, Cablevision would again directly
infringe the reproduction right. And third, by transmitting the data … to …
customers in response to a “playback” request, Cablevision would directly
infringe plaintiffs’ exclusive right of public performance.5

This decision attracted relatively little attention from the media and blogs, in large part
because it was consistent with a series of earlier rulings that restricted the ability of third parties
to distribute copyrighted material without authorization. For instance, in a 1991 case which
anticipated many of the issues in the Cablevision case, a district ruled in favor of seven major
movie companies in a dispute with a firm that developed a system for the electronic delivery of
movie video tapes.6 Despite the fact that the firm, On Command, had legally purchased the
videotapes that it transmitted to hotel guests, the court found that the firm’s system infringed the
studio’s copyrights because it electronically transmitted the movies to hotel rooms (as opposed
as physically renting the cassettes).
In August 2008, the District Court decision in Cablevision was reversed on appeal by the
Second Circuit Court of Appeals.7 The Circuit Court held that Cablevision's RS-DVR system did
not infringe the plaintiffs’ rights of reproduction and public performance on any of the three
claimed grounds. The original decision was reversed, vacated, and sent back to be reconsidered
by the lower court. In June 2009, the Supreme Court refused to hear the case, thereby effectively
finalizing the Second Circuit’s decision.

5
6
7

Cartoon Network, LP v. CSC Holdings, 536 F.3d 121 [2d Cir. 2008].
On Command Video Corp. v. Columbia Pictures Industries, 777 F. Supp. 787 [N.D. Cal. 1991].
Cartoon Network, op. cit.

6

Because the Supreme Court never heard the appeal, the decision was only binding to the
Second Circuit. But the decision was influential nationally, due to the historical sway that the
circuit as had in copyright cases. As Carter [1991] argues:
The Second Circuit is widely recognized as the nation's most important copyright
court. Centered in the capital city of publishing and the arts, and mindful of the
proud tradition of copyright scholars who have formed its treasure of precedent,
the court regularly hears appeals raising issues in the forefront of copyright
developments. The Second Circuit is not shy about its historic leadership role in
shaping U.S. copyright law.
Moreover, the decision was particularly influential because the Second Circuit has historically
been seen as sympathetic to copyright owners (as opposed to the 9th Circuit, based in San
Francisco, which was seen as more sympathetic to firms seeking to exploit copyrighted
material). The fact that this decision went “against the grain” by limiting the property rights of
the copyright owners in favor of cloud firms lent it particular importance. Perhaps most
importantly, the decision was the first in this area: such decisions are widely understood to have
significant “persuasive authority” in other jurisdictions.8
Consequentially, at the time of the decision, the ruling was perceived as likely to positively
impact firms focusing on cloud computing. To cite two contemporaneous accounts:

8

9



The Cablevision ruling is good for IT companies moving into cloud computing,
said Dow Lohnes PLLC attorney James Burger, who represents technology
companies in IP and content licensing matters. If the court had found
Cablevision guilty of direct infringement for giving its customers the RS-DVR
data storage system, system operators storing consumers’ legally acquired
entertainment media in the internet cloud could have faced the same claims.9



[A] rule holding Cablevision liable merely because it housed and maintained
the servers in this case could imperil a wide variety of innovative business
models that rely on the use of remote computing, ranging from examples like

This may be partially attributed to a “bandwagon effect,” and partially because reach a different outcome would
create a “circuit split” that invites Supreme Court review, and thus dramatically increases the odds of a reversal
of the decision, an outcome most judges try hard to avoid.
Standeford [2009].

7

Internet-enabled self-service photo processing and printing, to cloud computing
services offered by companies like Amazon, Apple and Google.10
Conversations with a number of venture investors suggest that the Cablevision decision led
to increased VC investment in cloud computing in the U.S. relative to other counties where no
comparable shift of copyright protection occurred.11 Prior to this decision, venture investors
feared that record labels, movie studies, and other content owners might sure cloud-computing
start-ups for copyright infringement, based on their users storing and accessing legally acquired
copies of protected content. Trade associations such as the Recording Industry Association had
made substantial investments in ferreting out infringing materials on platforms such as Pirate
Bay, and the investors feared that the start-ups could readily get caught up in litigation with
content owners. These concerns were exacerbated by the experience of investors in Napster. The
firm’s corporate and independent venture investors were sued by major recording companies,
who argued that the investors were liable for copyright infringement because they had effective
control of Napster. After the federal courts refused to dismiss the claims, the investors settled the
case in 2006 and 2007, collectively making what has been estimated to be a nine-figure sum
[Ottaviani, 2007]. As Ottaviani [2007] noted,
The decision caused a great deal of discomfort among those firms, in the private
equity community dealing with content distribution companies. Investors were
forced to review and rethink commonly used structures to control a portfolio
company, and evaluate whether and how those control structures exposed the
investors to liability for copyright infringements of the portfolio company.
It might be thought that these startups could obtain licenses from content providers to immunize
themselves from such fears, but the transaction costs of such licensing arrangements, our

10
11

Kwun [2008].
While there have been several copyright cases against online video recording service providers in Europe, we
are unaware of any that has resolved such substantial uncertainty with respect to reproduction and
retransmission rights in favor of such service providers as the Cablevision decision has in the U.S.

8

informants reported, were prohibitive. The costs reflected both the complexity of the rights
holdings and the suspicion of the intellectual property owners regarding the intentions of
venture-backed firms.
Two caveats should be noted. First, it is important to note that to the extent that U.S.-based
firms also do business in the rest of the world, or EU firms do business in the U.S., such
international activity will dampen the hypothesized effect since the Internet is affected by both
local and non-local regulations, and thus any estimates of the hypothesized effect are likely to be
conservative. (It should be noted that in many cases foreign courts have deferred to the laws in
which an Internet company is based when ruling on disputes involving these firms (Chander
[2012])).
Second, the Supreme Court addressed similar issues in June 2014,12 when it reversed an
appellate court decision and concluded that the firm Aereo publicly performs copyrighted works,
in violation of the Copyright Act, when it sells its subscribers a service that allows them to watch
television programs over the Internet at about the same time as the programs are broadcast over
the air. This decision was seen as reintroducing substantial uncertainty into the breadth of
copyright protection [Stoltz, 2014].
2.3. The French Litigation: M6, W9, France Television, TF1, and NT1 v. Wizzgo (2008)
In Section 5, we will also examine the impact of decisions in the French and German courts
relative to those elsewhere in Europe. In May 2008, Wizzgo launched the first online DVR
platform in France, which allowed users to view recorded copies of programs broadcast on
domestic terrestrial television channels as long as they requested that the show be recorded

12

American Broadcasting Companies v. Aereo, 573 U.S. ___ (2014).

9

before the programs started.13 The copy was a faithful reproduction and included the original
advertising.14 In response, a consortium of French television and copyright holders, including
M6, W9, France Television, TF1, and NT1, filed complaints against Wizzgo over alleged
copyright infringement.
Wizzgo argued that its technological platform fell under two exceptions in French
copyright law: transience and privacy copying. First, Wizzgo claimed that it provided users with
a temporary and transient copy of a program, and only assisted users in saving private copies.
Second, Wizzgo claimed that each copy of a recorded program was private. In France, copying
copyrighted work strictly for personal use falls under the private copy exception as long as the
copyist and the user of the copy are the same person.15 Throughout August and November 2008,
the Tribunal de Grande Instance de Paris issued a series of injunctions, banning Wizzgo from
using the plaintiffs’ copyrighted works.16 On November 25, 2008, the Tribunal de Grande
Instance de Paris declared the final set of summary judgments against Wizzgo and levied a
fine.17 In response to the court’s ruling and the fine ordered by the court, Wizzgo and similar
companies halted operations.18 Outside sources suggest that the French litigation is likely to have
a negative impact on VC investment and to delay the development of related technology, such as
cloud computing services. For example, a paper by European Digital Rights states that “[t]he
[Wizzgo] case is a relevant example to further corroborate the idea that the current EU copyright

13
14
15
16

17
18

International Law Office [February 19, 2009].
Wizzgo [2009].
International Law Office [February 19, 2009].
The Tribunal de Grande Instance issued five summary judgments against Wizzgo: (1) Metropole Television v.
Wizzgo [August 6, 2008]; (2) France 2 v. Wizzgo [November 6, 2008]; (3) TF1 v. Wizzgo [November 6, 2008];
(4) NT1 v. Wizzgo [November 10, 2008]; and (5) Metropole Television v. Wizzgo [November 25, 2008].
International Law Office [February 19, 2009]; and ZDNet.fr [November 14, 2008].
International Law Office [February 19, 2009].
“The court ordered compensatory damages of more than €440,000 against Wizzgo for copyright infringement,
which convinced other French online DVR platforms immediately to cease similar services.” (International Law
Office [February 19, 2009]).

10

policy hinders technology.”19 Some members of the popular press was similarly disappointed;
for example, one member wrote that “[b]y closing the door to the Wizzgo arguments […] and the
evolution of technology and uses, the French justice system is particularly reactionary and
conservative.”20 Given the view that the French ruling was likely to have a negative impact on
related technologies, it is logical to hypothesize that this ruling would lead to decreased VC
investment in cloud computing in France relative to other counties in the EU.
2.4. The German Litigation: RTL et al. v. Shift.tv and Save.tv
Shift.tv, founded in 2005, and Save.tv, founded in 2006, are subscription-based services
that allow customers to select and store television content on servers from which users can
download and stream stored programs.21 Online video recording platform service providers
operate sites that facilitate the receipt of TV signals through satellite reception stations, and
transform and store these signals in customer-dedicated server space.22 Customers select the
content to be stored and can download and/or stream the content. In response to the services
offered by these companies, two German television channels, RTL and SAT1, began judicial
action claiming that the services constituted copyright infringement.23
A German District Court found that both Shift.tv and Save.tv infringed plaintiffs’
reproductions rights by storing and copying the data streams provided by the plaintiffs on servers
for playback by customers, on May 12, 2006 and May 9, 2007, respectively. The Dresden Court
of Appeals ruled against Shift.tv on November 28, 2006, yet in favor of Save.tv on October 9,

19
20

21
22
23

European Digital Rights [2011].
“En claquant ainsi la porte à l'argumentaire de Wizzgo […] et l'évolution des technologies et des usages, la
justice française se montre particulièrement rétrograde et conservatrice.” (Caruana [2008]).
Poschenrieder [2008]; and International Law Office [June 11, 2009].
Bird and Bird [2009].
Three lawsuits: SAT1 v. Shift.tv; RTL v. Shift.tv; and RTL v. Save.tv. (See IRIS Legal Observations of the
European Audiovisual Observatory [2011]).

11

2007.24 On April 22, 2009, the Federal Court of Justice repealed both rulings and remanded them
to the Dresden Appeals Court.25 In doing so, the Federal Court of Justice considered the
recording process and ruled on two issues: the right of reproduction and the right of
retransmission. To the court, it was unclear whether Shift.tv and Save.tv recorded broadcasts on
behalf of its users, or if the technology was automatic and users themselves recorded the
programs. If the copying was not automatic, the Federal Court ruled that Shift.tv and Save.tv
would be liable for direct infringement of reproduction rights. Even if the copying was fully
automatic, the defendants could be liable for infringement of the plaintiffs’ retransmission rights
to the public, which are harmed by retransmitting broadcasting signals simultaneously to a large
number of customers.26 Thus, the Federal Court instructed the Appeals Court, on a case-by-case
basis, to rule on whether the reproduction process is automated and to clarify the extent to which
the plaintiffs infringed retransmission rights.27
In July 2011, the Dresden Appeals Court ruled in favor of Save.tv and found that its online
video recorder did not infringe RTL’s rights of reproduction, though a similar ruling has not been
reached for Shift.tv. The court found that from a technical standpoint, the user initiates an
automated recording process to create a private copy of a television program.28 However, the
court did not resolve the issue of retransmission rights infringement.29 As such, Save.tv requires
a license for retransmission from RTL, yet it has been unable to do obtain such a license.30 Thus,

24

25

26
27
28
29
30

Burghart [2010]; International Law Office [June 11, 2009]; IRIS Legal Observations of the European
Audiovisual Observatory [2011]; and “OLG Dresden 14 U 801/07 Urteil vom 12.07.2011.”
International Law Office [2009]; and IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory
[2011].
Burghart [2010]; and, Bird and Bird [2009].
IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory [2011].
Ibid.
Ibid.
VG Media, the German royalty collecting society, refused to grant Save.tv the necessary licenses to operate its
business, arguing that online video licenses are not covered by its agreement with German broadcasters. (See

12

while Save.tv was not found liable of direct infringement, German law has blurred the issue by
neither ruling completely in favor nor completely against companies like Save.tv and Shift.tv.
While Save.tv does not infringe reproduction rights, the German courts have ruled that television
channels can prevent these businesses from operating by refusing to issue licenses for
retransmission.
While both Save.tv and Shift.tv continue to operate in Germany, outside sources suggest
that the German litigation—by raising questions about the allocation of copyright protection—is
likely to have a negative impact on investment in this and related technologies, such as cloud
computing services. For example, “[a]lthough the Federal Court of Justice referred the case back
to the Court of Appeal, it is already clear that the business model of Internet-based video
recording can be operated legally only with the broadcasters’ prior permission. It is doubtful
whether a service operated on this basis can be profitable.”31 The popular press also reacted
negatively: “[N]ew technology and innovation are impeded by [the 2009 judgment], which
unnecessarily increases the technical deficits of Germany compared to other Internet-nations.”32
As with the French ruling, given the view that the German rulings were likely to have a negative
impact on related technologies, it is logical to hypothesize that these rulings would lead to
decreased VC investment in cloud computing in Germany relative to other counties in the EU.

31
32

IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory [2011]). In a November 2010 ruling on the
dispute, the Appeals Court of Munchen found that “RTL is entitled to prohibit Save.tv from retransmitting its
programmes.” (See IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory [2011]).
International Law Office [June 11, 2009].
“Moderner Technik und Innovation wird damit seiner Ansicht nach ein Riegel vorgeschoben, der die
technischen Defizite Deutschland gegenüber anderer Internet-Nationen nur unnötig steigert. Mit dem neusten
Urteil hingegen sei endlich ein Startschuss für weitere Entwicklungen gefallen.” (See TVAnbieter.de [July 25,
2011].)

13

2.5.

Event Study Evidence
One way to validate the impact of these judicial decisions on cloud companies is to

examine the consequences of these decisions on publicly traded cloud-computing companies in
the same country. Inasmuch as the decisions contained unexpected good or bad news, it should
affect their valuation either positively or negatively.
To undertake such an analysis, we sought to identify publicly traded cloud computing
companies. We identified potential cloud computing firms through Capital IQ, the CloudTimes
“50 Top” [2010] list, IDC analyst reports, and Thomson Reuters VentureXpert. We verified from
CRSP and/or Datastream that the firm was publicly traded at the time of the decisions, and from
securities filings that the firm was active in the cloud computing market at that time. The sample
included companies with active cloud-computing divisions but generated the bulk of their
revenues in other ways (e.g., Amazon) and dedicated cloud-computing firms (e.g., Rackspace).
It proved to be much more straightforward to undertake this analysis in the United States
than in France and Germany. In the United States, we were able to identify 25 companies that
met our criteria. In Europe, it was much more difficult. For instance, in Germany, following the
same procedure, we could identify only two borderline cases, Deutsche Telekom and SAP,
which were problematic as they appeared to really get involved in cloud computing at a
considerably later date. This paucity of identified firms may reflect the relative thinness of
technology activity in continental Europe in this area, the difficulties that many entrepreneurial
European face in going public, and the poorer representation of technology analysts and reporters
on the continent.
As a result, we focused our analysis on the U.S. judicial decisions. Because of some
uncertainty of the timing during the day of the release of the decisions, we looked at the
cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) on the day of the decision and the day after (the [0, +1]
14

window). Because the “pure play” cloud companies were generally smaller in market
capitalization, we focused on equal-weighted returns. For the market-adjusted model, we use a
one-year estimation period, ending two months before the event.
Table 1 illustrates the key patterns. The March 2007 District Court decision was
associated with negative returns, which was weakly significant in one specification. These results
were consistent with press accounts that suggested that this decision largely corroborated the
received wisdom about the nature of copyright protection, and thus contained limited news. The
August 2008 Second Circuit decision, on the other hand, had a substantial positive effect. Not
only was the absolute magnitude of the effect stronger (a positive CAR of +1.2% and 1.4%), but
the four tests are consistently significant at the 5% confidence level, and in three cases at the 1%
level.

3.

Data

3.1. Venture Capital Funding Data
In order to examine the differences in how VC investment in cloud companies varies
between the U.S. and EU, and between France and Germany and other EU countries, we
constructed a dataset that draws on historical investment figures captured by VentureXpert.33
VentureXpert is one of the two most widely-used databases of VC investments in the U.S. and
EU.34 It contains data on approximately 1.2 million global private companies and over 25,000
venture, buyout, and mezzanine funds.35

33
34
35

More specifically, the Thomson ONE’s Private Equity module powered by VentureXpert was used.
Maats et al. [2009].
Thomson Reuters factsheet [2011].

15

The dataset uses all private equity investments in the Thomson database from the beginning
of 1995 through the end of 2010 classified as “Venture Capital Deals”36 involving a portfolio
company with a business description including the term “cloud.” These criteria yielded data on
investments in 280 companies. Independent research identified an additional 216 cloud
computing-related companies,37 59 of which received VC investment from 1995 through 2010
captured in VentureXpert. Seventy-nine companies were removed from the list of 339 (280 + 59)
companies appearing in VentureXpert based upon review of their business descriptions, and 17
were removed for lack of any data on investment amount.38 As a result, the final dataset contains
data on VC investments in 243 cloud computing companies.39
The unit of observation in the data extracted from VentureXpert is an investment by a
particular VC fund into a particular portfolio company on a particular date. The dataset contains
2,009 observations on investments by 706 distinct funds into the 243 companies on 587 different
dates. These data were then aggregated by calendar quarter of investment date by region (U.S.,
EU, and the rest of the world for the analysis of the Cablevision decision, and France, Germany,
EU, and the rest of Europe for the analysis of the French and German rulings).

36
37

38

39

Venture capital investments include start-up, seed, and early, expansion, and later stage deals.
This researched involved the review of numerous sources, including: Corbin [2011]; “The Top 20 Software as a
Service (SaaS) Vendors,” http://www.clouds360.com/saas.php; “The Top 20 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Vendors,” http://www.clouds360.com/iaas.php; “The Top 20 Platform as a Service (PaaS) Vendors,”
http://www.clouds360.com/paas.php; Kirilov [2011]; Geelan [2009]; “50 Top Cloud Computing Companies,”
http://www.cloudtweaks.com/2010/07/over-50-of-the-biggest-and-best-cloud-computing-companies, [2010];
Depena [2011]; Singh [2009]; and, “List of Top ‘Cloud Computing Solution Providers to Watch in 2009,”
http://www.oncloudcomputing.com/en/2009/07/list-of-top-cloud-computing-solution-providers-to-watch-in2009/, [2009].
Business descriptions from VentureXpert, Bloomberg, the company websites, and news stories were reviewed.
Companies were excluded if cloud computing did not appear to be a primary part of their business or their
business appeared to focus on pushing non-user-generated content to from the cloud to users (e.g., security
updates, games, licensed media content).
In identifying cloud computing companies for our analysis, we carefully reviewed all business descriptions as
well as, when possible, company websites to ensure that the company was primarily a cloud computing
company and that the company’s business was one that had the potential to be affected by the rulings in France,
Germany, and the U.S.

16

Appendix A summarizes the data used in the analysis of the Cablevision decision. As it
shows, total VC investment in the identified U.S. cloud companies from the first quarter of 1995
to the end of 2010 amounted to $5.9 billion. This reflects average quarterly investment of $92.3
million over that time period. In the period immediately preceding the Cablevision ruling (Q1
2006 to Q2 2008), average quarterly investment in U.S. venture-backed cloud companies was
$131.0 million, and subsequent to the ruling, that figure amounted to $184.7 million. Thus,
average quarterly investment in U.S. cloud computing increased by approximately 41 percent
after the Cablevision decision. Appendix A further shows that VC investment in the identified
EU cloud companies from the first quarter of 1995 to the end of 2010 amounted to $242.3
million. This reflects average quarterly investment of $3.8 million over that time period. In the
period immediately preceding the Cablevision ruling (Q1 2006 to Q2 2008), the average
quarterly investment in EU venture-backed cloud companies was $7.0 million, and subsequent to
the ruling, that figure amounted to $8.9 million. Thus, average quarterly investment in EU cloud
computing increased by approximately 27 percent, as compared with 41 percent in the U.S., after
the Cablevision decision.
Appendix B summarizes the data used in the analysis of the French rulings for three time
periods: (1) the entire period for which data from VentureXpert were obtained (Q1 1995 to Q4
2010), (2) a short period preceding the Wizzgo ruling (Q1 2006 to Q4 2008), and (3) a short
period following the ruling (Q1 2009 to Q4 2010). We focus on relatively short periods around
the ruling to mitigate the bias that could be introduced from long-term investment trends prior to
2006.
In the period immediately preceding the Wizzgo ruling, there were no VC investments in
French venture-backed cloud companies, and subsequent to the ruling, the average quarterly VC

17

investment in French cloud companies was $0.45 million. In the EU as a whole,40 for the period
immediately preceding the Wizzgo ruling, the average quarterly VC investment in cloud
companies was $5.9 million. Subsequent to the ruling, the average quarterly VC investment in
EU cloud companies was $9.8 million.
Appendix C summarizes the data used in the analysis of the German rulings for four time
periods: (1) the entire period for which data from VentureXpert were obtained (Q1 1995 to Q4
2010), (2) a short period preceding the 2006 German District Court ruling (Q1 2004 to Q2 2006),
(3) a short period following the ruling (Q3 2006 to Q4 2008), and (4) a longer period following
the ruling (Q3 2006 to Q4 2010). As with the French ruling, we focus on relatively a short period
around the 2006 German District Court ruling (Q1 2004 to Q4 2008) to isolate the effect of this
ruling as well as the other similar rulings discussed above that occurred in 2006 and 2007. We
also investigate the effect over a longer time period (Q1 2004 to Q4 2010) since the litigation
involving Shift.tv and Safe.tv, to our knowledge, has not yet been completely resolved. Thus,
uncertainty likely exists regarding the viability of certain cloud computing business models in
Germany.
In the period immediately preceding the 2006 German District Court ruling (Q1 2004 to Q2
2006), there were no investments in German venture-backed cloud companies, while the average
quarterly VC investment in EU cloud companies was $3.5 million. Subsequent to the ruling, for
the shorter period Q3 2006 to Q4 2008, there were also no investments in German venturebacked cloud companies, while EU cloud computing companies received average quarterly VC
investment of $6.9 million. For the longer period Q3 2006 to Q4 2010, the average quarterly VC

40

All other EU countries during the period under study were included: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom.

18

investment in German cloud companies was $0.30 million, while EU cloud computing
companies received average quarterly VC investment of $8.2 million.
3.2. Supplemental Data
We augment the VC funding data with data on other factors that could influence investors’
decisions to invest in cloud computing specifically, and in other sectors more generally. Such
factors include macroeconomic conditions reflected in gross domestic product (GDP) measures
and the feasibility of cloud computing as measured by broadband penetration.
Our GDP data are quarterly growth rates of real, seasonally adjusted GDP as a percent
change over the previous quarter from the OECD.41 These data are available for the U.S. from
Q1 1995 through Q2 2011, and for the EU (27 countries), including France and Germany, from
Q2 1995 through Q2 2011.
Data on broadband penetration, which is equal to the number of broadband subscriptions
per 100 inhabitants, was obtained from the OECD for the U.S. and 21 of the 27 EU member
states from Q2 2002 through Q4 2010.42 To calculate an EU-specific measure of broadband
penetration in each period, the broadband penetration rate of each EU member state was
multiplied by its corresponding annual population to obtain the number of broadband
subscribers. Next, the total number of EU broadband subscribers was obtained by summing over
all EU member states; this total was then divided by the total EU population to obtain an EUspecific measure of broadband penetration. Finally, quarterly broadband penetration rates were
calculated by linearly interpolating the semi-annual series.

41
42

Data accessed through http://stats.oecd.org.
Data accessed through http://stats.oecd.org.

19

These supplemental data are summarized in Appendix A for the U.S., Appendix B for
France, and Appendix C for Germany.

4.

Estimation and Results – The Cablevision Decision
We first examine whether investment in venture-backed U.S. cloud companies shifted

subsequent to the Q3 2008 Cablevision appeals court ruling. Each of these analyses are variants
of difference-in-difference regression frameworks that rely on historical VC investment in both
the U.S. and EU as controls in order to identify any statistically significant increase in VC
investment in U.S. cloud companies post-Cablevision.
Our initial set of regression analyses are variants of the following regression model that
accounts for the impact of a variety of factors on quarterly venture-backed investment in the
identified cloud companies:
VC Ratior,t = β0 + β1(U.S. Indicator)r + β2(Q3 2008 or After Dummy)t + β3(Effect of
Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment)r,t +θXr,t+ εr,t.

(1)

Specifically, the dependent variable, VC Ratior,t, is VC dollars invested in the cloud
computing companies in region r at quarter t divided by VC dollars invested in all information
technology (IT) companies (including cloud computing) in region r at quarter t. We normalized
our dependent variable this way because the volume of VC activity varies considerably over time
due to factors that are largely exogenous to the issues being studied here. To cite one notable
example, the volume of venture investment fell by almost 90 percent between 2000 and 2002;
this decline was driven primarily by the collapse in the public valuations for internet and
telecommunications stocks in 2000, and the subsequent inability of venture funds to exit many of
their investments at attractive prices. In other cases, funds have flowed to particular sectors, such
as cleantech, potentially crowding out investment elsewhere.
20

As a result, the bulk of our analyses examine VC investments in cloud computing as a
share of all VC investments, though we also analyze the level of venture investment in cloud
computing in a robustness check. When we replicate the results using the level of financing, we
find the results go through as before.
The explanatory variable U.S. Indicator equals one for investment in U.S. cloud computing
companies and zero for investment in EU cloud computing companies. The explanatory variable
Q3 2008 or After Dummy equals zero for all quarters before the U.S. Appellate Court decision in
the Cablevision case in August 2008 and one in Q3 2008 and all quarters thereafter. The
explanatory variable, Effect of the Cablevision Decision on U.S. VC Investment, a dummy
variable capturing the interaction between the U.S. Indicator and the Q3 2008 Dummy, equals
one for investment in U.S. cloud computing companies in Q3 2008 and thereafter, and zero
otherwise. Xr,t is a vector of other explanatory variables, including GDP growth and broadband
penetration, that may be associated with investment in cloud companies.
This difference-in-difference model is designed to estimate parameter β3, whether
investment in venture-backed U.S. cloud companies rose subsequent to the Cablevision decision,
controlling for trends in the U.S. relative to EU (captured by U.S. Indicator), and trends in cloud
computing generally (captured by Q3 2008 or After Dummy) absent the policy.
In order to focus more narrowly on the time period surrounding the Cablevision decision,
our analyses focus on investment levels from 2006 to 2010. Doing so eliminates long-term
investment trends prior to 2006 from influencing the results. Figure 1, which depicts the
quarterly difference between investment in U.S. and EU venture-backed firms, suggests that
investment in U.S. venture-backed cloud companies was not systematically increasing, relative
to EU firms, in the time period immediately preceding the 2008 Cablevision ruling; however,

21

investment in U.S. venture-backed cloud companies increased, relative to EU firms, after the
2008 Cablevision ruling.43
Our first set of regression results are presented below in Table 2, and show that
investment in venture-backed cloud computing companies is significantly higher in the U.S. than
in the EU after the Cablevision decision.44 The coefficient on β3 in Model 1, which provides an
estimate of the change in VC investment post-Cablevision, is equal to 0.0257. It indicates that
the rise in average VC investment in cloud computing in the U.S. as a percentage of VC
investment in IT in the U.S. from the period Q1 2006 through Q2 2008 to the period Q3 2008
through Q4 2010 was approximately 2.57 percent greater than the corresponding rise in cloud
computing investment in the EU, or approximately 3.16 percent overall.45 This estimate of β3,
statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level, implies an approximately $730 million
increased VC investment in U.S. cloud computing companies after the Cablevision decision.
Model 2 is similar to Model 1, except that it incorporates variables that control for GDP
growth and broadband penetration. As shown in column 2 of Table 2, the coefficients on these

43

44

45

Figure 1 shows that the increase in VC investment in the U.S., relative to the EU, did not occur immediately
after the 2008 Cablevision ruling. Such a delay is consistent with both the typical amount of time required to
obtain VC investment and the fact that VC investment often involves multiple rounds of increasing size.
Specifically, the VC investment process typically takes between 6 and 12 months (Madison Park Group [2008])
and a firm receiving VC investment may receive multiple rounds, with the average investment size in the first
round equal to between $6 and $13 million, the average in the second round equal to between $8 and $15
million, and the average in later-stage rounds equal to between $15 and $23 million (Huggett [2012]). In
addition, there are gaps between each round, with the average time between rounds of financing in 2010 equal
to approximately 20 months (Sherman [2012]).
Around the time of the Cablevision decision, some cloud services were launched, such as Microsoft Windows
Azure on November 17, 2009 (“Microsoft Cloud Services Vision Becomes Reality With Launch of Windows
Azure Platform,” http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/news/press/2009/nov09/11-17pdc1pr.aspx), and these
services may have had an effect on VC investment in cloud computing in the U.S. However, other cloud
services, such as Amazon EC2 and Google Apps and Docs were launched much earlier in 2006, and appeared to
have little or no effect on VC investment in the U.S. (“Google Introduces New Business Version of Popular
Hosted Applications,” http://googlepress.blogspot.com/2007/02/google-introduces-new-businessversion_22.html; http://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2006/; and, “Google Announces Google Docs
& Spreadsheets,” http://googlepress.blogspot.com/2006/10/google-announces-google-docs_11.html.)
Furthermore, any cloud services that were launched around the time of the Cablevision decision may have been
in part launched because of the clarity afforded by the decision.
β2 + β3 = 0.0059 + 0.0257 = 0.0316.

22

variables have the expected positive sign and are statistically significant. Interpretation of the
other variables remains the same, and as shown in the table, the magnitude and significance of
the Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment is almost identical to the magnitude and
significance of the Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment in Model 1. The implied increase
in U.S. VC investment of approximately $728 million is nearly identical as well.
To investigate the potential impact of outliers on our analysis, we ran Models 1 and 2 using
a difference-in-difference quantile regression analysis. Quantile regression analysis allows one to
estimate the relationship between a set of independent variables and a specific quantile, or
percentile, of the response variable. One advantage of such an analysis is that the influence of
large outliers is mitigated. Thus, for our context, it allows us to determine the extent to which our
results are sensitive to quarters with very large or very small values of the dependent variable,
VC Ratio. Results for median (quantile) difference-in-difference regressions are presented in
Table 3.
Results for Model 3, the quantile regression version of Model 1, are presented in Table 3.
These results are similar to those presented in Table 2 and imply that the rise in median (as
opposed to average) VC investment in cloud computing in the U.S., as a percentage of VC
investment in IT in the U.S. from the period Q1 2006 through Q2 2008 to the period Q3 2008
through Q4 2010, was approximately 3.5 percent greater than the corresponding rise in cloud
computing investment in the EU. This estimate, which is statistically significant at the 95 percent
confidence level, implies an approximately $952 million increase in VC investment in U.S. cloud
computing companies after the Cablevision decision.

23

Results for Model 4, the quantile regression version of Model 2, are also presented in Table
3, and are similar to those for Model 3 with an implied increase in U.S. cloud computing
investment of approximately $904 million.
4.1. Additional Sensitivity Analyses and Robustness Checks
4.1.1. Alternative Control Group Specifications
We have also estimated a difference-in-difference model comparing investment in the U.S.
to investment in the rest of the world (ROW) in order to examine whether the results are
sensitive to the use of EU companies as a control group. Specifically, we have conducted
analyses analogous to Model 1 using ROW investment (rather than investment in the EU) as a
benchmark.
As an alternative approach to examining the robustness of our findings, we have examined
the extent to which investment levels increased subsequent to the Cablevision ruling for a broad
set of internet companies, rather than just the cloud companies included in the above analyses.
We anticipate that there will be no effects for this set of internet companies since the Cablevision
ruling should only affect cloud computing companies. The results associated with Models 5 and
6 presented in Table 4, are analogous to Models 1 and 2 except that they are run on the “internetspecific” companies rather than the cloud companies.46
As the results in Table 4 show, investment levels in U.S. internet-specific companies
either actually decrease in the U.S. following the Cablevision decision (Model 5), or are not
statistically different in the time periods before and after the Cablevision ruling (Model 6). This
suggests that the findings described above are specific to cloud companies, in particular, and do

46

VentureXpert categorized 8,510 companies as being internet-specific. This list includes companies described as
“internet communications,” “e-commerce technology,” “computer hardware,” “internet software,” “internet
programming,” “internet ecommerce,” “internet content,” and “internet services.”

24

not reflect general trends associated with venture-backed investment in internet-specific
companies.47
4.1.2. Stationarity48
One assumption made in our regression analyses is that the data are stationary; that is that
the data series do not depend on time and thus, that the mean, variance, and covariance of the
data do not vary with time. To examine the extent to which increased U.S. investment
subsequent to the Cablevision decision reflects an ongoing trend, perhaps attributable to factors
not reflected in any of the data we collected, we have conducted a variety of tests. First, we ran a
simple ordinary least squares regression on the difference between U.S. and EU investment
levels against a time trend; this revealed that U.S. investment levels relative to EU investment
levels were falling on average, but not significantly, during the Q1 2006 to Q3 2008 time period.
To more formally test for stationarity in our time series data, we conducted three wellknown tests on our data from Q1 2006 through Q4 2010: the Dickey-Fuller, Phillips-Perron, and
Kwiatkowski–Phillips–Schmidt–Shin tests. Using each test, we found no evidence of nonstationarity. As such, our data appear to be stationary, and thus, it is not necessary to adjust our
regression equations or data.
4.1.3. Autocorrelation
We also tested for the presence of autocorrelation in our regression analyses by conducting
a test proposed by Jeffrey Wooldridge for panel data.49 After correcting for autocorrelation, the

47

48

49

We also undertake a variety of unreported robustness checks. These include using the logarithm of venture
financing as a dependent variable, as more detailed controls for country and industry. The results are robust to
these alterations.
A stationary time series is one whose statistical properties such as mean, variance, and autocorrelation, are all
constant over time. Most statistical methods are based on this assumption, and violations of stationarity can lead
to biased point estimates.
Wooldridge [2002].

25

estimate of the effect of Cablevision remains significant and positive, and the implied increase
in U.S. cloud VC investment actually increases from that of Models 1 and 2.
4.1.4. Clustered Standard Errors
Clustering standard errors corrects for the lack of independence between observations. In
our data, observations within a quarter may contain similar information. Without correcting for
the non-independence of the data, the standard errors would potentially be too small, and thus the
p-values would be too low. To correct for this, we clustered our standard errors by quarter.
Although the p-values increase as expected, the estimate of the effect of Cablevision remains
significant. Specifically, as Table 5 shows, the estimate of the effect of Cablevision remains
significant in both Models 7 and 8 these models are analogs to Models 1 and 2, with the only
difference being that the standard errors are clustered by quarter.
4.1.5. Tobit Regression Model
Given the fact that many of the observations in our dependent variable are equal to zero
(32.8 percent), we run a Tobit model in an unreported analyses to account for potential
censoring. Doing so, we find that the estimate of the effect of Cablevision remains significant
and positive in Models 1 and 2. When Model 1 is run using ordinary least squares, we find that
the coefficient on the effect of Cablevision is equal to 0.0257 and is significant at the five percent
level. When we instead use a Tobit model, the coefficient on the effect of Cablevision is equal to
0.0241 and is significant at the ten percent level. When we rerun Model 2 using a Tobit model,
the estimate of the effect of Cablevision decision also remains significant.
4.1.6. Investment Levels (vs. Ratios)
We ran additional sensitivities based on an alternate specification of the dependent
variable. Specifically, we ran regressions analogous to Models 1 and 2 but where the dependent
26

variable was the total quarterly investment (in the U.S. or EU) measured in dollars, rather than
measured in terms of a ratio relative to total IT spending. The total other IT VC investment and
total other VC investment in a given region were controlled for by their inclusion as separate
independent variables in the regression analysis. These regressions yielded results, presented in
Table 6, comparable to those of Models 1 and 2.
In Model 9, the analog to Model 1, U.S. investment was, on average, $119 million higher
each quarter after the Cablevision ruling (after controlling for EU differences), totaling $1.2
billion over the 2.5 subsequent years. The corresponding figures for Model 10 the Model 2
analog, which incorporates controls for GDP changes and broadband penetration, imply $126
million higher investment on a quarterly basis and $1.3 billion in total for the 2.5 years.
4.1.7. Investment Events (vs. Investment Ratios or Investment Levels)
We next ran regressions analogous to Models 1 and 2 where the dependent variable was
whether a given VC deal was a cloud deal or not, rather than total quarterly investment measured
in dollars or the ratio of total quarterly investment relative to total IT spending. In running these
regressions, we used a logit model where, if a deal was a cloud deal, the binary dependent
variable was set equal to one; otherwise, the dependent variable was set equal to zero. Because
there is a strong industry effect in venture funding—some groups specialize, for instance, in
biotechnology, while others concentrate on energy--we restricted our sample to include only VC
firms that had previously provided funding to a cloud company. Our results, which are presented
in Table 7, indicate that the effect of Cablevision on whether a VC firm provided financing to a
cloud company is generally positive and significant, and suggest that our principal results are not
being driven by a small number of large VC investments.

27

4.1.8. Investment Rounds (vs. Investment Ratios or Investment Levels)
We also ran regressions analogous to Models 1 and 2 where the dependent variable was the
number of rounds of VC investment received within a given quarter (in the U.S. or EU), rather
than total quarterly investment measured in dollars or the ratio of total quarterly investment
relative to total IT spending. Our results, which are shown below in Table 8, indicate that the
effect of Cablevision on the number of U.S. VC investment rounds is positive and significant,
and suggest that our principal results are not being driven by a small number of large VC
investments. These results thus provide further evidence that decisions around copyright
protection can have significant impacts on VC investment.
4.1.9. Cloud Company Identification
We have also tested the sensitivity of our results to the list of cloud computing companies
included in our dataset. Our results are robust to the use of a smaller set of companies, that is,
one that includes those with “cloud” in their VentureXpert business descriptions but does not
include additions based on review of third party cloud computing company lists.
Our research also revealed specific types of cloud companies that are likely to be
differentially affected by the Cablevision decision. In particular, there exist three general types of
cloud computing services: infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), software-as-a-service (SaaS), and
platform-as-a-service (PaaS). IaaS providers are the most likely to be affected by the Cablevision
decision because their customers can store files, some of which may be copyrighted, on their
servers. SaaS providers, in contrast, are the least likely to be affected by the Cablevision decision
because they generally provide pre-packaged software solutions that are unlikely to be tasked
with storing copyrighted materials on the providers’ servers. And finally, PaaS providers form a
middle ground between IaaS and SaaS providers in which the consumer, rather than the provider,

28

creates the software using tools and/or libraries from the provider. Some customers may create
services that store or access copyrighted material, while others may not; thus, it is unclear
whether PaaS services are likely to be affected by the Cablevision decision.
Table 9 provides results from three regressions where we investigate the differential impact
of the Cablevision decision on VC investment in IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS companies. In Model 18,
we run a regression in which only VC investment in IaaS companies is included in the
denominator of our dependent variable, and we find results consistent with our hypothesis
articulated above; that is, we find a significant and positive impact of the Cablevision decision on
VC investment in IaaS companies. Model 19, which estimates the impact of the Cablevision
decision on PaaS companies, also finds a significant and positive impact of the Cablevision
decision. And finally Model 20, which estimates the impact of the Cablevision decision on VC
investment in SaaS companies, provides results that are consistent with our expectation that SaaS
companies should be unaffected; that is, we find an insignificant, although positive impact of the
Cablevision decision on VC investment in SaaS companies. Thus, we find that those cloud
companies that are the most likely to be affected by the Cablevision decision experience an
increase in VC investment in the U.S. relative to the EU after the decision.
4.1.10. Second Circuit Court Analysis
We ran additional regressions using a logit model, similar to Models 11, 12, and 13 in
Table 7, to determine whether investment in cloud companies headquartered in states under the
jurisdiction of the Second Circuit Court increased compared to the rest of the U.S. The Second
Circuit Court of Appeals has jurisdiction over the states of New York, Connecticut, and
Vermont; since the Second Circuit Court sets binding precedent for district courts in these states,
we expect to see an even bigger increase in investment in cloud companies located in these states

29

after the Cablevision decision. While this decision, as discussed above, was likely to have a
broader impact, the effect of the decision should be most substantial here.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that this ruling has indeed effected firms’ location decisions.
For instance, high-profile (and controversial) video streaming company Aereo chose to locate in
New York with a “model engineered specifically to take advantage of 2008 ruling from the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in a copyright case against Cablevision” (Bario [2013]).
Our results, presented in Table 10, support our hypothesis. We find a positive and
significant impact of the Cablevision decision on investment in cloud companies in states under
the Second Circuit’s jurisdiction in Models 21, 22, and 23.

5.

Estimation and Results – The French and German Rulings
To determine whether investment in venture-backed French and German cloud companies

declined subsequent to the Wizzgo and 2006 German District Court rulings, we ran regressions
similar to those that were run to analyze the impact of the Cablevision decision. For France:
VC Ratior,t = β0 + β1(France Indicator)r + β2(Q1 2009 or After Dummy)t + β3(Effect of
Wizzgo Decision on French VC Investment)r,t + θXr,t+ εr,t.

(1)

And for Germany:
VC Ratior,t = β0 + β1(Germany Indicator)r + β2(Q3 2006 or After Dummy)t + β3(Effect of
German Decisions on German VC Investment)r,t + θXr,t+ εr,t.

(2)

The dependent variable, VC Ratior,t, is VC dollars invested in the cloud computing companies in
region r at quarter t divided by VC dollars invested in information technology (IT) companies in
region r at quarter t, computed for both the country in question and the rest of the EU excluding
France and Germany.

30

The explanatory variable France Indicator (Germany Indicator) equals one for investment
in French (German) cloud computing companies and zero for investment in German (France)
and EU cloud computing companies. The explanatory variable Q1 2009 or After Dummy (Q3
2006 or After Dummy) equal zero for all quarters before the French (German) Court ruling in
November 2008 (May 2006) and one in Q1 2009 (Q3 2006) and all quarters thereafter. The
explanatory variable, Effect of Wizzgo Decision on French VC Investment (Effect of German
Decisions on German VC Investment), a dummy variable capturing the interaction between the
France Indicator (Germany Indicator) and the Q1 2009 Dummy (Q3 2006 or After Dummy),
equals one for investment in French (German) cloud computing companies in Q1 2009 (Q3
2006) and thereafter, and zero otherwise. Xr,t is a vector of other explanatory variables including
GDP growth and broadband penetration that may be associated with investment in cloud
companies.
This difference-in-difference model is designed to estimate the parameter β3, which
provides an estimate of the effect of the French and German rulings on investment in French and
German cloud computing, respectively, controlling for trends in France and Germany relative to
the EU (captured by the country indicators), and trends in cloud computing generally (captured
by Q1 2009 or After Dummy and Q3 2006 or After Dummy) absent the policy.
In order to focus more narrowly on the time period surrounding the French ruling, we
analyze investment levels from 2006 to 2010. Doing so helps to eliminate long-term investment
trends prior to 2006 from influencing the results. Similarly, in order to focus more narrowly on
the time period surrounding the 2006 German District Court ruling, we first analyze investment
levels from 2004 to 2008. We also investigate the effect over a longer time period, 2004 to 2010,

31

because additional court rulings were made in 2006, 2007, and 2009, and because the litigation
involving Shift.tv and Safe.tv, to our knowledge, has not yet been completely resolved.
Our first set of regression results are presented below in Table 11, and show that
investment in venture-backed cloud computing companies is lower in France than in the EU after
the Wizzgo ruling. The coefficient on β3 in Model 24, which provides an estimate of the effect of
the Wizzgo ruling on VC investment in French cloud computing companies, is equal to -0.0185.
This indicates that the increase in average VC investment in cloud computing in France as a
percentage of VC investment in IT in France from the period Q1 2006 through Q4 2008 to the
period Q1 2009 through Q4 2010 was approximately 1.85 percent lower than the corresponding
rise in cloud computing investment in the EU. This estimate of β3, statistically significant at the
90 percent confidence level, implies that VC investment in French cloud computing companies
decreased, relative to the rest of the EU, by an average of $2.0 million per quarter after the
Wizzgo ruling, or approximately $16 million in total for 2009 and 2010.
Model 25 is similar to Model 24, except that it incorporates variables that control for GDP
growth and broadband penetration. As shown in column 2 of Table 11, the coefficients on these
control variables have the expected positive sign and are statistically significant. Interpretation of
the other variables remains the same, and as shown in the table, the magnitude and significance
of the Effect of Wizzgo Decision on French VC Investment are almost identical to its magnitude
and significance in Model 24.
Analogous regression results for Germany are presented in Table 11 and show that
investment in venture-backed cloud computing companies is lower in Germany than in the EU
after the 2006 German District Court ruling, both when a shorter post-ruling period is used (Q3
2006 to Q4 2008) and when a longer post-ruling period is analyzed (Q3 2006 to Q4 2010).

32

Model 26, which estimates the estimate of the effect of the 2006 German District Court ruling on
VC investment through the end of 2008, shows that the effect of the 2006 German District Court
ruling (as well as other similar rulings that followed later in 2006 and 2007) on VC investment in
German cloud computing companies is equal to -0.0115. This indicates that the change in
average VC investment in cloud computing in Germany as a percentage of VC investment in IT
in Germany from the period Q1 2004 through Q2 2006 to the period Q3 2006 through Q4 2008
was approximately 1.15 percent lower than the corresponding rise in cloud computing
investment in the EU. This estimate, statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level,
implies that VC investment in German cloud computing companies decreased, relative to the rest
of the EU, by an average of $0.5 million per quarter after the 2006 German District Court ruling,
or approximately $3 million in total from 3Q 2006 through 4Q 2008.
Model 27 is similar to Model 26, except that it incorporates variables that control for GDP
growth and broadband penetration. As shown in column 4 of Table 11, the coefficients on these
control variables have the expected positive sign. Interpretation of the other variables remains the
same, and as shown in the table, the magnitude and significance of the Effect of German
Decisions on German VC Investment is almost identical to its magnitude and significance in
Model 26. The implied decrease in German VC investment is nearly identical as well.
As described above, the litigation involving Shift.tv and Safe.tv, to our knowledge, has not
yet been completely resolved; as such, uncertainty likely exists regarding the viability of certain
cloud business models in Germany. To investigate whether this ongoing legal uncertainty
continued to depress VC investment in German cloud computing in 2009 and 2010, we also
analyzed a longer post-ruling period (Q3 2006 to Q4 2010). These results, presented in Models

33

28 and 29 in Table 11, show that the magnitude and significance of the Effect of German
Decisions on German VC Investment is similar to the estimates in Models 26 and 27.
5.1. Additional Sensitivity Analyses and Robustness Checks
5.1.1. Alternative Control Group Specifications
We have also estimated a difference-in-difference model comparing investment in France
and Germany to investment in the rest-of-the-world (ROW) in order to examine whether the
results are sensitive to the use of EU companies as a control group. Specifically, we have
conducted analyses analogous to Model 24 (France) and Models 26 and 27 (Germany) using
ROW investment, rather than investment in the remainder of the EU, as a benchmark. These
results are presented in Table 12 and are qualitatively similar, finding that the decrease in
investment in French (German) venture-backed cloud computing companies, relative to the rest
of the EU, amounted to an average of $0.9 million ($0.2 million) per quarter after the Wizzgo
(German) ruling.
5.1.2. Stationarity50
To examine the extent to which the decrease in French and German investment subsequent
to the French and German rulings, relative to the EU, reflects an ongoing trend, perhaps
attributable to factors not reflected in any of the data we collected, we have conducted a variety
of tests. First, we ran a simple ordinary least squares regression on the difference between French
and EU investment levels against a time trend, as well as on the difference between German and
EU investment levels against a time trend. This revealed that French investment levels relative to
EU investment levels were falling on average, but not significantly, during the pre-ruling time

50

A stationary time series is one whose statistical properties such as mean, variance, and autocorrelation, are all
constant over time. Most statistical methods are based on this assumption, and violations of stationarity can lead
to biased point estimates.

34

period, and that German investment levels relative to EU investment levels were increasing on
average, but not significantly, during the pre-ruling time period.
To more formally test for stationarity in our time series data, we conducted three wellknown tests on our data: the Dickey-Fuller, Phillips-Perron, and Kwiatkowski–Phillips–
Schmidt–Shin tests. Using each test, we found no evidence of non-stationarity. As such, our data
appear to be stationary, and thus, we do not adjust our regression equations or data.
5.1.3. Autocorrelation
We also tested for the presence of autocorrelation in our regression analyses by conducting
a test proposed by Jeffrey Wooldridge for panel data.51 After correcting for potential
autocorrelation, the estimate of the effect of the French and German rulings remains significant
and negative, and the implied increase in French and German cloud VC investment is
qualitatively similar.
5.1.4. Investment Levels (vs. Ratios)
We ran additional sensitivities based on an alternate specification of the dependent
variable. Specifically, we ran regressions analogous to Models 24 and 25 for France, and Models
26 – 29 for Germany, where the dependent variable was the total quarterly cloud VC investment
measured in dollars, rather than measured in terms of a ratio relative to total IT spending. Total
other IT VC investment and total other VC investment in a given region were controlled for by
their inclusion as separate independent variables in the regression analysis. The results of these
regressions, presented in Table 13, show that the French and German rulings continue to have a
negative and significant impact on cloud VC investment, although both the French and German
results imply a larger decrease in cloud VC investment, relative to the EU, as compared to the

51

Wooldridge [2002].

35

regressions in which cloud VC investment is measured in terms of a ratio relative to total IT
spending.
5.1.5. Investment Rounds (vs. Investment Ratios or Investment Levels)
We also ran unreported regressions analogous to Models 24 and 26 for France, and Models
26 – 29 for Germany, where the dependent variable was the number of rounds of VC investment
received within a given quarter (in France, Germany, or the EU), rather than total quarterly
investment measured in dollars or the ratio of total quarterly investment relative to total IT
spending. Our results indicate that the effect of the French and German rulings on the number of
French or German VC investment rounds is negative and significant in Germany, and negative,
although insignificant in France. This suggests that our principal results are not being driven by a
small number of large VC investments and provides further evidence that decisions around
copyright protection can have significant impacts on VC investment.

6.

Conclusions
The impact of property rights, and in particular its implications for investment, is an

important issue in corporate finance. In this paper, we set out to address the impact of these
changes in one particular case: by looking at the impact of unexpected judicial decisions that
shifted the allocation of copyright protection on VC investment in cloud computing companies.
We do so by analyzing the joint effects of the Cablevision decision and the French and German
rulings on VC investment in the U.S. relative to the EU and across the U.S., as well as by
separately analyzing the effects of the French and German court rulings on VC investment in
French and German cloud computing companies. To that end, we constructed a dataset on VC
investment in cloud computing companies and estimated multiple difference-in-difference
regression models.
36

Our findings suggest that decisions around the allocation of copyright ownership can have
significant impacts on investment in innovative enterprises. Specifically, we find that the
Cablevision decision, along with court rulings in France and Germany, led to additional
incremental investment in U.S. cloud computing companies compared to the EU experience. In
addition, we find that French and German court rulings led to reduced investment in French and
German cloud computing companies compared to all other EU countries. The more granular
analyses, such as of the impact on funding in the Second District, support that the shift in the
allocation of copyright protection has a major impact on investment.
Taken together, our findings suggest that strong upstream property rights, combined with
transaction costs that limited the ability to enter into licenses, can significantly deter investment
in downstream innovations. We cannot assess the broader social welfare impact of these
changes, since we cannot observe investment by large corporations or the long-run consequences
of these shifts in property rights on the production of creative material. (Waldfogel [2011] argues
that changes in effective copyright protection has had little impact on the development of highquality popular music, but much more work needs to be done.) Nonetheless, the findings of this
paper provide an empirical data point that helps illustrate an important and little studied issue.

37

References
“50 Top Cloud Computing Companies,” cloudtweaks.com, July 30, 2010, accessed October 3,
2011, http://www.cloudtweaks.com/2010/07/over-50-of-the-biggest-and-best-cloud-computingcompanies, and similar compilations in other years.
Acemoglu, Daron, “The Form of Property Rights: Oligarchic Versus Democratic Societies,”
National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper #10037, 2003.
Bario, David, “Aereo Hits CBS with Preemptive Lawsuit Ahead of Big Expansion,” Corporate
Counsel, May 16, 2013, accessed May 18, 2013,
http://www.law.com/corporatecounsel/PubArticleCC.jsp?id=1367756878579&slreturn=2013041
8065133.
Bird and Bird, “Copyright Update: An Update on Developments in Europe in 2009,”
www.twobirds.com, December 14, 2009,
http://www.twobirds.com/English/Publications/NewsLetters/Upload/Copyright%20Update%202
009.pdf.
Branstetter, Lee, Fisman, Raymond, and Foley, Fritz, “Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights
Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel
Data,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 121 (1), 2006, pp. 321-349.
Boldrin, Michele, and Levine, David, Against Intellectual Monopoly. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2008.
Burghart, Sara, “Cablevision – Please Rewind: A Legal Analysis of Copyright Infringement by
Remote Storage-DVRs under German and U.S. Copyright Law,” unpublished thesis paper,
Boston University School of Law, 2010.
Carter, James, “They Know It When They See It: Copyright and Aesthetics in the Second
Circuit,” St. John's Law Review, Vol. 65 (3), 1991.
Caruana, Stephane, “Scandale Judiciaire Autour de Wizzgo,” degroupnews.com, November 26,
2008, http://www.degroupnews.com/actualite/n3038-scandale-judiciaire-autour-de-wizzgo.html.
Cartoon Network, LP, LLLP v. CSC Holdings, Inc., 536 F.3d 121 (2d Cir. 2008).
Chander, Anupam, “Facebookistan,” North Carolina Law Review, Vol. 90, 2012, p. 1807.
Corbin, Kenneth, “15 Cloud Computing Firms to Watch: Security, Storage, Apps,”
datamation.com, April 26, 2011, accessed October 3, 2011,
http://itmanagement.earthweb.com/cloud-computing/15-Cloud-Computing-Firms-to-WatchSecurity-Storage-Apps-3931826.htm.
Depena, Ray, “Cloud Computing Companies to Watch in 2011,” Cloud Computing Journal,
February 4, 2011, accessed October 3, 2011, http://cloudcomputing.sys-con.com/node/1662284.
38

European Digital Rights, “The Response of the European Digital Rights to the European
Commission's Green Paper on the Online Distribution of Audiovisual Works,” ec.europa.eu,
November 2011, http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2011/audiovisual/registeredorganisation/edri_en.pdf.
Geelan, Jeremy, “The Top 150 Players in Cloud Computing: SYS-CON's Cloud Computing
Journal Expands Again Its List of Most Active Players in the Cloud Ecosystem,”
soacloud.utilizer.com, October 29, 2009, accessed October 3, 2011,
http://soacloud.ulitzer.com/node/770174.
Gilbert, Richard, and Shapiro, Carl, “Optimal Patent Length and Breadth,” RAND Journal of
Economics, Vol. 21 (1), 1990, pp. 106-112.
Hall, Robert, and Jones, Charles, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114 (1), 1999, pp. 83-116.
Hellmann, Thomas and Puri, Manju, “The Interaction between Product Market and Financing
Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 13 (4), 2000, pp. 959984.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, Llobet, Gerard, and Mitchell, Matthew, “Rewarding Sequential Innovators:
Prizes, Patents and Buyouts,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 114 (6), 2006, pp. 1041-1068.
Huggett, Brady, “Biotech’s Wellsping: A Survey of the Health of the Private Sector,” Nature
Biotechnology, Vol. 30, 2012, pp. 395-400.
International Law Office, “Federal Court Rules on Internet-Based Video Recording,”
internationallawoffice.com, June 11, 2009,
http://www.internationallawoffice.com/newsletters/detail.aspx?g=a3b4f236-0844-4890-8a9c2801a77792d8&redir=1.
International Law Office, “Rise and Fall of Online Digital Video Recorders,”
internationallawoffice.com, February 19, 2009,
http://www.internationallawoffice.com/newsletters/detail.aspx?g=a08cc455-b5ae-42d4-881dfa85fc7c3a53.
IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, “DPMA Decides that VG
Media Does Not Need to Grant Rights to Operate an Online Video Recorder,” IRIS Legal
Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2011,
http://merlin.obs.coe.int/iris/2011/1/article22.en.html.
IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, “RTL Loses Dispute with
Save.tv,” IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2011,
http://merlin.obs.coe.int/iris/2011/8/article21.en.html.

39

IRIS Legal Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, “ DPMA Decides that VG
Media Does Not Need to Grant Rights to Operate an Online Video Recorder,” IRIS Legal
Observations of the European Audiovisual Observatory, 2011,
http://merlin.obs.coe.int/iris/2011/1/article22.en.html.
Kirilov, Kiril, “Top 25 European Cloud Computing Rising Stars To Watch – Complete List,”
cloudtweaks.com, April 6, 2011, accessed October 3, 2011,
http://www.cloudtweaks.com/2011/04/top-25-european-cloud-computing-rising-stars-to-watchcomplete-list/.
Kortum, Samuel, and Lerner, Josh, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 31 (4), 2000, pp. 674-692.
Kwun, Michael, “Victory for DVRs in the Cloud,” Electronic Frontier Foundation, August 4,
2008, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2008/08/victory-dvrs-cloud.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert, “Investor
Protection and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 58 (1–2), 2000,
pp. 3-27.
Lerner, Josh, The Architecture of Innovation. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2012.
Lerner, Josh, “The Empirical Impact of Intellectual Property Rights on Innovation: Puzzles and
Clues,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 99 (2), 2009, pp. 343-348.
“List of Top Cloud Computing Solution Providers to Watch in 2009,” onCloudComputing.com,
July 1, 2009, accessed October 3, 2011, http://www.oncloudcomputing.com/en/2009/07/list-oftop-cloud-computing-solution-providers-to-watch-in-2009.
Maats, Frederike, Metrick, Andrew, Hinkes, Brian, Yasuda, Ayako and Vershovski, Sofia, “On
the Consistency and Reliability of Venture Capital Databases” (2009).
Madison Park Group, “Guide to Venture Capital,” 2008.
“OECD Stat Extracts,” Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,
http://stats.oecd.org.
“OLG Dresden 14 U 801/07 Urteil vom 12.07.2011,” http://www.rechthat.de/urteile/urheberrecht-urteile/olg-dresden-14-u-80107-urteil-vom-12-07-2011-rtl-gegensave-tv/.
Ottaviani, John, 2007, “The End is Near – Bertelsmann Settles EMI Claims Over Napster,”
Technology & Marketing Law Blog,
http://blog.ericgoldman.org/archives/2007/03/the_end_is_near.htm.
Poschenrieder, Pascal, “Online-Videorekorder: mit ein paar Klicks zum Wunsch-Programm,”
www.CNet.de, August 21, 2008, http://www.cnet.de/praxis/tv40

gaming/39195111/fullcontent/online_videorekorder_mit_ein_paar_klicks_zum_wunsch_progra
mm.htm.
“Private Equity Module: ThomsonONE.com Investment Banking,” thomsonreuters.com,
accessed October 17, 2011,
http://thomsonreuters.com/content/financial/pdf/i_and_a/thomsononecom_ib_pe.pdf.
Puri, Manju and Zarutskie, Rebecca, “On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital and NonVenture-Capital Financed Firms,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 67 (6), 2012, pp. 2247-2293.
Sakakibara, Mariko, Branstetter, Lee, “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation? Evidence
from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 32 (1), 2001,
pp. 77-100.
“Save.TV Gewinnt Rechtsstreit Gegen RTL Nur Teilweise,” TVAnbieter.de, July 25, 2011,
http://www.tvanbieter.de/2011/07/online-videorecorder-save-tv-gewinnt-rechtsstreit-gegen-rtlnur-teilweise/.
Scotchmer, Suzanne, Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004.
Sherman, Andrew, Raising Capital: Get the Money You Need to Grow Your Business Third
Edition. New York: American Management Association, 2012.
Singh, Basant, “Top 10 Cloud Computing Service Providers of 2009,” techno-pulse.com,
December 8, 2009, accessed October 3, 2011, http://www.techno-pulse.com/2009/12/top-cloudcomputing-service-providers.html.
Standeford, Dugie, “US Cablevision Decision Has Implications for Cloud Computing, Online
Advertising,” Intellectual Property Watch, July 3, 2009, http://www.ipwatch.org/weblog/2009/07/03/us-cablevision-decision-has-implications-for-cloud-computingonline-advertising/.
Stoltz, Mitch, “Symposium: Aereo decision injects uncertainty into copyright,” SCOTUSblog,
accessed December 26, 2014, http://www.scotusblog.com/2014/06/symposium-aereo-decisioninjects-uncertainty-into-copyright/.
“The Top 20 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Vendors,” clouds360.com, accessed October 3,
2011, http://www.clouds360.com/iaas.php.
“The Top 20 Platform as a Service (PaaS) Vendors,” clouds360.com, accessed October 3, 2011,
http://www.clouds360.com/paas.php.
“The Top 20 Software as a Service (SaaS) Vendors,” clouds360.com, accessed October 3, 2011,
http://www.clouds360.com/saas.php.
“Thomson ONE’s Private Equity module powered by VentureXpert,” ThomsonOne.
41

“TNT: Wizzgo Interdit d’Enregistrer les Programmes de France Télévisions et TF1,” ZDNet.fr,
November 14, 2008, http://www.zdnet.fr/actualites/tnt-wizzgo-interdit-d-enregistrer-lesprogrammes-de-france-televisions-et-tf1-39384863.htm.
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. v. Cablevision Systems Corp., 478 F. Supp. 2d 607 [S.D.N.Y.
2007].
Waldfogel, Joel, 2011, “Copyright Protection, Technological Change, and the Quality of New
Products: Evidence from Recorded Music since Napster,” Working Paper no. 17503, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
“Wizzgo Blog,” Wizzgo, March 16, 2009, www.wizzgo.com/blog/.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 2002.

42

Figure 1
Difference in the Ratio of Investment in Cloud Computing Companies
to Investment in all IT Companies in the U.S. and EU
12%

Cartoon Network v. Cablevision
Appeals Court Decision
10%

Ratio to IT Investment

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

U.S. Cloud / IT - EU Cloud / IT
Source: Private Equity Investment data Jan 2006 - Dec 2010 from Thomson ONE.

43

Table 1
1
Event Study Results: U.S. Cloud Computing Firms
[0,+1] Window; Equal-Weighted Returns
Independent Variables
Number of Observations

Judicial Decision
District Court
Second Circuit
22
25

Market Model Returns
Mean Cumulative Abnormal Returns
Positive: Negative Ratio
p-Value, Patell z-test
p-Value, Generalized Sign Test

-0.57%
7:15
0.273
0.057*

1.16%
18:7
0.002***
0.008***

Market-Adjusted Returns
Mean Cumulative Abnormal Returns
Positive: Negative Ratio
p-Value, Patell z-test
p-Value, Generalized Sign Test

-0.48%
8:14
0.292
0.126

1.36%
18:7
0.001***
0.015**

March 22-23, 2007

August 4-5, 2008

Length of Time Period

Notes:
[1] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.

44

Table 2
1,2
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Cloud Computing VC Dollars to
Total IT VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(1)
0.0201***
(0.0048)

(2)
0.0128***
(0.0045)

0.0059
(0.0080)

-0.0094
(0.0090)

0.0257**
(0.0114)

0.0256**
(0.0095)

Percent Change in GDP

0.0093***
(0.0030)

Broadband Penetration Rate

0.3743***
(0.0900)

Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Implied Increase in U.S. Cloud VC Investment
($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

0.0117***
(0.0038)

-0.0627***
(0.0167)

40
0.544
$730

40
0.699
$728

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008
Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

45

Table 3
1,2
Cloud Computing Quantile Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Cloud Computing VC Dollars to
Total IT VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(3)
0.0189**
(0.0074)

(4)
0.0099
(0.0060)

-0.0014
(0.0107)

-0.0174
(0.0183)

0.0350**
(0.0169)

0.0318**
(0.0155)

Percent Change in GDP

0.0058
(0.0044)

Broadband Penetration Rate

0.3594***
(0.0863)

Constant
Observations
Implied Increase in U.S. Cloud VC Investment
($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

0.0112*
(0.0059)

-0.0556***
(0.0136)

40
$952

40
$904

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008
Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

46

Table 4
1,2
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Internet-Specific VC Dollars to
Total IT VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(5)
0.1089***
(0.0275)

(6)
0.0805***
(0.0285)

0.1186**
(0.0446)

0.0514
(0.0575)

-0.0852*
(0.0491)

-0.0789
(0.0503)

Percent Change in GDP

0.0150
(0.0147)

Broadband Penetration Rate

1.2788***
(0.4496)

Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Length of Time Period

0.2030***
(0.0238)

-0.0401
(0.0809)

40
0.302
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

40
0.365
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008
Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

47

Table 5
Cloud Computing Regression Results with Clustered Standard Errors:
1,2

U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Cloud Computing VC Dollars to
Total IT VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(7)
0.0201***
(0.0010)

(8)
0.0128***
(0.0010)

0.0059
(0.0057)

-0.0094
(0.0068)

0.0257*
(0.0109)

0.0256*
(0.0111)

Percent Change in GDP

0.0093**
(0.0018)

Broadband Penetration Rate

0.3743***
(0.0234)

Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Implied Increase in U.S. Cloud VC Investment
($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

0.0117***
(0.0026)

-0.0627***
(0.0040)

40
0.579
$730

40
0.738
$728

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Clustered standard errors (by quarter) are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008
Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

48

Table 6
1,2
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Cloud Computing VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
IT U.S. Minus Cloud VC Investment

(9)
0.0531
(0.0325)

(10)
0.0586**
(0.0264)

Total VC Investment Minus IT Minus Cloud VC
Investment

0.0090
(0.0105)

0.0002
(0.0112)

-71.3537
(108.3648)

-87.3035
(84.2297)

7.4676
(8.8497)

-23.4116
(26.4662)

118.7576*
(59.1897)

126.1020**
(51.2073)

U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment
Percent Change in GDP

20.6408**
(9.2082)

Broadband Penetration Rate
Constant

707.0396*
(372.2410)
-37.6883
(22.7698)

Observations
40
Adjusted R-Squared
0.783
Implied Increase in U.S. Cloud VC Investment ($ Millions)
$1,191
Length of Time Period
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

-170.0521**
(71.2992)
40
0.838
$1,268
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and *
indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008 Dummy
variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

49

Table 7
1,2,3
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Whether a Deal is a Cloud Deal (0/1)
Data are Restricted to Investments by VC firms Which Have Done at Least One Cloud Deal Previously

U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

4

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(11)
-0.054***
(0.000)

(12)
0.013***
(0.003)

Model
(13)
0.013***
(0.003)

(14)
-0.127
(0.101)

(15)
-0.127
(0.101)

-0.884***
(0.000)

-1.584***
(0.001)

17.742***
(4.249)

-1.772***
(0.295)

6.345***
(1.561)

1.220***
(0.000)

1.217***
(0.012)

1.214***
(0.012)

1.475***
(0.310)

1.475***
(0.310)

Percent Change in GDP

7.819***
(1.612)

3.593***
(0.475)

Broadband Penetration Rate

78.141***
(6.404)

83.760***
(1.108)

Constant
Quarter of Year Fixed Effects?
VC Firm Fixed Effects
Observations
Pseudo R-Squared
Length of Time Period

-2.345***
(0.000)

-1.278***
(0.069)

-46.826***
(5.335)

17.045***
(1.214)

-16.397***
(2.167)

No
No
5,539
0.00670
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Yes
No
5,539
0.0212
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Yes
No
5,539
0.0212
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Yes
Yes
4,512
0.156
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Yes
Yes
4,512
0.156
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] A logit model was used. If a deal is a cloud deal the binary dependent variable is equal to one; otherwise, it is equal to zero.
[2] Clustered standard errors (by region) are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[3] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[4] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008 Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

50

Table 8
1,2
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: Number of Rounds of VC Investment
Model
Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

(16)
15.5***
(1.9)

(17)
13.4***
(1.5)

0.8
(0.8)

-3.7
(2.4)

6.5*
(3.8)

6.6**
(2.9)

Percent Change in GDP

2.2**
(1.0)

Broadband Penetration Rate
Constant
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Length of Time Period

102.7***
(33.9)
1.2***
(0.3)

-19.0***
(6.4)

40
0.787
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

40
0.845
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent
level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008
Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

51

Table 9
1,2
Cloud Computing Regression Results: U.S. vs. EU
Dependent Variable: For Each of IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS, Ratio of Cloud Computing VC
Dollars to Total IT VC Dollars

IaaS
(18)
0.0026
(0.0034)

Model
PaaS
(19)
0.0057***
(0.0013)

SaaS
(20)
0.0151***
(0.0037)

-0.0016
(0.0028)

0.0000
(0.0005)

0.0081
(0.0073)

Effect of Cablevision on U.S. VC Investment

0.0117**
(0.0050)

0.0061**
(0.0030)

0.0089
(0.0087)

Constant

0.0039
(0.0026)

0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0074
(0.0026)

40
0.389
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

40
0.546
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

40
0.448
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Independent Variables
U.S. Indicator
2008 Dummy

3

Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
Length of Time Period

Notes:
[1] Robust standard errors (by quarter) are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates
significance at a 10 percent level.
[3] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008 Dummy variable is set
equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.

52

Table 10
Cloud Computing Regression Results: 2nd Circuit Court vs. Rest of U.S.
Dependent Variable: Whether a Deal is a Cloud Deal (0/1)

Independent Variables
2nd Circuit Indicator
2008 Dummy

4

Effect of Cablevision on 2nd Circuit VC Investment

1,2,3,4,5

(21)
-1.148***
(0.181)

Model
(22)
-1.205***
(0.179)

(23)
-1.200***
(0.179)

0.626***
(0.079)

-0.228
(0.206)

1.029*
(0.569)

0.704***
(0.084)

0.708***
(0.087)

0.716***
(0.086)

Percent Change in GDP

0.418**
(0.180)

Broadband Penetration Rate

1.861
(6.720)

Constant
Quarter of Year Fixed Effects?
Observations
Pseudo R-Squared
Length of Time Period

-3.430***
(0.132)

-2.031***
(0.202)

-4.363***
(1.313)

No

Yes

Yes

29,356
0.0143
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

29,356
0.0277
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

29,356
0.0251
1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] A logit model was used. If a deal is a cloud deal the binary dependent variable is equal to one; otherwise, it is equal
to zero.
[2] Clustered standard errors (by state) are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[3] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates
significance at a 10 percent level.
[4] Decision by Appellate Court (judgment of District Court is reversed) (8/4/2008). The 2008 Dummy variable is set
equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2008.
[5] 2nd Circuit Court's jurisdiction covers the states of New York, Connecticut, and Vermont.

53

Table 11
Cloud Computing Regression Results: France and Germany vs. the EU
1
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Cloud Computing VC Dollars to Total IT VC Dollars
Model
Independent Variables
France Indicator
Q1 2009 Dummy

2

Effect of the Wizzgo Decision on French
VC Investment

(24)
-0.0125***
(0.0041)

(25)
-0.0207***
(0.0060)

0.0223**
(0.0092)

0.0175*
(0.0091)

-0.0185*
(0.0095)

-0.0176*
(0.0089)

Germany Indicator
Q3 2006 Dummy

3

Effect of German Decisions on German
VC Investment

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

-0.0031*
(0.0018)

-0.0026
(0.0020)

-0.0031*
(0.0017)

-0.0029
(0.0028)

0.0115**
(0.0049)

0.0103*
(0.0053)

0.0205***
(0.0053)

0.0098
(0.0094)

-0.0115**
(0.0049)

-0.0133**
(0.0054)

-0.0156**
(0.0073)

-0.0233***
(0.0065)

Percent Change in GDP

0.0042**
(0.0020)

0.0020
(0.0017)

0.0025
(0.0016)

Broadband Penetration Rate

0.1406**
(0.0641)

0.0270
(0.0317)

0.1181
(0.0821)

Constant
Observations
R-Squared
Implied Quarterly Decrease in Cloud
VC Investment ($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

0.0125***
(0.0041)

-0.0137
(0.0112)

0.0031*
(0.0018)

-0.0010
(0.0042)

0.0031*
(0.0017)

-0.0102
(0.0089)

40
0.500

40
0.535

40
0.396

40
0.418

56
0.256

56
0.311

-2.0

-1.9

-0.5

-0.5

-0.6

-0.9

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2008 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2008 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level. Robust
standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] Decision by Tribunal de Grande Instance of Paris in November of 2008. The 2009 Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 4Q 2008.
[3] Decision by the German District Court against Shift.tv on May 12, 2006. The 2006 Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2006.
Additional decisions include an Appeals Court ruling against Shift.tv on November 28, 2006, a District Court ruling against Save.tv on May 9, 2007, an Appeals
Court ruling in favor of Save.tv on October 9, 2007, and a Federal Court decision in which the cases against Shift.tv and Save.tv were remanded back to the
Appeals Court on April 22, 2009.

54

Table 12
Cloud Computing Regression Results: France and Germany vs. ROW
1
Dependent Variable: Ratio of Cloud Computing VC Dollars to Total IT VC Dollars

Independent Variables
France Indicator
Q1 2009 Dummy

2

Effect of the Wizzgo Decision on French VC Investment

Model
(31)

(32)

-0.0012
(0.0008)

-0.0012
(0.0008)

0.0056*
(0.0033)

0.0104***
(0.0026)

-0.0056*
(0.0033)

-0.0054
(0.0056)

0.0057*
(0.0028)

0.0012
(0.0008)

0.0012
(0.0008)

40
0.467

40
0.239

56
0.111

-0.2

-0.2

(30)
-0.0057*
(0.0028)
0.0117***
(0.0037)
-0.0079*
(0.0045)

Germany Indicator
Q3 2006 Dummy

3

Effect of German Decisions on German VC Investment
Constant
Observations
R-Squared
Implied Quarterly Decrease in French Cloud VC
Investment ($ Millions)
Implied Quarterly Decrease in German Cloud VC
Investment ($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

-0.9

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2008 1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates
significance at a 10 percent level. Robust standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] Decision by Tribunal de Grande Instance of Paris in November of 2008. The 2009 Dummy variable is set equal to
one for all quarters after 4Q 2008.
[3] Decision by the German District Court against Shift.tv on May 12, 2006. The 2006 Dummy variable is set equal to
one for all quarters after 2Q 2006. Additional decisions include an Appeals Court ruling against Shift.tv on
November 28, 2006, a District Court ruling against Save.tv on May 9, 2007, an Appeals Court ruling in favor of
Save.tv on October 9, 2007, and a Federal Court decision in which the cases against Shift.tv and Save.tv were
remanded back to the Appeals Court on April 22, 2009.

55

Table 13
Cloud Computing Regression Results: France and Germany vs. the EU
Dependent Variable: Cloud Computing VC Dollars

1

Model
Independent Variables
French IT Minus Cloud VC
Investment

(33)
0.0203***
(0.0067)

(34)
0.0195***
(0.0062)

(35)
0.0119
(0.0079)

(36)
-0.0129*
(0.0069)

(37)
0.0144*
(0.0078)

(38)
0.0144*
(0.0073)

Total French VC Investment
Minus IT Minus Cloud VC Investment

0.0002
(0.0010)

-0.0007
(0.0010)

-0.0005
(0.0027)

-0.0020
(0.0023)

-0.0022
(0.0036)

-0.0033
(0.0032)

France Indicator

1.6962
(3.2316)

-3.0309
(4.1813)

10.3236**
(3.8434)

8.0265**
(3.9036)

-9.9446**
(3.8490)

-8.1107**
(3.4266)
1.8987
(2.4262)

1.9702
(2.3332)

1.8041
(1.8319)

1.6259
(1.9181)

3.7146
(2.5231)

3.9986
(2.4620)

7.5471***
(2.3380)

6.7182**
(2.6475)

-3.7622
(2.5160)

-4.9726*
(2.8590)

-7.2437***
(2.3567)

-9.0964***
(2.7749)

Q1 2009 Dummy

2

Effect of the Wizzgo Decision on French
VC Investment
Germany Indicator
Q3 2006 Dummy

3

Effect of German Decisions on German
VC Investment
Percent Change in GDP

2.7005**
(1.0572)

1.5993
(1.0032)

1.4356
(0.8902)

Broadband Penetration Rate

63.7616**
(31.1572)

9.6318
(16.3778)

18.5790
(12.9991)

Constant
Observations
R-Squared
Implied Quarterly Decrease in French
Cloud VC Investment ($ Millions)
Length of Time Period

-3.8858
(3.8896)

-14.9104***
(5.1048)

-2.3038
(2.7809)

-3.9396
(2.4841)

-2.1293
(2.0958)

-4.3394**
(1.8465)

40
0.571

40
0.628

40
0.448

40
0.495

56
0.472

56
0.513

-9.9

-8.1

-3.8

-5.0

-7.2

-9.1

1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2006 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2008 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2008 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2010 1Q 2004 - 4Q 2010

Notes:
[1] *** indicates significance at a 1 percent level, ** indicates significance at a 5 percent level, and * indicates significance at a 10 percent level. Robust
standard errors are provided under the point estimates in italics.
[2] Decision by Tribunal de Grande Instance of Paris in November of 2008. The 2009 Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 4Q 2008.
[3] Decision by the German District Court against Shift.tv on May 12, 2006. The 2006 Dummy variable is set equal to one for all quarters after 2Q 2006.
Additional decisions include an Appeals Court ruling against Shift.tv on November 28, 2006, a District Court ruling against Save.tv on May 9, 2007, an Appeals
Court ruling in favor of Save.tv on October 9, 2007, and a Federal Court decision in which the cases against Shift.tv and Save.tv were remanded back to the
Appeals Court on April 22, 2009.

56

Appendix A - Cablevision Decision
Summary Statistics for Investment Levels and Regression Variables
Q1 1995 - Q4 2010

VC Investment in U.S.

Mean
$92.3

Std
Dev
$88.0

2.2%

2.3%

0.0%

1.6%

11.5%

$3.8

$7.4

$0.0

$0.0

$34.0

0.7%

1.4%

0.0%

0.0%

0.6%

0.7%

-2.3%

0.5%

0.6%

17.7%
15.0%

Min
Med
Max
Total
$0.0 $71.8 $406.5 $5,906.3

Pre Cablevision: Q1 2006 - Q2 2008
Std
Mean Dev
Min
Med
Max
Total
$131.0 $39.9
$72.9 $125.8 $191.1 $1,309.7

Post Cablevision: Q3 2008 - Q4 2010
Std
Mean Dev
Min
Med
Max
Total
$184.7 $84.9
$58.8 $176.6 $369.4 $1,847.1

1

Cloud ($ Millions)

VC Investment in U.S.
Cloud as % of VC
Investment in U.S. IT

3.2%

0.9%

1.8%

3.0%

4.6%

6.3%

2.4%

3.1%

6.1%

11.5%

$7.0

$7.7

$0.0

$4.5

$20.5

$8.9

$11.5

$0.0

$3.7

$34.0

6.4%

1.2%

1.2%

0.0%

0.9%

3.6%

1.8%

2.2%

0.0%

0.8%

6.4%

0.7%

2.0%

0.4%

0.5%

-0.4%

0.4%

1.3%

-0.1%

1.2%

-2.3%

0.5%

1.0%

-2.6%

0.5%

1.2%

0.7%

0.4%

-0.3%

0.7%

1.0%

-0.3%

1.1%

-2.6%

0.3%

1.0%

7.4%

5.4%

18.6%

27.7%

20.7%

2.6%

16.6%

20.8%

23.9%

26.1%

0.8%

24.7%

25.9%

27.7%

8.4%

2.0%

15.8%

26.0%

18.2%

3.0%

13.5%

18.5%

22.2%

24.6%

1.0%

22.8%

24.9%

26.0%

1

VC Investment in EU

$242.3

$69.9

$88.7

1

Cloud ($ Millions)

VC Investment in EU
Cloud as % of VC
Investment in E.U. IT

1

Real U.S. GDP Growth
2

Rate Prior Quarter

Real EU GDP Growth
2

Rate Prior Quarter
U.S. Broadband
Penetration Rate
EU Broadband
Penetration Rate

3

3

Notes and Sources:
[1] Thomson ONE Private Equity data, Jan 1995 to Dec 2010.
[2] OECD real GDP growth from the previous quarter.
[3] OECD broadband penetration rate.

57

Appendix B - French Ruling
Summary Statistics for Investment Levels and Regression Variables

VC Investment in French Cloud ($

Q1 1995 - Q4 2010
Std
Mean
Dev
Min
Med
Max
$0.056 $0.321 $0.000 $0.000 $2.199

Total
$3.561

Pre-Wizzgo Decision: Q1 2006 - Q4 2008
Std
Mean
Dev
Min
Med
Max
Total
$0.000 $0.000 $0.000 $0.000 $0.000 $0.000

Post-Wizzgo Decision:: Q1 2009 - Q4 2010
Std
Mean
Dev
Min
Med
Max
Total
$0.445 $0.854 $0.000 $0.000 $2.199 $3.561

1

Millions)

VC Investment in French Cloud as
% of VC Investment in French IT
VC Investment in EU Cloud ($

0.05%

0.28%

0.00%

0.00%

1.70%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.38%

0.72%

0.00%

0.00%

1.70%

1

$3.645 $7.301

$0.000 $0.000 $32.645

0.91%

1.88%

0.00%

0.00%

0.41%

0.51%

-1.58%

0.53%

0.61%

-2.33%

$233.303

$5.900 $7.388

$0.000 $3.070 $20.500 $70.800

$9.840 $12.037

$0.000 $3.707 $32.645 $78.720

8.79%

1.25%

1.41%

0.00%

0.65%

3.83%

2.76%

2.87%

0.00%

1.97%

8.13%

0.53%

1.31%

0.19%

0.69%

-1.45%

0.37%

1.07%

0.10%

0.71%

-1.58%

0.34%

0.60%

0.62%

1.34%

0.31%

0.90%

-1.84%

0.69%

1.04%

-0.03%

1.00%

-2.33%

0.30%

0.75%

18.01% 10.44%

1.57% 18.84% 33.66%

22.54%

3.75% 16.31% 22.95% 27.64%

30.95%

1.91% 28.30% 30.92% 33.66%

13.61%

1.78% 14.97% 22.62%

17.75%

2.83% 12.88% 18.14% 21.41%

21.57%

0.87% 20.15% 21.60% 22.62%

1

Millions)

VC Investment in EU Cloud as %
of VC Investment in E.U. IT

1

Real French GDP Growth Rate
2

Prior Quarter

Real EU GDP Growth Rate Prior
2

Quarter

French Broadband Penetration
Rate

3

EU Broadband Penetration Rate

3

7.31%

Notes and Sources:
[1] Thomson ONE Private Equity data, Jan 1995 to Dec 2010.
[2] OECD real GDP grwoth from the previous quarter
[3] OECD broadband penetration rate.

58

Appendix C - German Ruling
Summary Statistics for Investment Levels and Regression Variables
Q1 1995 - Q4 2010
Std
Mean
Dev
Min
Med
Max
$0.087 $0.690 $0.000 $0.000 $5.473

VC Investment in German

Pre-German District Court decision: Q1 2004 - Q2 2006
Total
$5.473

Mean
Std Dev
$0.000 $0.000

Min
Med
$0.000 $0.000

Max
$0.000

Total
$0.000

Post-German District Court decision: Q3 2006 - Q4 2008
Std
Mean
Dev
Min
Med
Max
Total
$0.000 $0.000 $0.000 $0.000
$0.000
$0.000

Post-German District Court decision: Q3 2006 - Q4 2010
Mean Std Dev
$0.304
$1.290

Min
$0.000

Med
$0.000

Max
$5.473

Total
$5.473

1

Cloud ($ Millions)

0.15%

VC Investment in German
Cloud as % of VC Investment
in German IT

1.15%

0.00%

0.00%

8.86%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

$22.710

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

$6.913 $7.728

$0.000 $4.545

$20.500

0.49%

2.09%

0.00%

0.00%

8.86%

$8.214

$9.671

$0.000

$4.483

$32.645

1

VC Investment in EU Cloud ($

$3.645 $7.301

$0.000 $0.000 $32.645 $233.303

$3.514

$7.094

$0.000 $0.000

$35.140

$69.126

0.91%

1.88%

0.00%

0.00%

8.79%

1.18%

2.73%

0.00%

0.00%

8.79%

1.46%

1.46%

0.00%

1.30%

3.83%

2.04%

2.23%

0.00%

1.59%

8.13%

0.32%

0.88%

-4.01%

0.36%

1.95%

0.44%

0.57%

-0.15%

0.29%

1.51%

0.27%

1.03%

-2.17%

0.62%

1.22%

0.24%

1.36%

-4.01%

0.62%

1.95%

0.53%

0.61%

-2.33%

0.62%

1.34%

0.71%

0.23%

0.36%

0.75%

0.99%

0.19%

0.94%

-1.84%

0.64%

1.04%

0.09%

0.94%

-2.33%

0.41%

1.04%

17.21% 10.31%

3.14% 16.55% 31.93%

10.10%

3.16%

6.01%

9.71%

15.01%

22.72%

3.81% 16.55% 23.07%

27.44%

26.17%

4.91%

16.55%

27.16%

31.93%

13.61%

1.78% 14.97% 22.62%

9.54%

2.83%

5.52%

9.40%

13.97%

18.61%

2.18% 14.97% 19.00%

21.41%

19.93%

2.26%

14.97%

20.54%

22.62%

$147.846

1

Millions)

VC Investment in EU Cloud as
% of VC Investment in E.U. IT

1

Real German GDP Growth Rate
2

Prior Quarter

Real EU GDP Growth Rate Prior
2

Quarter

German Broadband Penetration
3

Rate
EU Broadband Penetration
Rate

7.31%

3

Notes and Sources:
[1] Thomson ONE Private Equity data, Jan 1995 to Dec 2010.
[2] OECD real GDP grwoth from the previous quarter
[3] OECD broadband penetration rate.

59

