                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           POLITICS IN THE COURTROOM:
                  POLITICAL IDEOLOGY AND JURY DECISION MAKING

                                         Shamena Anwar
                                          Patrick Bayer
                                        Randi Hjalmarsson

                                       Working Paper 21145
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21145


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2015


This research would not have been possible without the assistance of a number of individuals at the
Gothenburg District Court. In particular, we would like to thank the two nämndemän coordinators,
Assistant Judge Christoffer Önrup, Judge of Appeal Christer Ranch, and Assistant Judge David Caldevik
for the their help answering numerous questions and Mikael Sjöberg in the Archives for his assistance
collating all of the court documents. We would also like to thank two research assistants (Ulrika
Kjellström and Magnus Landergren) for their help collecting the data and Matthew Lindquist, Emma
von Essen, Erik Hjalmarsson, Johan Lönroth, and Jordi Blanes I Vidal as well as seminar participants
at Queen Mary University of London, Gothenburg University, Aarhus, Leciester University, Stockholm
School of Economics, Lund University, Växjö, the Swedish Institute for Social Research at Stockholm
University, the Paris School of Economics and the Bath Crime Economics Workshop for valuable
feedback. Hjalmarsson would also like to acknowledge funding from Vetenskapsrådet (The Swedish
Research Council) and Jan Wallanders och Tom Hedelius Stiftelse Tore Browaldhs Stiftelse, P2014-
0200:1.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of theNational Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Shamena Anwar, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Politics in the Courtroom: Political Ideology and Jury Decision Making
Shamena Anwar, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson
NBER Working Paper No. 21145
May 2015
JEL No. K0,K14,K4

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper uses data from the Gothenburg District Court in Sweden and a research design that exploits
the random assignment of politically appointed jurors (termed nämndemän) to make three contributions
to the literature on jury decision-making: (i) an assessment of whether systematic biases exist in the
Swedish nämndemän system, (ii) causal evidence on the impact of juror political party on verdicts,
and (iii) an empirical examination of the role of peer effects in jury decision-making. The results reveal
a number of systematic biases: convictions for young defendants and those with distinctly Arabic sounding
names increase substantially when they are randomly assigned jurors from the far-right (nationalist)
Swedish Democrat party, while convictions in cases with a female victim increase markedly when
they are assigned jurors from the far-left (feminist) Vänster party. The results also indicate the presence
of peer effects, with jurors from both the far-left and far-right parties drawing the votes of their more
centrist peers towards their positions. Peer effects take the form of both sway effects, where jurors
influence the opinions of their closest peers in a way that can impact trial outcomes, and dissent aversion,
where jurors switch non-pivotal votes so that the decision is unanimous.


Shamena Anwar                                        Randi Hjalmarsson
Carnegie Mellon University                           University of Gothenburg
5000 Forbes Ave                                      Department of Economics
Heinz College, Hamburg Hall Room 2116D               PO Box 640
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                 405 30 Gothenburg
shamena@andrew.cmu.edu                               Sweden
                                                     randi.hjalmarsson@economics.gu.se
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
1. Introduction

      The right of a defendant to a fair trial is an essential feature of any criminal justice

system that respects the rule of law and, as such, is inscribed in the modern constitutions of

the vast majority of nations. In countries with representative governments, criminal trials are

typically decided by juries drawn from the local population in a manner intended to create

representative participation in the legal system analogous to that in the political system,

although the exact way juries are formed varies widely across countries. Many, particularly

those that follow the English legal tradition, utilize juries of ordinary citizens selected

randomly from the community, while others, including most of continental Europe, draw on a

pool of lay judges or expert jurors selected through local elections or as political appointments

(Jackson and Kovalev, 2006).

      While the use of representative juries may provide a basis for popular legitimacy, the

integrity of any criminal justice system ultimately depends on how close it comes to achieving

the abstract promise of providing a fair trial for all defendants. A particular concern in many

settings is whether juries exhibit systematic biases for or against certain defendants (or

victims) in a way that impacts verdicts beyond the objective quality of the evidence in the

case. While no system is likely to eliminate all such bias, much of the ongoing academic and

legal debate surrounding alternative jury systems is focused on whether certain designs are

more likely to minimize it (Hans, 2008).

      Despite the fundamental importance of these questions for the fairness and integrity of

criminal justice systems, there is surprisingly little hard evidence on jury decision-making

using data from actual trials anywhere in the world. The lack of empirical research is due first

and foremost to restrictions or severe limitations on the use of trial data, especially in

countries outside of the United States. As a result, the current empirical literature consists




                                                                                               2!
!
primarily of a small number of correlation studies using data from the United States.1,2

Unfortunately, these studies are generally subject to concerns about the non-random selection

of the seated jury, making it difficult to draw strong causal conclusions about the effects of

jury composition on verdicts.

           A recent pair of studies (Anwar, Bayer and Hjalmarsson; 2012, 2014) provides causal

evidence of biases in U.S. jury decisions by exploiting random aspects of the assignment of

juries to felony cases in two counties in Florida. Specifically, these studies take advantage of

the random variation in the day-to-day composition of the jury pool from which the jury is

chosen. These papers make clear that verdicts are not simply a function of the objective

quality of the evidence in the case, showing instead that that trial outcomes vary

systematically and significantly with random fluctuations in the composition of juries

(including juror race and age). Importantly, this kind of causal evidence is limited so far to

this single setting, raising concern about the external validity of the existing findings;

analogous studies simply do not exist for other jurisdictions within the U.S. or for alternative

jury systems in other countries.3 Because the vast majority of trials are conducted by local

jurisdictions (e.g., municipalities, counties) in most countries, the broad validity of this kind




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
  See Diamond and Rose (2005) for a review of studies using data from jury trials. More recently, Lehmann and
Smith (2013) look at the impact of a variety of seated juror characteristics (race, gender, age, religiousness,
education, and income) on trial outcomes and Lee (2014) shows that states that switched from key-man jury
selection procedures to more random selection procedures, which were meant to increase black representation on
juries, saw a resulting drop in the share of non-whites newly admitted to prison.
2
  In the absence of data from real trials, researchers have also conducted mock trials, but the resulting
conclusions are limited by both the simplifications made for experimental expediency and the substantially lower
stakes compared to real criminal trials. See Devine et. al. (2001) for a survey of this literature.
3
  There is a more substantial literature on judges, both in the US and internationally, as opposed to juries. A
number of papers look at random assignment of judges, including Abrams et. al (2012) who study racial
differences in sentencing and Ashenfelter et. al (1995) who study the effect of judicial ideology in Federal
courts. See, for instance, Shayo and Zussman (2011) and Gazal-Ayal and Sulitzeanu-Kenan (2010) for studies of
judicial in-group bias in Israeli small claims courts and bail hearings, respectively. Casper and Zeisel (1972)
conducted an early study of German lay judges.

                                                                                                              3!
!
of research depends crucially on increasing the number of carefully designed jury studies

using data from settings throughout the world.4

           With this context in mind, this paper uses a novel data set of criminal cases tried in

Gothenburg, Sweden to make three broad contributions to the empirical literature on jury

decision-making. By way of background, serious criminal cases in Sweden are decided by a

professional judge in collaboration with three lay jurors (termed nämndemän), who are drawn

(essentially) randomly from a pool of eligible nämndemän in the district. Nämndemän are

politically affiliated, appointed officials that serve on many trials during their four-year term.

           The first main goal of our analysis is to assess whether nämndemän exhibit systematic

biases based on the characteristics of the defendant or case. To do so, we take advantage of

the random assignment of nämndemän triplets (juries) to cases, examining how conviction

rates vary with the assignment of different types of nämndemän.                       This research design

naturally avoids the primary concerns with correlation studies in settings where the jury is

seated through a pre-trial selection process and allows us to test whether nämndemän

systematically reach different verdicts when faced with statistically identical evidence.

           Second, our analysis provides the first causal evidence on the role that political

affiliations play in jury decision-making. Given the general perception that views on criminal

justice issues are related to political and ideological leanings, it is surprising that political

party does not appear in reviews of more than 100 jury studies (Devine et al, 2001; Devine,

2012).5 In contrast, political ideology has been considered more extensively in the context of

judicial decision-making, where many judges are politically appointed or elected.6

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4
  Put another way, external validity for research on jury decision making will only be possible in the long run
through the aggregation of many carefully designed studies, each of which analyzes data drawn from a particular
local context.
5
  The only reference we have come across is Tuerkheimer’s (2008) discussion of a mock trial conducted by a
litigation consulting firm (Zagnoli McEvoy Foley). The findings of this study suggest that political leanings are
related to a perspective juror’s views on civil damages, but not his actions in the courtroom.
6
  This literature considers a wide range of cases, including EPA (Revesz, 1997; Miles and Sunstein, 2006),
NLRB (Miles and Sunstein, 2006), criminal appeals, death penalty, and abortion (Sunstein et. al. 2006). It
generally finds that a judge’s politics matter – Democratic judges are more favorable in liberal cases while

                                                                                                               4!
!
           The final component of our analysis uses the random assignment of nämndemän triplets

to cases in a complementary way to explore the role of peers in jury decision making and, in

so doing, begin to provide some empirical evidence on how jurors work together to reach

decisions.               In particular, the repeated randomized structure of nämndemän assignment

provides interesting variation not only in the matching of nämndemän to defendants but also

in the matching of nämndemän to each other. In this way, we observe the same individual

serving with different sets of peers across a large number of different cases. This unique

structure allows us to identify the causal impact of nämndemän on one another.

              Because of legislation in the 1950s prohibiting the observation and recording of

deliberations in U.S. trials, how real juries arrive at verdicts largely remains a black box.

Much of what is known about jury deliberations is based on mock trials;7 there is almost no

research on the dynamics of jury decision-making using data from actual trials. One recent

exception is Hans and Waters (2009) analysis of juror surveys from The Hung Jury Project;

more than half of the unanimous jury verdicts had at least one juror who would have voted

differently than the actual verdict if voting independently. While this result is clearly

suggestive that group dynamics matter, we are unaware of any studies that directly estimate

the impact of peers on jury decision-making.8



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Republican judges are more favorable in conservative cases (Spitzer and Talley, 2013). With respect to
sentencing in criminal cases, Schanzenbach and Tiller (2008) find evidence of harsher sentences from
Republican appointed judges. Iaryczower and Shum’s (2012) study of the Supreme Court finds that while the
justices’ initial leanings are changed in more than 40 percent of cases after incorporating ‘information’, such
changes have become less likely as appointments to the court has become more politicized. Finally, Lim, Snyder,
and Strömberg (forthcoming) study how media coverage differentially affects sentence length for partisan and
non-partisan judges; they find that it leads to harsher sentences for the latter but has no effect on the former.
7
  MacCoun’s (1989) brief review of this literature highlights two phenomena: (i) a majority effect, whereby a
verdict can be predicted fairly reliably by a two-thirds majority, even when there is a unanimous decision rule
and (ii) group polarization, where deliberations make group members more extreme in their views than they
were before deliberating.
8
  A related literature studies panel effects in U.S. circuit court judicial decision-making. Much of this literature
documents the existence of judicial peer effects; see, for instance, Boyd et al (2010) for a study of judge gender.
Fischman (2013) reanalyzes more than ten previous studies of judge panel effects, concluding that the estimated
peer effects are consistent with a strong norm of consensus. Other papers test the potential mechanisms
underlying these peer effects; see, for instance, Miles (2012). Amongst the main mechanisms put forth are
whistleblowing (Cross and Tiller, 1998), dissent aversion (Epstein et al, 2011; Posner, 2008), and the dynamics

                                                                                                                                                                                          5!
!
           The data used in this paper consist of more than 950 closed crimes against person cases

for the Gothenburg District Court for 2009 to 2012, representing more than 1,150 defendant

by case observations. For each case, documents were obtained from the Court Archives that

provide the names of the judge and nämndemän, defendant and case characteristics, the

outcome, and any dissenting opinions (as verdicts do not have to be unanimous in the

Swedish judicial system). These data were merged with a secondary data set of nämndemän

characteristics, including political party, gender, birth year, and years of experience.

           There are nine political parties represented in the data. The two predominant parties, as

in Swedish politics in general, are the Social Democrats and Moderates; in fact, there is at

least one Social Democrat and one Moderate on 74 and 69 percent of cases, respectively.

Thus, variation in the composition of the nämndemän triplets comes primarily from those

parties that are more extreme in the political spectrum and, as a result, our empirical

specifications focus on two parties on the far left (Vänster (left) and Green) and one on the far

right (Swedish Democrats), who have the most soft- and hard-on-crime attitudes, respectively.

           The first part of our empirical analysis uses this defendant by case level data to assess

whether certain kinds of defendants and cases are more (or less) likely to be convicted when

randomly assigned nämndemän from these most liberal and conservative parties, respectively.

The results of the analysis reveal substantial systematic biases with respect to political

affiliation in the Swedish system of lay judges. The presence of a Swedish Democrat in the

triplet increases the likelihood of conviction by 17 percentage points for defendants with

Arabic names, which is consistent with the Swedish Democrats’ nationalist, anti-immigration

platform. Having a Vänster in the triplet increases convictions by 14 percentage points when

there is a female victim, consistent with the party’s feminist platform. These results, which

are robust to a variety of specifications, suggest that the impact of political party on

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
of deliberation (Sunstein et al, 2006). Blanes I Vidal and Leaver (2013) study social interactions in judge citation
behavior in English appellate courts.

                                                                                                                                                                                          6!
!
conviction decisions does not just reflect the parties’ general views on crime, but rather the

multi-dimensional nature of political platforms.

      The remainder of the empirical analysis focuses on understanding the role of peer

effects in jury decision-making. Specifically, we analyze the determinants of an individual

nämndeman’s actual vote (as opposed to the verdict), taking into account dissenting opinions.

Our main specification regresses an individual’s vote on the characteristics of their

nämndemän peers while controlling for case characteristics and nämndemän fixed effects. In

this way, we take advantage of the fact that the same nämndemän are observed with different

peers to identify how a given nämndeman's vote responds to their peers.

      We find strong evidence of peer effects on juror votes, with nämndemän from both the

far-left and far-right parties drawing the votes of their more centrist peers (especially those

with more limited experience) towards their own positions.           A key remaining question,

however, is whether the peer effects that we detect actually affect trial outcomes.              In

particular, we seek to distinguish between sway effects, where jurors from extreme parties

change the votes of their peers by actually changing their point of view, and dissent aversion,

where non-pivotal voters change their votes simply to ensure a unanimous decision. In the

former case, the swayed jurors’ vote can actually have a decisive impact on the case outcome

while peer effects that operate through dissent aversion are inconsequential to the verdict.

      To disentangle these potential channels, we conduct a novel simulation exercise that

uses the results of our analysis to simulate verdicts in a world without peer effects - i.e., one in

which individual jurors only affect verdicts through their impact on the majority. Comparing

these simulated verdicts to actual trial outcomes leads to several conclusions. First, the

majority of the impact of adding Vänsters and, especially, Swedish Democrats to juries comes

from the direct effect of their votes (i.e., because they are pivotal voters) rather than from peer

effects. Second, dissent aversion plays a clear role in juror voting, as there are substantially


                                                                                                  7!
!
more unanimous verdicts in the real world data compared to the simulated data. Finally, and

most importantly, we decompose the estimated peer effects into sway effects and dissent

aversion. For the far-left Vänsters, at least one-third of the total estimated peer effect operates

as a sway effect, implying that Vänsters often influence the votes of their closest centrist

colleagues in a way that is decisive. In contrast, sway effects account for a negligible portion

of the peer effect for far-right Swedish Democrats, implying that they rarely influence their

colleagues in a way that actually affects trial outcomes.

           The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the

Swedish nämndemän system and uses survey data to characterize Swedish politics. Section 3

discusses the data. Section 4 presents the empirical methodology, tests of the identifying

assumption that nämndemän assignment to cases is random, and the main analysis of the

defendant by case level data. Section 5 explores the mechanisms underlying the main results

and includes an analysis of peer effects in the individual level data as well as the above

described simulation exercise. Section 6 concludes.



2. Background

       2.1. Nämndemän (Lay Judges) in Sweden

           Criminal cases in Sweden are adjudicated in the 48 District Courts. Each court employs

a pool of professional judges with varying levels of experience and has an associated pool of

nämndemän. In contrast to the U.S., where the jury pool is drawn from the general population,

individuals must put themselves forward to become nämndeman.9 A nämndäman is appointed

to the courts for a four-year term by the municipality or county council after being nominated

by a political party. The share of each party in a jurisdiction’s nämndemän pool is

proportional to the party’s representation in that jurisdiction. However, although almost all
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
9
 Almost all Swedish citizens over the age of 18 who do not have criminal records are eligible to become
nämndemän; some professionals, such as court employees or attorneys, cannot become nämndemän to avoid a
conflict of interest.

                                                                                                     8!
!
nämndemän are politically affiliated, they are not meant to be politically active. It is hard to

evaluate the extent to which this is true in reality, but an online search for the nämndemän in

our data set suggests that about half of the nämndemän do not currently sit and have not sat in

the past on any other political committees while 20 percent sit on just one other committee.

To the extent that nämndemän are not generally politically active, this would increase the

external validity of our findings to less politically based jury systems. Finally, it is important

to note that the nämndemän pool is far from representative of the population. This is

particularly true with respect to age; in 2010, just 16 percent of nämndemän were younger

than 45 while 46 percent were older than 65.10 The unrepresentativeness and political nature

of the nämndemän system, particularly with the growth of more extreme parties like the

Swedish democrats, is a growing source of public concern.

           A defendant’s case (verdict, sentence, and oftentimes, damages) is decided at the main

hearing (which is the Swedish equivalent of a trial). 11 For a criminal case in which

imprisonment is a possible sentence, the court is comprised of one professional judge and

three nämndemän. If the harshest punishment is a fine, the court is typically comprised of a

single professional judge. The analysis in this paper focuses on the former, in which the

charges are serious enough to require the presence of nämndemän.

           Working as a lay judge typically only requires 10 to 15 days per year; most nämndemän

are otherwise employed or retired. In the courtroom, each nämndeman listens to the

proceedings and may ask additional questions. After the hearing, the judge and nämndemän

discuss the possible decisions, including the verdict and sentence, and express their

viewpoints. In contrast to the U.S., verdicts do not have to be unanimous, and each lay judge’s

opinion carries equal weight as that of the presiding judge. If all members of the court are not

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10
    http://www.borastingsratt.domstol.se/Om-Sveriges-Domstolar/Pressrum/Nyhetsarkiv/2010/Regeringens-mal-
Fler-yngre-namndeman-/
11
   This main hearing occurs for most criminal defendants. In contrast to the U.S. where more than 90% of cases
are pled before trial, even if the defendant admits their guilt, this is typically done in the main hearing.

                                                                                                            9!
!
in agreement, then dissenting opinions are recorded. A defendant is convicted if the majority

finds him guilty, even if the presiding professional judge believes he should be acquitted.



       2.2. Additional Details About Gothenburg and The Gothenburg District Court

           Gothenburg is the second largest city in Sweden, and as such, has a relatively high

criminal caseload. While the number of reported crimes in all of Sweden from 2009 to 2011

was 14,906 per 100,000, the number of crimes in Gothenburg was 18,413 per 100,000.

Relative to the other main cities in Sweden, however, Gothenburg has a relatively low crime

rate overall and across crime categories; the number of reported crimes over this period in

Stockholm and Malmo, respectively, were 22,078 and 20,834 per 100,000 (Brå, 2012). The

Gothenburg District Court had almost 350 nämndemän on the roster in the beginning of 2013,

representing nine political parties. The two predominant parties are the Social Democrats and

the Moderates, which comprise 32 and 29 percent of the nämndemän pool respectively. The

other parties are: (i) the Vänster (left) and Green, which are often in alliance with the Social

Democrat party,12 (ii) the Folk, Center, and Christian Democrats, which form a coalition with

the Moderate party (referred to as the Center-Right Block), (iii) the far-right Swedish

democrats, and (iv) the vägvalet, which is a local party that opposes the congestion tax in

Gothenburg.13

           According to the Gothenburg District Court webpage, “Neither a professional judge nor

a lay judge may choose which cases they adjudicate. The court draws lots to determine who

will adjudicate in different cases.” Thus, in contrast to the ‘de-selection’ of the U.S. jury
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
  Though the green party is not officially part of the left or right block, many voters do consider them to be left.
13
  There are similarities and differences in the distribution of political parties across the three main cities. Of
particular emphasis in this paper are the far right and far left parties. Gothenburg is not an anomaly with respect
to these parties. After the 2010 election, vänsters held approximately 7%, 9% and 8% of the seats in the
municipality councils in Malmo, Gothenburg, and Stockholm respectively; greens held approximately 8%, 11%,
and 16% respectively; and Swedish democrats held approximately 12%, 4%, and 0% respectively. After the
2014 election, however, even Stockholm had enough Swedish Democrat voters to be represented with a 6%
share on the council, compared to 7% and 15% in Gothenburg and Malmo, respectively. In terms of the main
parities, Malmo and Gothenburg are historically social democrat strongholds while Stockholm is a moderate
party stronghold.

                                                                                                                 10!
!
through voir dire, there is meant to be a random nature to the assignment of nämndemän to

cases. If such randomness exists, then the characteristics of the nämndemän and judge should

be unrelated to the characteristics of the case; we directly test this in the data in Section 4.

           How specifically does the roster of more than 300 nämndemän get assigned to cases?

Upon election, each nämndeman fills out a form indicating availability for each day of the

week. Nämndemän coordinators allocate each nämndeman 15 dates in the upcoming year,

taking into account the typical caseload on a given day; for instance, a typical assignment

would be every third Tuesday. Importantly, nämndemän are assigned dates far in advance of

any knowledge about the cases to be tried on those dates. For each pool of nämndemän

assigned to a given day, the coordinators then form triplets; each nämndeman assigned to the

same triplet is meant to have the same schedule and sit on cases together in the upcoming

year. In practice, however, there is more than expected variation in the composition of the

triplets due to the use of substitutes because of either sick (or otherwise unavailable)

nämndemän or a higher caseload on a given day than anticipated. While we do not have

explicit data on nämndemän absences, one should note that these cannot be correlated with

case characteristics, such as offense type, since nämndemän do not know the case until

arriving at the courthouse. At the end of the year, new dates are assigned and triplets are

adjusted to account for changing schedules. The fact that the data spans the 2010 election

provides additional variation in triplet composition.

           The formation of triplets is done with some attempt to balance gender (e.g. no all female

triplets), age, and political party. With respect to party, the coordinators try to assign different

parties to a triplet, which is not always feasible given the high share of Social Democrats and

moderates.14 Finally, the coordinators assign triplets to those courtrooms scheduled to be in

session. For the most part, this is done by going down the list of triplets in order, as each
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
  They try to assign one nämndeman to each triplet who has been identified as having special juvenile
qualifications, such as being a school teacher. Finally, they ensure that personally connected nämndemän, e.g.
married, are not on the same triplet.

                                                                                                           11!
!
triplet has a number associated with it, without taking into account the characteristics of the

case or nämndemän. That is, the first triplet is assigned to the first courtroom, the second to

the second courtroom, etc. The only exception is for the most serious charges of murder or

rape, in which case the coordinators try to assign triplets with some prior experience. Until

they arrive at the courthouse, nämndemän do not know what case, or judge, they will see.15



       2.3. Political Party Platforms

To provide some context about Swedish politics, this section analyzes two surveys. The VU

Election Survey (Valundersökning), conducted by the SOM-institute at the University of

Gothenburg at every general election, is a random sample from Statistics Sweden’s population

registry of 18-80 year olds who are eligible to vote and residing in Sweden (Holmberg and

Oscarsson, 2012). In 2010, 2,736 individuals were interviewed in total, though only 1336 had

full-scale interviews. The second survey is the Riks-SOM, which is an annual nationwide

postal survey of a random sample of 16-85 year olds residing in Sweden. The survey is split

into three editions, focusing on (i) society and politics, (ii) media and culture and (iii) lifestyle

and health. The 2010 survey round had 5,007 respondents (SOM-institute, 2011).

           The first order question is how each party, on average, views the criminal justice

system. We focus in the VU survey on questions related to the support of longer prison

sentences and more law and order and in the Riks SOM survey on whether the courts give

reasonable punishments. Table 1 presents the results of regressing a respondent’s responses to

these questions (coded as categorical variables) on party affiliation and controls for age,

gender, citizenship, education, and urbanicity. Relative to Social Democrats, Vänsters

(greens) are 15 (19) percentage points less likely to favor harsher prison sentences, 13 (14)

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15
  The description of the nämndemän assignment process characterizes the system as of March 2010, when a new
system was implemented. This occurred at the same time as the merging of the Göteborg and Mölndal district
courts. Prior to this date, judges sat with one of two sets of triplets for a given day; that is, the nämndemän
regularly came into contact with the same judges.

                                                                                                            12!
!
percentage points less likely to favor more law and order, and 16 (17) percentage points more

likely to oppose harsher prison sentences. In contrast, Swedish Democrats are 24 percentage

points more likely to favor harsher sentences, 28 percentage points more likely to favor more

law and order, and 26 percentage points more likely to think that the courts give unreasonable

punishments. These results are surprisingly insensitive to including controls and even

additional controls for how left/right respondents perceive themselves; they appear to say

something about party rather than other individual characteristics that may be related to party.

           Thus, the available survey evidence suggests that the left and green parties are, on

average, relatively soft on crime while Swedish Democrats are hard on crime: these parties

generally fall on opposite ends of the spectrum, with all other parties somewhere in the

middle. This is very much consistent with anecdotal evidence and popular perceptions. In

fact, the Swedish Democrat platform advocates the use of real life sentences without parole;

under the current system, life sentences usually imply 18 years (and parole after 12 years).

           Given the multi-faceted nature of both politics and criminal cases, it is perhaps too

narrow-minded to only consider a party’s attitude towards crime. Other issues that may play

prominent roles are feminism and nationalism/immigration. In fact, one of the primary

platforms of the Vänster party is as a feminist party; according to the party’s manifesto: “The

superiority of men and subordination of women is no law of nature. The struggle for women's

rights has yielded significant results. Feminism gives arguments and tools for the women’s

struggle that must be waged to break the power of the patriarchy. This struggle is carried out

in politics and in the workplace, but also in private life.” 16 This paper will assess whether the

struggle is also carried out in the courtroom. Empirical evidence of the Vänster party feminist




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
  Translated by the author: “Mäns överordning och kvinnors underordning är ingen naturlag. Kampen för
kvinnors rättigheter har givit viktiga resultat. Feminismen ger argument och redskap för den särskilda
kvinnokamp som måste föras för att patriarkatets makt skall kunna brytas. Denna kamp förs inom politiken och
arbetslivet, men också i privatlivet.” http://www.vansterpartiet.se/material/partiprogram/

                                                                                                         13!
!
platform is provided in Table 1; Vänster party members are 17 (15) percentage points more

likely than social democrats to strongly support gender equality in the VU (SOM) survey.

           In addition, similar to other far right parties throughout Europe, Swedish Democrats

largely run on a nationalist, anti-immigration platform.17 A quote from their party website

clearly demonstrates their views: “In recent decades, Sweden has accepted too many

immigrants in too short a time. … This reckless policy has created impoverished and

marginalized areas around the country. Areas which, when they were originally built, were

regarded as fine middle-class neighborhoods have turned into segregated areas where

unemployment and crime is high.”18 These views are apparent in the SOM questions on

whether immigrants are punished harsher than non-immigrants. Swedish Democrats are more

than 30 percentage points more likely than Social Democrats to think that immigrants are not

punished more harshly; Vänsters, in contrast, are 13 percentage points less likely to think that

immigrants are punished more harshly (consistent with their anti-racism position).

!

3. Data

       3.1. Data Description

           The data is based on a sample of closed crimes against person cases for the Gothenburg

District Court for 2009 through 2012. Specifically, we obtained all cases (almost 400) with at

least one charge of murder, rape, robbery, manslaughter, sexual assault, and aggravated

assault (or an attempt) during this period. Given the time intensive nature of manually coding

all data, we requested a random sample of almost 200 (of 400) unlawful threat cases and 400

(of 1500) simple assault cases. As all of these violent offense charges have imprisonment on

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17
   These include, for instance, the National Front Party in France, the Golden Dawn Party in Greece, the Flemish
Interest Party in Belgium and the Danish People’s Party in Denmark.
18
   Translated by the author: ”De senaste decennierna har Sverige tagit emot allt för många människor på allt för
kort tid. … Denna ansvarslösa politik har gjort att det ständigt skapats växande utanförskapsområden runt om i
landet. Områden som när de byggdes betraktades som fina medelklasskvarter har förvandlats till segregerade
områden där arbetslösheten och brottsligheten är hög.”https://sverigedemokraterna.se/var-politik/vara-viktigaste-
fragor-2/invandring/

                                                                                                              14!
!
the table, they were tried by a professional judge and three nämndemän.19 The resulting data

set includes 956 cases and, due to multiple defendant cases, 1152 unique defendant-case

observations. Just 28 defendants appear in the data more than once.

           Two documents for each case number were obtained from the Gothenburg District

Court Archive: Anteckningar (notes) and Dom (Judgement).20 For each case, we extracted the

nämndeman and judge names as well as trial dates times from the Anteckningar. From the

Dom, we extract information about the defendant(s), offense(s) charged, case, and verdict.

Defendant information includes name, country of citizenship, and personal identity number,

from which we can identify birth date and gender. Though we do not know ethnicity, we have

coded defendant names as having distinctly Arabic sounding names (all of the 255 defendants

coded as such have Arabic sounding first and last names). We do recognize that not all of

these defendants are actually Arabic, but may simply have names ‘similar’ to Arabic names.

We cannot distinguish these two groups of individuals in the data; however, the same may be

true for the nämndemän who are deciding their cases. We also coded two additional

categories of defendant names: (i) distinctly Swedish and (ii) other (which contains, but is not

limited to, many Eastern European names, as well as those that are difficult to otherwise

classify).21

           The case and verdict information includes the victim’s name(s), attorney names, the

charges on which the defendant was acquitted or convicted, damages requested and awarded,

and the sentence. The most common sentences are fine, probation, imprisonment, suspended

sentence, and community service. Juveniles can be sentenced to community service or the

child welfare authorities; youths under 18 are generally not eligible for adult prison sentences.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
19
   Because the Court could not directly identify nämndemän cases, the data request conditioned on offense
categories guaranteed to be eligible for prison, regardless of criminal history. This immediately excludes many
property crimes, which are sentenced with fines.
20
   A handful of requested cases were not included in the final data because of missing documents in the archives.
21
   We cross-check the coding of names by looking at the number of individuals with the same name (first or last)
throughout Sweden. http://svenskanamn.alltforforaldrar.se/statistik/sverige

                                                                                                              15!
!
From a description in the Dom of the evidence presented, we determine whether the defendant

fully or partially admits guilt; partial admission implies that the defendant admits some

aspects/circumstances of the incident. The Dom also describes the criminal history of

convicted defendants; we code the number of previous episodes in the crime registry, whether

there are any violent offenses, and, when available, the date of the last sentence. For acquitted

individuals, we obtain this information from an additional document (belastingsregistret) from

the archives. Finally, the Dom includes a description of any dissenting opinions (skiljaktig

mening) amongst the judge and/or nämndemän in the verdict and sentence.

           We merged this case by defendant level data with a data set that we created of

nämndemän and judge characteristics.22 The primary variables identified for nämndemän

included municipality, gender (based on name), birth year, first year as a nämndeman, and

political party. Though we do not have a measure of nämndeman ethnicity, we have coded

individuals as having names that are non-Swedish. With respect to judges, we have data on

age and gender from the district court. There are 93 unique judges in our data, though just 37

judges are assigned to ten or more cases.



       3.2. Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics characterizing the defendants, case characteristics,

verdicts and sentences, judges, and nämndemän triplets. We begin with the variable of interest

– nämndemän triplets. Despite the facts that nämndemän are assigned to triplets that should

‘ordinarily’ serve together and there are a little more than 100 such triplets at any given time,

793 unique triplets are observed in the data set. This variation arises from (i) a substantial

change in the nämndemän roster after the 2010 election, (ii) annual adjustments to account for

changes in schedules, and (iii) substitute nämndemän due to unscheduled absences or an
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22
  These data were compiled from a number of sources, including the Gothenburg district court for the current
nämndemän roster and communications with each municipality (and/or their websites) in the Gothenburg district
court catchment area for nämndemän on the roster prior to the 2010 election.

                                                                                                          16!
!
unexpectedly high caseload. Table 2 shows that the majority of nämndemän in the triplet are

male in 46 percent of the observations, the average nämndemän age in a triplet is 58, and 83

percent of defendants face triplets where the average age is older than 50. In terms of

experience, 17, 36, 24, and 23 percent of defendants face triplets with less than two, two to

four, four to six, and more than six years of experience, respectively. Finally, 40 percent of

triplets have at least one nämndeman with a non-Swedish name.23

           In terms of political affiliations, Table 2 shows that 74 and 69 percent of triplets have at

least one Social Democrat and Moderate, respectively. With respect to the other parties, we

see that 27 and 20 percent, respectively, have members of the Green and Vänster parties (both

of which sometimes cooperate with the Social Democrats). For the parties closely aligned

with the Moderates, we see that 29, 13, and 2 percent have at least one Folk, Christian

Democrat, and Center party member, respectively. A Swedish Democrat is in the triplet in

nine percent of observations.

           Turning to the defendants and cases, Table 2 shows that 91 percent of defendants are

male, 12 percent are not Swedish citizens, 22 percent have an Arabic sounding name, and the

average defendant age is 32. 36 percent of defendants have at least one past conviction and

20 percent have at least one violent conviction. Cases have, on average, 1.7 defendants (74%

of observations have just one defendant), 1.5 victims (71% have just one victim), and 1.9

charged offenses (57% have just one offense). 50 percent of the observations have at least

one female victim, where victim gender was determined by victim name or the pronouns used

in the transcript for cases with anonymous victims (e.g. some sex related offenses). In 9

percent of observations, the defendant fully admits guilt, i.e. on all charges, while 44 percent

of defendants fully deny guilt. 46 percent of defendants are coded as partially admitting guilt;

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
23
  Non-Swedish names are quite distinct from Swedish ones, and typically have Arabic or Eastern European
origins. This variable was created by a Swedish research assistant; we have also assessed the validity of his
assessment by looking at the relationship between the number of Swedes with the same first name and last name
as each nämndeman.

                                                                                                          17!
!
they have either admitted guilt to one offense but not another, or they have admitted some of

the aspects of the charge but do not take full responsibility (e.g. he admits to hitting him, but it

was in self-defense). The conviction analyses exclude cases where guilt is fully admitted, as

there is no room for discretion.

           Current offense charges are grouped into nine categories; 28 percent of the observations

include an offense that does not fall into one of these categories. Though the data were created

using a ‘crimes against person’ selection criterion, other offenses appear in multi-charge

cases. The most common offenses are: assault (56% have at least one assault charge),

unlawful threat (26%), aggravated assault (13%), rape (8%), robbery (5%), drug charges

(11%), and other sex offenses (7%).

           The primary outcome considered in this paper is conviction. Table 2 shows that 83

percent of charges result in a conviction and 88 percent of defendants have at least one

conviction; these statistics are substantially smaller (75 percent and 77 percent, respectively)

when conditioning on the almost 500 defendants who fully deny guilt, i.e. when there is

presumably more room for discretion. Though not the focus of the paper, we see that 30

percent of all convicted defendants are sentenced to prison; 35 percent of those who are older

than 18 and eligible for adult prison receive such a sentence.24

           Eight percent of observations have at least one dissenting opinion (about three percent

from a professional judge and five percent from at least one nämndeman). Five percent of

observations have a dissenting opinion in favor of a harsher outcome, while three percent

favor a more lenient outcome. The dissenting opinion data will be used when we create the

individual nämndemän level data set described in Section 5. Finally, the average age of

judges is 50 years old and 55 percent are male. We include judge fixed effects in almost all

specifications to account for these and other judge characteristics.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
24
  Note that in Sweden, defendants under the age of 18 are not eligible for an adult prison sentence, while there is
some discretion for those between the ages of 18 and 21. There is no discretion for defendants above the age of
21.

                                                                                                                18!
!
4. Main Case by Defendant Level Analysis

      4.1. Methodology and Identification

The first part of the empirical analysis uses the defendant by case level data set described

above to examine the relationship between nämndemän triplet political affiliations and case

outcomes. To this end, the basic empirical specification is as follows:


    ! !!!!!" !! !!!! !!!"#$%! ! ! !! !"##$! ! ! !! !"#$%&!!"#! ! ! !! !! ! !!" !! ! !!"#$% ! ! !!" ,


where Y represents the outcome (e.g. share of charges resulting in conviction) for defendant i

associated with case j. Vänster, Green, and SwedishDem are dummy variables indicating if at

least one of the nämndemän in the triplet belongs to each of these far left or right parties,

respectively. We choose to focus our specification on these extreme parties rather than all

parties because this is where the interesting variation is in the composition of the triplets, as

almost all triplets have a social democrat and moderate block member. It is important to note

that controlling for the other parties has little impact on the results (as will be demonstrated

later); thus, excluding them from the main analysis greatly eases the exposition, particularly

for those specifications with many interactions. X represents a vector of other nämndemän

triplet characteristics, including the average age and experience of the triplet, an indicator for

whether the majority of the triplet is male, and an indicator for whether the triplet contains at

least one member with a non-Swedish name. Finally, Z represents a vector of 20 offense, case

and defendant characteristics and !!"#$% represents judge fixed effects.

         For the !"# to represent a causal effect of nämndemän political affiliations on case

outcomes, nämndemän triplets must be randomly assigned to cases, or at least randomly

assigned conditional on known assignment factors. Because the nämndemän coordinators

randomly assigned nämndemän triplets to courtrooms, the characteristics of the triplet should



                                                                                                  19!
!
be unrelated to the characteristics of the defendant and case. Thus, Columns (1) – (10) of

Table 3 assess whether there is evidence of non-random assignment of triplets to cases by

regressing ten triplet characteristics (party, gender, non-Swedish name, average age, average

experience) on four defendant characteristics (gender, age, citizenship, and Arabic sounding

names), eleven offense characteristics (number of charges and ten offense category dummies),

five case characteristics (full and partial admission, number of defendants, number of victims,

any female victims), and two criminal history measures (any past convictions and any violent

past convictions). We summarize the results by conducting F-tests of the joint significance of

the controls in each of these categories, counting the number of coefficients significant at the

5% level in each regression, and presenting the R-squared.

      Of the 40 F-tests conducted (four tests for 10 regressions), just two are significant at the

five percent level – the offense characteristics in column (3) for Christian democrats in the

triplet and the case characteristics in column (5) for Swedish democrats in the triplet.

However, the joint significance of both of these tests is driven by the significance of just one

coefficient. In fact, in nine of the ten regressions, there are just two (or fewer) significant

coefficients. There are four significant coefficients when looking at average experience of the

triplet, though just one of the joint F-tests are significant at the ten percent level; if there were

to be non-random assignment in any dimension, it would be with respect to triplet experience

given statements by the nämndemän coordinators about trying to assign triplets with

experience to the most serious cases. Finally, this large set of 22 case characteristics explains

very little of the variation in triplet characteristics; the R-squared ranges from 0.016 to 0.037.

      Columns (11) and (12) of Table 3 test for the random assignment of judges to cases and

nämndemän triplets. We regress judge gender and age on the same sets of case characteristics

included in the previous specifications plus two sets of variables characterizing the political

affiliations and other characteristics of the nämndemän triplet, respectively. None of the joint


                                                                                                  20!
!
tests of nämndemän characteristics are significant: consistent with courthouse discussions,

nämndemän triplets do not appear to be assigned to courtrooms on the basis of the judge

assigned to the case. In terms of the random assignment of judges to case characteristics, we

see four significant coefficients in the judge gender specification and an R-squared of 0.072;

none of the coefficients are significant at the five percent level for judge age. These results are

consistent with courthouse statements that judges are assigned to cases according to a roster,

with some load balancing and with certain cases requiring more senior judges.

      Taken as a whole, the results presented in Table 3 are strongly indicative of the random

assignment of nämndemän triplets to cases and judges. However, it should also be

emphasized that to the extent there is not random assignment, we control for almost all

potentially confounding factors with judge fixed effects and the same set of nämndemän

characteristics that the coordinators have at their disposal. Finally, as shown below, the

insensitivity of our results to the inclusion of these controls is also consistent with random

assignment.



    4.2. Baseline Results

Table 4 presents the results of estimating equation (1) with the full set of controls; only the

coefficients on the variables of interest (having at least one Vänster, Green, or Swedish

Democrat in the triplet) are presented. The dependent variable is the share of current charges

resulting in conviction in columns (1) and (2) and whether any charge results in conviction in

columns (3) and (4).        Two key results emerge. First, having a hard-on-crime Swedish

Democrat in the triplet does not affect the likelihood of conviction. Second, having a soft-on-

crime Vänster in the triplet, if anything, increases the likelihood of conviction by more than

five percentage points when looking at cases where the defendant did not fully admit guilt

(columns (1) and (3)) and by more than 13 percentage points when looking at cases where the


                                                                                                21!
!
defendant completely denied guilt and there is arguably more discretion (columns (2) and

(4)). Note that controlling for the other, more central parties, in this regression has little

impact on the results for the extreme left and right parties; in addition, these other parties also

do not significantly affect conviction rates.

           The specifications presented in Table 4 implicitly assume that juror political party has

the same impact on every case, regardless of the characteristics of the defendant or case.

Given the multi-dimensional nature of party platforms, however, this is a very strong

assumption. To explore the impact of political party in a more nuanced way, Table 5 expands

the specification to include an interaction of each party variable with a series of

defendant/case characteristics: whether there are any female victims in column (1), whether

the defendant has an Arabic name in columns (2) and (3), and whether the defendant is

younger than 21 years old in column (4).25 The choice of case characteristics is based on key

aspects of the political party platforms and what is available in the data. For readability, we

only show results for the presence of Swedish Democrat and Vänster nämndemän; Green

party affiliation is included (and appropriately interacted) in all specifications. !

           Some striking patterns emerge. First, the Vänster effect suggested in Table 4 is driven

by cases with a female victim. Specifically, Column (1) shows that having a Vänster in the

triplet when there is a female victim increases the share of current charges resulting in

conviction by about 14 percentage points; this is significant at the 1 percent level.26 On the

other hand, when the victim is male, having a Vänster in the triplet does not have a significant

impact.27

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
25
   Age twenty-one is chosen as a natural cutoff given the differential treatment (with respect to sentencing
options) of defendants above and below that age.
26
   Here we are describing the results for the total effect of adding a Vänster in cases in which the victim is female
– i.e., summing the coefficient on any_vänster and any_vänster*any_femalevic and characterizing whether that
coefficient is significantly different than zero. We follow this approach for reporting results throughout this
section of the paper.
27
   To further understand these results, we have also categorized vänsters as older (> 50) and younger (<50).
Perhaps surprisingly given that the feminist vänster platform emerged in the last 30 years, we see that it is only
triplets with vänsters who are older that are significantly more likely to convict when there are female victims.

                                                                                                                  22!
!
           Second, Column (2) shows that having a Swedish Democrat in the triplet increases the

share of current charges resulting in conviction for defendants with Arabic names by 17

percentage points, a result which is significant at the 5 percent level. Adding a Swedish

Democrat to the triplet has no significant impact when the defendant has a non-Arabic name.

Column (3) repeats the specification in Column (2) but excludes defendants with non-Arabic

and non-Swedish names (such that Arabic named defendants are compared directly to just

Swedes, rather than those of other ethnic origins); the results are similar. These results are

consistent with the Swedish Democrats' nationalist, anti-immigration platforms. They are

also consistent with Marten’s (2015) recent finding that asylum appeals in Sweden are more

likely to be rejected when there is a Swedish Democrat on the triplet.

           Finally, Column (4) indicates that adding a Swedish Democrat to the triplet increases

the share of current charges resulting in conviction for defendants that are younger than 21 by

16 percentage points (-0.079 + 0.239), with an associated p-value of 0.008. While the

Swedish Democrat party platform does not explicitly take a position regarding the treatment

of youths in the criminal justice system, these results are consistent with other aspects of the

party platform including those related to schooling and personal responsibility.                                                                                                Taken

together, the results in Columns (1)-(4) suggest that it is important to take into account the

multi-dimensional nature of party platforms when examining how political affiliations might

affect conviction decisions, as opposed to only considering the party's general stance on

crime.

           In addition, it is important to note that the basic pattern of results seen for these extreme

parties in Table 5 is robust to the inclusion of dummies for each party and the appropriate

party by case characteristic interaction. This can be seen in Appendix Table 1, which

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Triplets with younger vänsters are insignificantly more likely to convict in all cases. These results are consistent
with the VU survey data; older vänsters appear to have more strongly feminist views than younger vänsters. We
have also assessed whether it is female or male vänsters driving these results, but we find the same, albeit
statistically insignificant, vänster-female victim estimate for both genders.

                                                                                                                                                                                        23!
!
replicates columns (1), (2) and (4) from Table 5 for all parties. These less extreme social

democrat and moderate block parties generally do not have a significant impact themselves;

the only exception is that having a moderate on the triplet increases the conviction rate for

female victim and young defendant cases, though these relationships are only marginally

significant.

           The central results presented in the first four columns of Table 5 are robust to a number

of alternative specifications. In Table 5, Columns (5)-(7) repeat the specifications in Columns

(1), (2) and (4), respectively, but change the dependent variable to an indicator of whether a

defendant was convicted of at least one charge; the same pattern of results emerge. And Table

6 demonstrates that the main results are not sensitive to the exclusion/inclusion of the baseline

set of controls included in Table 5: defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics

and judge fixed effects. Column (1) of Table 6 includes just the main nämndemän political

party variables and their simultaneous interactions with the three case characteristics

considered in Table 5.28 Column (2) adds judge fixed effects, which increases the magnitude

of some of the coefficients but does not change the qualitative pattern of results; this is

consistent with the results from the previous section suggesting that judges are not perfectly

randomly assigned to cases. Controlling for other nämndemän triplet characteristics (gender,

age, experience, Swedish name) in column (3) does not affect the results, indicating that it is

the nämndeman’s party that matters and not another characteristic of nämndemän correlated

with party choice. Columns (4) – (7) control for defendant, case, offense, and criminal history

characteristics, respectively; the robustness of the results to this large set of controls is again

indicative of the random assignment of triplets to cases. Controlling for hearing year and day

of week effects in column (8) has no effect and indicates that the results are not being driven

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
28
   Note that because this specification includes all three interactions simultaneously, the coefficients on
any_vänster and any_swededem will not be the same as in Table 5. However the same general pattern of results
is found among the subgroups of cases (i.e., female victims, Arabic named defendants) when one plugs in the
mean level of the variables in the other interaction terms.

                                                                                                         24!
!
by changes in the nämndemän pool and party views on crime over time. Lastly, column (9)

indicates that controlling for the 81 prosecutors observed in the data has little effect on the

results, suggesting that attorney characteristics are not driving the result.29



       4.3. Triplet Majority Composition

           The analysis presented thus far considers only the presence of at least one Vänster or

Swedish Democrat in the triplet and does not take into account the composition of the

remainder of the triplet. Because some parties are closer to others in terms of political

platforms, one might expect the impact on conviction from adding nämndemän from these

extreme parties to depend on the remaining composition of the jury. Table 7 examines this by

presenting specifications that include an interaction of party affiliations with case

characteristics (as in Table 5), and an additional interaction with whether the majority of the

triplet is from a party that is considered to be on the left of the political spectrum (i.e., the left

alliance of Social Democrats, Greens, and Vänsters). Column (1) repeats the baseline result

shown in the first column of Table 5, showing that having a Vänster in the triplet increases the

share of charges convicted by almost 14 percentage points when there is a female victim.

Column (2) indicates, however, that this effect is driven by cases in which the majority of the

triplet is from the left/social democrat alliance. Columns (3) and (4) present the results for the

Arabic-named defendants specifications. Having a Swedish democrat in the triplet increases

(substantially) the share of charges convicted for an Arabic sounding named defendant,

regardless of whether the majority composition is from the left/social democrat alliance.

Finally, columns (5) and (6) indicate that having a Swedish Democrat in the triplet increases



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
29
   This specification rules out, for example, that the Vänster-female victim result is driven by the fact that
Vänster prosecutors can present a more persuasive case to a triplet with a Vänster nämndeman. Controlling for
fixed effects for the 232 defense attorneys (a demanding specification given there are only about 1000
observations) has little qualitative impact; however, there is some loss of precision for a couple of estimates and
some changes in the coefficient magnitudes (some larger and some smaller).

                                                                                                                25!
!
the share of charges convicted for young defendants, regardless of the majority composition

of the triplet.



5. Peer Effects in the Deliberation Process

The previous section documented two key results: (i) having a Vänster in the triplet increases

convictions when there is a female victim and (ii) having a Swedish Democrat in the triplet

increases convictions when there is an Arabic-named defendant. The most obvious way in

which adding these nämndemän from the far left and right parties can have an impact on

verdicts is that their vote simply shifts the majority opinion in the case towards their

viewpoint. We term this the direct effect. However, it is also possible that in addition to

having a direct effect, these nämndeman also influence the votes of their peers. The unique

structure of the Gothenburg District Court, whereby the same nämndeman sits on numerous

court cases with different peers in their triplet, allows us to explicitly determine whether peer

effects are present. Section 5.1 discusses our identification strategy in more detail and shows

empirical evidence that Vänsters and Swedish Democrats impact the votes of their peers in

cases with female victims and Arabic-named defendants, respectively. Section 5.2 examines

whether there is heterogeneity in peer effects. Finally, in Section 5.3, we consider whether

jurors are only changing their votes to avoid dissent in cases in which their vote would not be

pivotal or whether peer effects affect decision-making in a way that actually impacts trial

outcomes.



    5.1. Measuring Peer Effects

The goal of this section is to determine whether a nämndeman's vote is affected when they are

seated in a triplet with either a Vänster or Swedish Democrat nämndeman. To do this, we

transform the defendant level data set that we have been using into an individual nämndemän-


                                                                                              26!
!
defendant data set. That is, each observation in the original defendant data set now represents

three (nämndemän) observations in the new data set associated with each nämndemän’s

verdict.30 Recall that since verdicts do not need to be unanimous, the three nämndemän who

sit on the same case may vote differently with respect to whether to convict. In reality,

however, less than 2 percent of nämndemän dissent.31, 32

             Equation (2) presents the basic specification we use to identify peer effects:


    ! !!!!" !! !!! !!!!""#!" ! ! !! !"#$%&$$'!" ! !"!!""#$!!"!" ! ! !!" !! ! !!"#$% ! !! ! !!!!" $!


where Y represents the share of charges on which nämndeman n assigned to case j with

defendant i votes to convict. VänPeernj and SwDemPeernj are indicator variables for whether

any of nämndeman n’s peers on case j are members of the Vänster or Swedish Democrat

parties, respectively. OthPeerCharnj contains an indicator for whether any of nämndeman n’s

peers on case j are members of the Green party, as well as a vector of other peer nämndemän

characteristics (e.g. age, gender, experience). As above, Z is a vector of case and defendant


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
30
    Note that there are some nämndemän for which information on background characteristics, particularly age
and experience, is missing. So as to not decrease the sample size in the main case level analysis, nämndemän
triplet characteristics were based on the average for those nämndemän on the triplet for which this information is
observed. In the individual level analysis, we omit those observations with missing own nämndeman
characteristics, so there are some cases from the main data set that only translate into two nämndemän level
observations. As can be seen in the simulation exercise in the next sub-section, however, the baseline results are
not sensitive to the exclusion of cases for which nämndeman background characteristics are not known for all
three nämndemän on the triplet.
31
    The fact that there are so few dissents suggests that some of the potential peer effects we might find are due to
dissent aversion. This will be explicitly discussed in Section 5.3.
32 !
     We examine the determinants of individual nämndeman dissents more closely in Appendix Table 2.
Specifically, we regress whether the nämndeman dissented from the verdict for at least one offense on a vector
of own nämndeman characteristics, a vector of peer characteristics, and the full vector of defendant and case
characteristics. Columns (1) and (2) present the results for nämndemän from parties considered to be to the right
in the political spectrum (members of the moderate block and Swedish Democrats) and to the left (Vänster,
Green and Social Democrats), respectively. The results show that few variables are significantly related to
dissenting. However, one does see that sitting with extreme peers from the same side of the political spectrum as
oneself significantly decreases the likelihood of dissenting: ‘right’ and ‘left’ nämndemän sitting with Swedish
democrat and vänster peers, respectively, are less likely to dissent. In contrast, sitting with extreme peers from
the opposite end of the political spectrum as oneself (i.e. ‘left’ nämndemän with Swedish democrat peers and
‘right’ nämndemän with vänster peers) increases the likelihood of dissenting; though the point estimates are as
large as those for peers on the same side of the spectrum, they are insignificant. These relationships are not
affected when controlling for interactions between case characteristics (female victim, Arabic defendant, young
defendant) and peer extreme parties.


                                                                                                                  27!
!
characteristics and !!"#$% represents judge fixed effects. Finally, !! represents nämndeman

fixed effects. All standard errors in the individual analysis are clustered at the case level.

           Using nämndeman fixed effects implicitly focuses on the variation within the cases on

which a given nämndeman sits, measuring how their vote is affected when they sit with a far

left Vänster (!1) or far right Swedish Democrat (!2) relative to when they sit with more

centrist peers. As long as a given nämndeman's pairing with a Vänster peer or a Swedish

Democrat peer is uncorrelated with defendant and case characteristics, !1 and !2 will identify

causal peer effects. Importantly, even though nämndemän themselves are not fully randomly

assigned to each other in order to balance triplets based on gender, age, and political party, the

pairing of nämndeman with each other appears to be independent of case and defendant

characteristics. The latter statement is borne out in the results presented in Table 3, which

show that the composition of the triplet is largely unrelated to case and defendant

characteristics.                  Further, in results not shown, we regress the characteristics of a given

nämndeman's peers (such as whether they have a Vänster peer, etc.) on case and defendant

characteristics along with nämndeman fixed effects. The overall pattern of results is similar

to Table 3 in that there are very few significant coefficients.33

           Table 8 presents the results of estimating equation (2). Because we would expect

Vänsters and Swedish Democrats to exert peer effects in the cases for which they have

distinctly different viewpoints, we accordingly test for the presence of peer effects separately

for these subsamples.                             Specifically, columns (1)-(2) present the results from estimating

equation (2) separately for cases with and without female victims; cases with and without

Arabic-named defendants are in columns (3)-(4), and cases with younger (<21) and older

defendants are in columns (5)-(6). For brevity, we only report the !1 and !2 coefficients

associated with peer effects. The results in Column (1) indicate that for female victim cases,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
33
  The fact that nämndemän are assigned to each other in order to provide gender, age and political party balance
in the triplets will have implications when we look at the heterogeneity of peer effects; we discuss this further in
Section 5.2.

                                                                                                                 28!
!
sitting with a Vänster peer increases the share of charges on which a nämndeman votes to

convict by 13 percentage points versus when they sit with a more centrist peer. Column (2)

reveals that there is no effect of having a Vänster peer in non-female victim cases. Likewise,

Columns (3) and (4) reveal that having a Swedish Democrat peer increases the share of

convictions for cases with Arabic-named defendants, but has no effect for defendants with

non-Arabic names.                           Column (5) shows that for cases with young defendants, having a

Swedish Democrat peer increases the share of charges convicted, although the effect is not

significant; Column (6) reveals that among cases with older defendants, the presence of a

Vänster peer increases the share of charges on which a given nämndeman convicts. Overall,

the results from Table 8 provide strong evidence of peer effects for the cases in which

Vänsters and Swedish Democrats were identified to have distinctly different opinions.

Furthermore the peer effects these more extreme parties exert are consistent with their direct

effect on trial outcomes.

           One final note to the above conclusion is that while so far we have made the plausible

assumption that Vänsters and Swedish Democrats do themselves exert a direct effect, we

show explicit evidence of this in Appendix Table 3.34 The analysis in this table exploits the

fact that we observe different nämndeman sitting with the same set of peers to identify the

effects of a nämndeman's own political party on their decision to convict.35 These results

firmly establish that both Vänsters and Swedish Democrats are themselves more likely to vote

to convict in cases with female victims and Arabic-named defendants, respectively.



5.2 Are Peer Effects Heterogeneous?



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
34
   Note that if there were no direct effect, the overall impact of adding a Vänster or Swedish Democrat would
come about solely because other parties became more likely to convict when they sat with these extreme party
members.
35
   Specifically, we regress an individual nämndeman's vote to convict on a vector of dummies that capture the
nämndeman's own party affiliation, judge fixed effects, the full set of case controls, and peer fixed effects.

                                                                                                           29!
!
The previous section documented that Vänsters and Swedish Democrats affect the votes of

their peers in a way that is consistent with the platforms of these more extreme parties. The

next natural question is whether they have more of an effect on some peers than others. As

one might expect the degree of peer influence to depend on both the demographics and the

political party characteristics of the nämndemän, we examine both of these in turn.

      Table 9 examines whether peer effects are heterogeneous across nämndemän with

different demographic characteristics.    Each column considers a different sub-sample of

nämndemän, characterized by their gender, age, and experience. Each panel estimates the

basic peer effect specification presented in equation (2), but also interacts the peer party

variables with a case characteristic (female victim cases in Panel A, Arabic named defendants

in Panel B, and young defendants in Panel C). Though all peer party variables are interacted

with the relevant case characteristic, we only present the coefficients for the variables of

interest; e.g. Vänster peers in female victim cases and Swedish democrat peers in Arabic

named defendant cases.

      The results presented in Table 9 suggest the existence of heterogeneous peer effects. For

female victim cases, the effect of having a Vänster peer appears to have a qualitatively similar

impact across these groups of nämndemän, but with the hint of stronger effects for younger,

less experienced nämndemän. Similarly, the estimated Swedish Democrat peer effect for

Arabic sounding defendant cases is positive in all cases and again greatest in magnitude for

less experienced nämndemän. Finally, the results presented in Panel C reveal that among

cases with older defendants the presence of a Vänster peer has the largest effect for male and

younger nämndemän, while among cases with younger defendants the presence of a Swedish

Democrat peer is greatest for the least experienced nämndemän.

      Taken as a whole, the results presented in this table indicate that peer effects tend to be

strongest among the most inexperienced nämndemän. Note that because the nämndemän


                                                                                              30!
!
coordinators form the nämndemän triplets independently of each nämndeman's experience

level (i.e., they do not balance based on experience), an inexperienced nämndeman faces a

Vänster and Swedish Democrat peer comparable to one that a more experienced nämndeman

faces.36, 37

             Table 10 presents the results of expanding equation (2) to include interactions between

one’s own party and having a Vänster or Swedish Democrat peer. This specification allows

us to analyze whether party peer effects vary with an individual’s own political position; this

might be expected if nämndemän are more influenced by peers from parties that are closer to

them in the political spectrum. Recall that the parties line up as follows from left to right:

Vänsters, Greens, Social Democrats, the Center-Right block (which includes Moderate,

Center, Folk, Christian Democrat, and Vägvalet party members), and the Swedish Democrats;

further, Vänsters often tend to politically align with Social Democrats.38 Because balancing is

done with respect to the political parties of the triplet and the majority of nämndemän do not

come from the extreme parties, Vänsters and Swedish Democrats are typically matched up to

nämndemän from more central parties (i.e. Social Democrats and members of the Center-

Right block). Thus there is not a lot of data to identify the impact of one extreme party sitting

with another.39 While we present all of the results for completeness in Table 10, we mainly


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
36
   In contrast, when we look among subgroups along which balancing does occur (like gender and age)
nämndemän subgroups will be matched up with Vänster and Swedish Democrat peers with different
characteristics. For example, female nämndemän would be more likely than male nämndemän to be matched up
to a male Vänster peer. Thus if we had found stronger peer effects among females it would have been difficult
to distinguish whether females themselves were more influenced by Vänsters, or if male Vänsters were just more
influential.
37
   Previous field studies of actual juries have looked at which jurors are the most influential. These studies found
that (i) male jurors are more influential on their peers than females (Mills and Bohannon, 1980; Marcus, et. al,
2000), (ii) higher socioeconomic status jurors are more influential (York and Cornwell, 2006), and (iii) more
extraverted jurors are more influential (Clark et al, 2007; Marcus et al, 2000). These studies often use small case
samples and are based on the ‘selected’ seated jury. See Devine (2012) for a more thorough review of this
literature.
38
   The Vägvalet party is a young, local party specific to Gothenburg, and as such does not have a formal platform
on many national issues. However, a recent article characterizes them as mostly voting to the right, and that there
party     platform     is    even     to    the    right   of    the    moderate     party     on   some      issues.
http://www.gp.se/nyheter/goteborg/1.2266983-vagvalet-drar-at-hoger-i-politiken
39
   There are only 15 defendant cases with two Vänsters in the triplet, 20 cases with a Vänster and Swedish
Democrat in the triplet, and no cases where there are two Swedish Democrats in the triplet.

                                                                                                                  31!
!
focus on the impact that Vänster and Swedish Democrat peers have on Social Democrats and

the Center-Right block.

      The results in Column (1) indicate that Vänster peers exert influence on both Social

Democrats and Center-Right block members in cases with female victims, although the effect

is slightly stronger for Social Democrats. Column (2) indicates that among Arabic-named

defendant cases Swedish Democrats peers exert their effect on Social Democrats but have no

impact at all on the conviction votes of Center-Right block members. Finally, Column (3)

shows that among cases with older defendants, Vänster peers exert their effect on both Social

Democrats and Center-Right block members, but the effect is slightly stronger on Social

Democrats; likewise among cases with younger defendants Swedish Democrat peers exert

their effect on both Social Democrat and Center-Right block members but the effect is

stronger on Social Democrats.      Thus the overall results suggest that both Vänsters and

Swedish Democrats exert larger peer effects on Social Democrats than on members of the

Center-Right block.



5.3 Mechanisms and Deliberation Dynamics

      The results from Table 10 demonstrate that Vänsters and Swedish Democrats typically

exert peer effects on nämndemän from centrist parties that are consistent with their respective

party platforms. The goal of this section is to distinguish among potential explanations for

these estimated peer effects and, more importantly, to determine whether these peer

influences actually affect trial outcomes.

      The previous literature in this area has drawn a distinction between two key

mechanisms of peer influence. The first is a "sway effect" in which jurors actually impact

peers’ points of view, changing their evaluation of the case. Importantly, if the juror being

swayed is the swing voter, then this form of peer influence can have real consequences for


                                                                                            32!
!
trial outcomes. The second mechanism is "dissent aversion" whereby jurors who would

otherwise vote against the majority change their vote simply to make the decision unanimous.

A nämndemän may wish to avoid dissent because of a potential negative collegial effect on

the judge (who must write up a brief summary of the dissent) and the other nämndemän in the

majority opinion, given that they may sit together again in future cases.40 In this way, while

both sway effects and dissent aversion are consistent with the results presented in Tables 8-10,

distinguishing between these mechanisms is important for determining whether peer effects

actually impact trial outcomes or are purely incidental.

           To provide additional evidence on these mechanisms, we first re-examine some of the

results presented above and then conduct a two-part simulation exercise. Our re-examination

of the results begins with the observation (seen in Appendix Table 3) that, among female

victim cases, jurors from both Social Democrats and the Center-Right block have nearly

identical own effects, implying they would vote similarly in the absence of peer effects.

Thus, in the absence of a sway effect, the predicted effect of adding a Vänster to a case should

only be determined by whether the Vänster swings the majority, which should be similar no

matter which centrist party is their peer. Notice, however, that the results presented in column

(1) of Table 7 imply a significantly larger impact of adding a Vänster to a female victim case

in a juror triplet with a majority of soft-on-crime members (i.e. typically at least one member

of the Social Democrat party) versus a majority of non-soft-on-crime members (i.e. typically

two members from the Center-Right block). This suggests that Vänsters are swaying Social

Democrats, pulling them towards their own position in a way that actually affects the verdict.

This conclusion is also consistent with the way the parties line up in terms of platforms, as

Vänsters often tend to politically align with Social Democrats. In contrast, the peer effects
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
40
   The idea of dissent aversion was put forth in studies of judge panel effects in federal courts of appeals (Epstein
et al., 2011; Posner, 2008) where a dissent can impose a cost both on the dissenting judge (who writes up the
dissenting opinion) and the judge that writes up the majority opinion (and must respond to the dissent).
Subsequently, Fischman (2011) used a structural model to show that judicial voting patterns in federal appeals
courts were consistent with judges having a cost of dissent.

                                                                                                                  33!
!
that Swedish Democrats exert on Social Democrats in Arabic-named defendant cases are

more difficult to disentangle as these results are consistent with either a sway effect or dissent

aversion.41



5.3.1 Simulation Part I: Predicting Trial Outcomes in the Absence of Peer Effects

To examine the relative importance of sway effects and dissent aversion more directly, we

conduct a two-part simulation exercise. The results presented in this section attempt to break

down how much of the overall impact a Vänster or Swedish Democrat has on trial outcomes

can be specifically attributed to their direct effect and how much can be attributed to peer

effects (i.e. their ability to sway a pivotal voter).

           The basic idea is to first simulate verdicts in a world without peer effects - i.e., one in

which individual jurors make a decision in the absence of deliberating with anyone else and

these votes are aggregated using a majority rule to determine a final verdict. Recreating Table

5 with these simulated verdicts should reveal the impact adding a Vänster or Swedish

Democrat has on trial outcomes solely through their direct effect. And, because the results

originally presented in Table 5 show the actual impact of adding these extreme party members

(which include both their direct and sway effect), the difference between these actual and




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
41
   To see this, recall that the results from Table 7, Column 3 imply that, if anything, adding a Swedish Democrat
to a majority soft panel has more of a positive impact on the conviction likelihood than adding a Swedish
Democrat to a triplet with only one other soft member. This is consistent with Swedish Democrats swaying
Social Democrats, as then we would expect the effect on trial outcomes to be greater when we increase the
number of Social Democrats with whom Swedish Democrats sit. However this pattern of results is also
consistent with Social Democrats simply engaging in dissent aversion once we take into account that Appendix
Table 3 shows the Center-Right block is actually less likely than Social Democrats to convict Arabic-named
defendants. If Social Democrats are simply avoiding dissent, then the impact of adding a Swedish Democrat on
trial outcomes is only the latter's direct effect. Since Social Democrats are actually more likely than the Center-
Right block to convict in these cases, Swedish Democrats will have a larger direct effect when they are seated
with more of them; thus the impact of adding a Swedish Democrat would be expected to be larger when the
majority of the panel is soft. We thus cannot determine whether Social Democrats are being swayed or averting
dissent.

                                                                                                                34!
!
simulated effects should reveal how much of their impact comes from their ability to sway

pivotal voters.42

           The first step in the simulation procedure is to predict the likelihood that each

nämndemän would vote to convict in the absence of peer effects. We identify this by

estimating a specification similar to that in Appendix Table 2, which essentially regresses an

individual nämndemän's vote on their own characteristics, case characteristics and peer fixed

effects.43 With the exception of some gender and party balancing, individual nämndemän are

randomly assigned to both cases and their peers. Since we control for the only source of non-

randomness through peer fixed effects, the coefficients should reveal the causal impact an

individual's own characteristics have on their conviction likelihood. 44,45 We then set the peer

fixed effect coefficients to zero and compute the fitted values of this regression using only the

effect of individual nämndemän attributes and defendant and case characteristics. This should

identify the probability with which each nämndeman would vote to convict on the average

case that has the same observables as the one they sat on, in the absence of peer effects. From

this regression, we also estimate the residual for each nämndeman-defendant observation,

calculate the mean residual across nämndemän in each case, and construct the empirical

distribution of the means across cases. This distribution will be used in the simulation to

allow correlated decision-making across nämndemän that sit on the same case.

           We then merge these individual nämndeman predicted likelihoods into the case level

data set used in the baseline analysis in Table 5. This results in 888 observations, as we
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
%&
  !Note that their ability to sway non-pivotal voters will not show up in these results since it would not have any
effect on trial outcomes.!
43
   The primary difference between this regression and the one presented in Appendix Table 3 is that we include
interactions between each party and the case characteristics (female victims, Arabic defendants, and young
defendants) to account for the differences across columns of Appendix Table 3.
44
   The results of our simulation exercises are completely robust to basing individual voting predictions on a
specification that excludes peer fixed effects. That the individual vote predictions are not affected by
conditioning on peer fixed effects implies any balancing issue does not affect the random assignment of peers to
each other in an important way.
45
   The results of our simulation exercises are also completely robust to basing individual voting predictions on a
specification that includes interactions between peer characteristics and own characteristics (such as own party-
peer party interactions).

                                                                                                                35!
!
exclude cases for which at least one of the three nämndemäns’ votes could not be predicted

because of missing information about the nämndeman’s age or experience (see footnote 30 for

additional details). We take a bootstrapped sample equal in size to the data set and simulate

each nämndeman’s vote by taking a draw from a binomial distribution where the probability

of a guilty vote is determined by the sum of the individual nämndeman’s own predicted

probability plus a draw from the distribution of mean residuals across cases.46 This procedure

allows for correlated decision-making that might naturally result because of the specific

elements of a case, as the same draw from the mean residuals is applied to all three

nämndemän on a simulated case. Finally, we add the simulated nämndemän votes with the

actual vote of the judge and apply a majority rule to simulate the verdict in the case; a

defendant is guilty if there are at least three guilty votes. We then estimate specifications

comparable to those in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5; recall that these specifications regress

whether there is at least one conviction on a dummy for each extreme party, case

characteristics (female victim and Arabic defendants, respectively), and party*case

interactions. 47 We repeat this exercise 500 times and present the mean of estimated

coefficients and the associated standard errors in Table 11.

           For comparison purposes, the odd columns of Table 11 present the results when using

the actual verdict in the case, while the even columns present the results when the dependent

variable is the simulated verdict.48 Column 1 shows that having a Vänster on a female victim

case increases the likelihood of conviction by 14.2 percentage points; the simulation results in

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
46
    By including a draw from the distribution of mean residuals as part of individual voting behavior, we are
implicitly assuming that any remaining correlation in voting (after peer fixed effects are excluded) is due to
factors related to the case and not any form of unobserved peer effects. In this way, we are attempting to be as
conservative as possible in estimating the role of peer effects on voting behavior. If we instead exclude this
correlated error draw when predicting individual voting behavior, we estimate that sway peer effects are about
twice as important (although the direct effect still makes up the majority of the overall impact of adding extreme
nämndemän) and that unanimous decisions arise in even fewer cases.
47
    The results presented here include the full set of controls, as in Table 5. They are also robust to a more
streamlined specification with no controls.
%'
   !Note that the estimates in Columns 1 and 3 differ slightly from those presented in Table 5 due to the modest
change in the sample (described above) that resulted in 888 observations for the simulation exercises.

                                                                                                               36!
!
Column 2 show this effect drops to 11.6 percentage points when peer effects are eliminated. 49

This implies that roughly 18 percent of the overall effect Vänsters have on trial outcomes

comes from their ability to sway pivotal peers. Similarly, Columns 3 and 4 show that the

impact of adding a Swedish Democrat to an Arabic named defendant case declines from 23.0

to 21.7 percentage points when peer effects are eliminated; this implies that less than 6

percent of the overall effect Swedish Democrats have on trial outcomes is from their ability to

sway pivotal peers.

           These results are consistent with our above discussion of the results in Table 7, as both

exercises suggest that at least some of the total effect of adding a Vänster is due to their

ability to sway their peers. However, as the simulation results show, the majority of the effect

of adding Vänsters and, especially, Swedish Democrats to a jury comes from the direct effect

that they have on the decision as pivotal voters, rather than from peer effects.50

           The first part of our simulation exercise also provides suggestive evidence of dissent

aversion. For the 500 simulated bootstrap samples, the average share of cases with at least one

dissent is about 20 percent. That is, if individual nämndemän votes were determined by their

own characteristics and the characteristics of the case, as in our simulation, then about 80

percent of cases would result in a unanimous verdict. This sharply contrasts with the data. As

reported in Table 2, just eight percent of cases have a dissenting opinion, and this includes

dissents on both verdicts and sentences; just four percent of cases have a dissenting opinion

on the verdict in the real world.



5.3.2 Simulation Part II: Distinguishing Sway Effects from Dissent Aversion

           The much higher rate of non-unanimous decisions in the simulated sample (20 percent)

versus the data (4 percent) naturally suggests a way to get a sense of how important dissent

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
49
     Note that these numbers are based on the sum of the any_vanster and any_vanster*any_femalevic coefficients.
50
     The same patterns hold when looking at the young defendant – party interactions.

                                                                                                             37!
!
aversion might be in driving the peer effects estimated above. In particular, we can mimic

dissent aversion in the simulations by switching dissenting votes in many of the non-

unanimous cases in order to match the rate of unanimity observed in the data. We can then

re-estimate comparable peer effects specifications to those presented above – e.g., in Table 8 -

in these simulated data to see whether dissent aversion alone is capable of explaining the

estimated peer effects in the actual data.

           It is important to point out from the outset that this second part of our simulation

provides an upper bound for the importance of the dissent aversion mechanism and a lower

bound for the importance of sway effects. In particular, this exercise assumes that all of the

difference in the rate of unanimous decisions between the simulated and actual data is due to

dissent aversion, when, in fact, sway effects would also naturally switch some split-vote cases

to unanimous decisions – i.e., when a juror that would have been a lone dissenter changes

their actual evaluation of the case due to sway effects.

           The exact procedure that we use for the second part of the simulation is as follows: we

randomly switch dissenting opinions in 80 percent of the non-unanimous simulated verdicts to

make these unanimous, bringing unanimous decisions up to 96 percent in the simulated

sample to match the data. We then transform the case level data set into an individual-level

data set comparable to that used in the peer effects analysis and re-estimate the peer effect

specifications in Table 8.

           Panel A of Table 12 presents the results when using the actual vote, while Panel B uses

the simulated vote.51 Any peer effect that is observed in Panel B provides an upper bound on

dissent aversion while the difference between the estimates in Panels A and B provides a

lower bound on the share of the estimated peer effect that can be attributed to sway effects.

The results presented in Table 12 indicate that at least one-third of the Vänster peer effect
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
51
  Note that the estimates using the actual vote are not identical to those in Table 8 because (i) we use the slightly
reduced sample of 888 defendant-case observations here, and (ii) we use whether there are any convictions rather
than at least one conviction as the dependent variable.

                                                                                                                  38!
!
across all three categories (female victims, Arabic defendants and young defendants) is driven

by sway effects, which have real impacts on the verdicts.52 In contrast, virtually none of the

Swedish Democrat peer effects are driven by sway effects.



6. Conclusion

That a defendant should receive a fair trial in which the verdict is decided only on the basis of

the evidence is a fundamental principle of most criminal justice systems. But the challenge of

designing and implementing a system that is capable of achieving this abstract goal is

immediately obvious as soon as one confronts the practical questions of how jurors should be

assigned, especially in settings where members of the local population may have biases for or

against certain kinds of defendants.

           Faced with this challenge, many justice systems use a selection process that attempts to

form juries that are somehow representative of the local population or public opinion. In the

United States, a ‘representative’ jury is typically determined by a random draw from a list of

eligible jurors from the local community. But recent empirical studies, as well as a long

history of anecdotal evidence, have raised serious concerns about biases in this system,

particularly when minority members of the local population (where minority could be defined

in any number of dimensions including race, ethnicity, and religion) face juries that are

representative and, therefore, include few, if any, members of the minority group.

           Sweden’s nämndemän system provides an alternative approach to selecting jurors that

are representative of the local population. In the nämndemän system, the share of lay judges

from each political party is proportionate to how the local population voted in the last

election, thereby achieving representativeness in the sense of the locality’s political


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
(&
 !If we are even more conservative in the second part of the simulation, and turn 100 percent of the non-
unanimous votes to unanimous, we still find that at least 20 percent of the Vänster peer effect is attributable to a
sway effect.!

                                                                                                                 39!
!
ideologies.53 Given the lack of existing empirical evidence on jury verdicts outside of the

United States, our paper provides an opportunity to assess whether the Swedish system is

capable of delivering a ‘fair’ trial – does the presence (and vote) of the professional judge and

the fact that the lay judges are politically appointed to office rather than randomly drawn from

the population lead to impartiality?

           Our findings imply that significant biases exist in the Swedish system; biases that are, in

fact, closely associated with positions of the nämndeman’s political party. For instance,

having a far-left Vänster or far-right Swedish Democrat in the nämndeman triplet assigned to

a case significantly impacts the likelihood of conviction in cases closely related to the party’s

platform – female victims (feminism) and Arabic named defendants (anti-immigration),

respectively. The latter finding may be particularly relevant outside of Sweden, given the rise

of far right parties throughout Europe similar in platform to the Swedish Democrats.

           Importantly, the political affiliations of the nämndemän assigned to a case affected the

actual verdicts in the case and were not just reflected in dissenting opinions. Thus, contrary to

some opinions in Sweden and around the world, nämndemän (and lay judges more generally)

are not inconsequential, even when deliberating in collaboration with a professional judge.

This implies that proposals to reduce the role of nämndemän (or eliminate them from some

cases) would have a real impact on verdicts.

           Alternative appointment processes that aim to de-emphasize the role of politics have

also been suggested. In particular, the most recent government proposal to change the

nämndemän system included suggestions to: (i) not appoint nämndemän in direct connection

with elections and (ii) investigate how to introduce a share of nämndemän who would be




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
53
  There are, of course, other key differences between the U.S. and Swedish systems. American verdicts are
unanimous while a majority is required in Sweden and verdicts are decided by American juries without the
presence of the professional judge, while Swedish verdicts are decided by a professional judge in collaboration
with three lay judges.

                                                                                                            40!
!
chosen outside the political parties.54 Whether these measures would reduce biases in the

nämndemän system associated with political ideology depends, of course, on whether the

nämndemän that would be appointed through this process would be materially different than

those that serve in the current system.

           The selection of jurors is, of course, only one aspect of the design of jury systems and

other dimensions (including the size of the jury, the voting rules, and the requirements for

conviction) impact the collective decisions reached by groups of jurors. In fact, we know

very little about how jurors decide verdicts collectively in real trial settings. By exploiting

variation in the assignment of jurors not only to cases but to one another, our analysis also

contributes to the nascent literature on the dynamics of jury deliberations. Our simulation

exercises find that the vast majority of the effect of adding Vänsters and, especially, Swedish

Democrats comes from the direct effect of them being pivotal voters rather than from their

influence on their peers. Though virtually all of the Swedish Democrat peer effects operate

through dissent aversion, such that the influence of the Swedish Democrat nämndeman on his

peers does not influence verdicts, we find that at least one-third of the Vänster peer effect is

due to sway effects, where a Vänster nämndeman convinces a fellow juror of their standpoint.

These results provide the first empirical evidence in the literature based on actual trials on the

ways that jurors influence one another during group decision-making. The nature of these

peer effects imply that, in some cases, groups of jurors do more than simply aggregate (or

average) opinions and that jury deliberation and decision-making processes can indeed have

systematic effects on verdicts.



References

Abrams, David, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2012) “Do Judges Vary in
Their Treatment of Race?” Journal of Legal Studies, 41(2): 347-383.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
54
     http://www.regeringen.se/sb/d/18449/a/233942

                                                                                                41!
!
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer and Randi Hjalmarsson (2012) “The Impact of Jury Race in
Criminal Trials” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 1017-1055.

Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer and Randi Hjalmarsson (2014) “The Role of Age in Jury
Selection and Trial Outcomes”, Journal of Law and Economics, 57(4), 1001-1030.

Ashenfelter, Orley, Theodore Eisenberg, and Steward J. Schwab (1995) “Politics and the
judiciary: The Influence of Judicial Background on Case Outcomes” The Journal of Legal
Studies, 24(2): 257 – 281.
Blanes I Vidal, Jordi and Clare Leaver (2013) “Social Interactions and the Content of Legal
Opinions” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 29: 78-114.
Boyd, Christina, Lee Epstein and Andrew Martin (2010) “Untangling the Causal Effects of
Sex on Judging” American Journal of Political Science, 54(2): 389-411.
Brå (2012), “Brottslighet      och   trygghet   I   Malmö,   Stockholm      och    Göteborg”,
URN:NBN:SE:BRA-473
Casper, Gerhard and Hans Zeisel (1972) “Lay Judges in the German Criminal Courts” The
Journal of Legal Studies, 1: 135-191.
Clark, J, M. Boccaccini, B. Caillouet, and W. Chaplin (2007), “Five Factor Model Personality
Traits, Jury Selection, and Case Outcomes in Criminal and Civil Cases” Criminal Justice and
Behavior, 34: 641-660.
Cross, Frank and Emerson Tiller (1998) “Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal
Doctrine: Whistleblowing on the Federal Courts of Appeals” Yale Law Journal 107: 2155-
2176.
Devine, Dennis (2012) Jury Decision Making: The State of the Science, New York University
Press.
Devine, Dennis, Laura Clayton, Benjamin Dunford, Rasmy Seying, and Jennifer Pryce
(2000). “Jury Decision Making: 45 Years of Empirical Research on Deliberating Groups”.
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7:3, 622-727.
Diamon, Shari and Mary Rose (2005) “Real Juries” Annual Review of Law and Social
Science, 1: 255-284.
Domstolverket     (2010),      Regeringens     mål:    Fler         yngre         nämndemän,
http://www.domstol.se/templates/DV_Press.aspx?id=18997
Epstein, Lee, William Landes and Richard Posner (2011) “Why (and When) Judges Dissent:
A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis” Journal of Legal Analysis 3, 101-137.
Fischman, Joshua (2011) “Estimating Preferences of Circuit Judges: A Model of Consensus
Voting” Journal of Law and Economics 54(4): 781-809.
Fischman, Joshua (2013) “Interpreting Circuit Court Voting Patterns: A Social Interactions
Framework” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.



                                                                                          42!
!
Gazal-Ayal, Oren and Raanan Sulitzeanu-Kenan (2010) “Let My People Go: Ethnic In-Group
Bias in Judicial Decisions – Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment” Journal of
Empirical Legal Studies, 7(3): 403-428.
Hans, Valerie (2008) “Jury Systems Around the World” Cornell Law Faculty Publications.
Paper 305.
Hans, Valerie and Nicole Waters (2009) “A Jury of One: Opinion Formation, Conformity,
and Dissent on Juries” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 6.
Holmberg, Sören and Oscarsson, Henrik. SWEDISH NATIONAL ELECTION STUDY 2010
[data file]. Department of Political Science, 2012. Gothenburg, Sweden: Swedish National
Data Service (SND) [distributor].
Iaryczower, Matias and Matthew Shum (2012) ”The Value of Information in the Court: Get
Right, Keep it Tight,” American Economic Review, 102(1): 202-237.
Jackson, John and Nikolay Kovalev (2006) “Lay Adjudication and Human Rights in Europe”,
Colum. L. Rev. 83.

Lee, Jean N. (2014) "The Process is the Punishment: Juror Demographics and Case
Administration in State Courts", Mimeo.

Lehmann, Jee-Yeon K. and Jeremy Blair Smith (2013) "A Multidimensional Examination of
Jury Composition, Trial Outcomes, and Attorney Preferences"#!$%&'()

Lim, Claire, James Snyder, and David Strömberg (forthcoming) “The Judge, The Politician
and The Press: Newspaper Coverage and Criminal Sentencing across Electoral Systems”,
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

MacCoun, Robert (1989) “Experimental Research on Jury Decision-Making” Science 244:
1046-1050.

Marcus, D, P Lyons, and M Guyton (2000) “Studying Perceptions of Juror Influence in Vivo:
A Social Relations Analysis” Law and Human Behavior, 24: 173-186.
Marten, Linna (2015) “Political Bias in Court? Lay Judges and Assylum Appeals”, Working
Paper.

Miles, Thomas (2012) “The Law’s Delay: A Test of The Mechanisms of Judicial Peer
Effects” Journal of Legal Analysis 4.

Miles, Thomas J. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2006. “Do Judges Make Regulatory Policy? An
Empirical Investigation of Chevron,” 73 University of Chicago Law Review 823–82

Mills, Carol and Wayne Bohannon (1980). “Jury Characteristics: To What Extent Are They
Related to Jury Verdicts?” Judicature, 64, 22.
Posner, Richard (2008) How Judges Think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Revesz, Richard L. 1997. “Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit,” 83
Virginia Law Review 1717–72.

                                                                                          43!
!
Shayo, Moses and Asaf Zussman (2011) “Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (3): 1447-1484.
Schanzenbach, Max and Emerson Tiller (2008) “Reviewing the Sentencing Guidelines:
Judicial Politics, Empirical Evidence, and Reform,” University of Chicago Law Review, 75:
715.
SOM Institute. NATIONAL SOM 2010 [data file]. SOM Institute, 2011. Gothenburg,
Sweden: Swedish National Data Service (SND) [distributor].
Spitzer, Matthew and Eric Talley (2013) “Left, Right, and Center: Strategic Information
Acquisition and Diversity in Judicial Panels” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization

Schkade, David, Cass Sunstein, and Reid Hastie (2007) “What Happened on Deliberation
Day?” California Law Review 95.

Sunstein, Cass R., David Schkade, Lisa M. Ellman, and Andres Sawicki. 2006. Are Judges
Political?: An Empirical Analysis of the Federal Judiciary, Washington: Brookings
Institution Press.

Tuerkheimer, Alan, (2008) “Politics in Civil Jury Selection”, Wisconsin Lawyer, 81(12).


York, E. and B. Cornwell (2006) “Status on Trial: Social Characteristics and Influence in the
Jury Room” Social Forces, 85: 455-477.




                                                                                          44!
!
Table 1. Survey Evidence of Party Beliefs

                                                  VU 2010 Election Survey Analysis                                               RIKS SOM 2010 Survey Analysis
                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)                  (8)
                                     Favor or       Favor Working         Against or          Strongly
                                 Strongly Favor    to a Society with   Strongly Against       Support        Courts Give        Immigrants are     Immigrants are
                                 Harsher Prison     More Law and        Harsher Prison        Gender         Unreasonable         Punished          Not Punished       Strongly Support
                                    Sentences            Order            Sentences           Equality       Punishments          Harhser             Harsher          Gender Equality
    Vänster (left)                  -0.150**           -0.126**            0.158***          0.172***           -0.00833           0.126***           -0.0548              0.150***
                                    (0.0610)           (0.0593)            (0.0523)          (0.0607)           (0.0396)           (0.0323)           (0.0383)             (0.0352)

    Green                          -0.186***           -0.138***           0.167***           0.114**           0.0629*             0.0302            -0.0446              0.144***
                                    (0.0505)            (0.0490)           (0.0433)           (0.0505)          (0.0360)           (0.0308)           (0.0365)             (0.0300)

    Center                          -0.133**            0.0368              0.0285             0.0223            -0.0576            0.0126            -0.00855            -0.0910***
                                    (0.0556)           (0.0536)            (0.0477)           (0.0552)          (0.0376)           (0.0329)           (0.0390)              (0.0324)

    Folk                             0.0260            0.174***             -0.0487           0.00655            0.0238           -0.0670**            0.0157              -0.0656**
                                    (0.0527)           (0.0509)            (0.0452)           (0.0526)          (0.0338)           (0.0288)           (0.0342)              (0.0304)

    Christian Democrat               0.0326            0.266***             -0.0573          -0.172***           -0.0557          -0.0685**            0.0507              -0.120***
                                    (0.0601)           (0.0581)            (0.0516)           (0.0599)          (0.0380)           (0.0333)           (0.0395)              (0.0334)

    Moderates                      0.0922***           0.174***           -0.0964***           -0.0400           0.0316           -0.0576***          0.0398*             -0.0853***
                                    (0.0351)           (0.0341)             (0.0302)          (0.0351)          (0.0218)            (0.0188)          (0.0223)              (0.0187)

    Swedish Democrats               0.239***           0.278***             -0.0986            -0.131*          0.256***           -0.0694*           0.305***              -0.0363
                                    (0.0772)           (0.0751)            (0.0662)           (0.0774)          (0.0444)           (0.0361)           (0.0428)             (0.0408)

    _cons                           0.764***           0.619***              0.109           0.430***           0.412***           0.157***           0.245***             0.483***
                                     (0.103)            (0.100)            (0.0885)           (0.103)           (0.0392)           (0.0331)           (0.0392)             (0.0335)
    N                                 1209               1218                1209               1221              2360               1877               1877                 4556
    R-sq                               0.173              0.128               0.143              0.048               0.047             0.028             0.042               0.056
    Standard errors in parentheses. * is significant at 10%, ** at 5% and *** at 1%. The dependent variable in each specification is listed at the top of the column. All specifications
    control for age, gender, citizenship, education, and whether respondents live in an urban area. Note that the omitted category is social democrats. Also, note that adding the
    controls had little impact on the magnitude of the baseline estimates. In addition, controlling for left/right ideology generally has little impact.

                                                                                                                                                                                    45!
!
Table 2. Summary Statistics for Case by Defendant Level Data

    Variable                              Obs        Mean      Std. Dev.
    Nämndemän Triplet Characteristics
    any social democrats?                 1129        0.74       0.44
    any vänster (left)?                   1129        0.20       0.40
    any miljö (green)?                    1129        0.27       0.44
    any christian democrats?              1129        0.13       0.33
    any moderates?                        1129        0.69       0.46
    any folk party?                       1129        0.29       0.45
    any center party?                     1129        0.02       0.15
    any swedish democrats?                1129        0.09       0.29
    any local party (vägvalet)?           1129        0.10       0.30
    majority nämndemän male?              1152        0.46       0.50
    any nämn. with nonswedish name?       1147        0.40       0.49
    average age of triplet                1151       58.06       9.01
    average age >=50                      1151        0.83       0.38
    average experience 2-4 years?         1150        0.36       0.48
    average experience 4-6 years?         1150        0.24       0.43
    average experience > 6 years?         1150        0.23       0.42
    Defendant Characteristics
    defendant age                         1143       32.20      14.06
    defendant male                        1137        0.91       0.28
    defendnat non swedish citizen         1152        0.12       0.32
    defendant has arabic name             1152        0.22       0.42
    any_past convictions?                 1144        0.36       0.48
    any violent past convictions?         1144        0.20       0.40
    Case Characteristics
    # offenses                            1143        1.87       1.47
    any_robbery                           1144        0.05       0.22
    any_rape (child/adult)                1144        0.08       0.28
    any_assault                           1144        0.56       0.50
    any_aggravated assault                1144        0.13       0.34
    any_unlawful threat                   1144        0.26       0.44
    any manslaughter/murder               1144        0.03       0.17
    any drunk drive                       1144        0.02       0.14
    any_drugs                             1144        0.11       0.31
    any_other_sex_off                     1144        0.07       0.26
    any_other                             1144        0.28       0.45
    # victims                             1148        1.51       1.22
    any female victims?                   1129        0.50       0.50
    # defendants                          1151        1.69       1.62
    full admission of guilt?              1124        0.09       0.29
    partial admission of guilt?           1124        0.46       0.50
    Case Outcomes
    any current convictions?              1152        0.88       0.33
    share of current offenses convicted   1142        0.83       0.34
    any_prison?                           1008        0.30       0.46
    any dissenting opinions?              1152        0.08       0.27
    dissenting opinion up?                1152        0.05       0.21
    dissenting opinion down?              1152        0.03       0.18
    Judge Variables
    judge_age                             1107       49.99       9.67
    judge_male                            1152        0.55       0.50




                                                                           46!
!
Table 3. Random Assignment of Nämndemän Triplets and Judges
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)
                                                              any_                   any_                     maj_       any_       triplet_     triplet_
                                            any_    any_      krist      any_       swede        any_        nämn_        non       average      average     judge_       judge_
                                         vänster    green     dem        folk        dem        vägvalet      male      swedish        age         exp        male          age
F-test (p-value) of joint significance of:
defendant characteristics                   0.89     0.77     0.68       0.19        0.71         1.23        0.47        1.05        0.81         1.44        2.01        2.24
(4 variables)                              (0.47)   (0.54)   (0.61)     (0.95)      (0.58)       (0.30)      (0.76)      (0.38)      (0.52)       (0.22)      (0.09)      (0.06)

offense characteristics                   0.81       1.46     3.36       1.21        1.07         1.46        0.75        1.21        0.72         1.75        1.85        0.50
(11 variables)                           (0.63)     (0.14)   (0.00)     (0.28)      (0.38)       (0.14)      (0.69)      (0.27)      (0.72)       (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.90)
case characteristics                      0.95       0.81     0.77       0.35        3.31         0.38        1.04        0.34        1.41         1.24        1.64        0.67
(5 variables)                            (0.45)     (0.54)   (0.57)     (0.88)      (0.01)       (0.87)      (0.40)      (0.89)      (0.22)       (0.29)      (0.15)      (0.65)

criminal history characteristics          0.17       1.98     0.84       0.00        1.20         1.40        0.37        0.69        0.25         0.48        3.77        1.19
(2 variables)                            (0.84)     (0.14)   (0.43)     (1.00)      (0.30)       (0.25)      (0.69)      (0.50)      (0.78)       (0.62)      (0.02)      (0.30)

nämndemän political affiliations                                                                                                                               0.67        0.79
 (7 variables)                                                                                                                                                (0.70)      (0.60)

other nämndemän characteristics                                                                                                                                0.89        1.75
(5 variables)                                                                                                                                                 (0.49)      (0.12)
# coef significant at 5% level              0         2        1          1            1            2          0           0            1           4           4           0
N                                         1051      1051     1051       1051         1051         1051       1074        1069         1074        1073        1051        1011
R-sq                                      0.025     0.022    0.021      0.016        0.028        0.034      0.023       0.023        0.030       0.037       0.072       0.043
Each column presents the results of a regression of a nämndemän triplet or judge characteristics (listed at the top of the column) and a large set of controls that can are
grouped into six categories: defendant characteristics, offense characteristics, case characteristics, criminal history, nämndemän political affiliations, and other nämndemän
characteristics. The results of these regressions are summarized in the above table by presenting the F-tests of the joint significance of the variables included in these
categories. The table also reports the number of significant coefficients and the R-squared for each regression. F-tests are based on robust standard errors, clustered by case.




                                                                                                                                                                                   47!
!
Table 4. Baseline Specification for All Cases

                                            (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
                                          Share of Current Offenses
                                                 Convicted                     Any current convictions?

    any_vänster                            0.0584            0.146*            0.0572             0.139*
                                          (0.0381)          (0.0753)          (0.0373)           (0.0776)

    any_green                              0.0255            0.0811           -0.00227            0.0469
                                          (0.0322)          (0.0607)          (0.0268)           (0.0587)

    any_swededem                          -0.0377           -0.00466          -0.00865           -0.00361
                                          (0.0525)          (0.0968)          (0.0497)           (0.0959)

    _cons                                0.927***           0.737***          0.826***          0.711***
                                         (0.0848)            (0.193)          (0.0837)           (0.181)

    Other Nämndemän Controls                   Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes
    Judge Fixed Effects                        Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes
    Def/Offense/Case Controls                  Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes
    Sample                              Full Admit = 0       No Admit = 1     Full Admit = 0     No Admit = 1
    N                                          961                 466              962                466
    R-sq                                      0.212              0.261             0.230              0.253
    Each column corresponds to a regression of the conviction outcome (denoted at the top of the column) on
    a dummy variable indicating the presence of each of three main extreme parties of interest, and include
    controls for other nämndemän characteristics (such as age, gender, non-swedish, and experience),
    defendant characteristics, offense characteristics and other case characteristics. Columns (1) and (3) use
    the full sample of cases that did not fully admit their guilt, while columns (2) and (4) focus on those
    cases that completely deny their guilt. Robust standard errors, clustered on judge name, are in
    parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                                                          48!
!
Table 5. Baseline Party Platform*Case Characteristic Results

                                          (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)         (7)
                                           Share of Current Offenses Convicted            Any Current Convictions?
    any_vänster                        -0.0126      0.0595      0.0357     0.108**      -0.0115     0.0637*     0.0924**
                                       (0.0520)    (0.0377)    (0.0557)    (0.0424)     (0.0475)    (0.0354)    (0.0432)

    any_swededem                       -0.0702     -0.0866     -0.0921     -0.0788      0.00134     -0.0553     -0.0392
                                       (0.0760)    (0.0586)    (0.0703)    (0.0568)     (0.0625)    (0.0568)    (0.0550)

    any_vänster*any_femalevic         0.148***                                         0.143***
                                      (0.0558)                                         (0.0527)

    any_swedem*any_femalevic            0.0637                                          -0.0163
                                       (0.0958)                                         (0.0783)

    any_vänster*def_arabic name                    -0.0115     0.00728                              -0.0276
                                                   (0.0661)    (0.0790)                             (0.0597)

    any_swedem*def_arabic name                     0.260**    0.283***                             0.255***
                                                   (0.100)     (0.101)                             (0.0851)

    any_vänster*def<21                                                     -0.153**                             -0.105*
                                                                           (0.0622)                             (0.0606)

    any_swedem*def<21                                                      0.239***                             0.169**
                                                                           (0.0764)                             (0.0810)

    def_arabic_name                   -0.00483     -0.0236     -0.0587     -0.00146     0.00393     0.00270     0.00912
                                      (0.0327)     (0.0374)    (0.0478)    (0.0312)     (0.0334)    (0.0370)    (0.0321)

    any_female_vic                     -0.0218     0.00252      0.0167     0.00295     -0.00903     0.00421     0.00466
                                       (0.0390)    (0.0320)    (0.0385)    (0.0310)    (0.0398)     (0.0325)    (0.0314)

    def<21                             -0.0268     -0.0235     -0.0109     -0.0303      -0.0209     -0.0193     -0.0345
                                       (0.0347)    (0.0357)    (0.0454)    (0.0432)     (0.0296)    (0.0313)    (0.0380)

    _cons                             0.945*** 0.928***       0.868***     0.905***    0.836***    0.828***     0.809***
                                      (0.0886) (0.0863)        (0.103)     (0.0850)    (0.0835)    (0.0852)     (0.0848)

    N                                     961        961           690          961          962         962         962
    R-sq                                 0.219      0.217         0.249        0.225        0.238       0.237       0.240
    Robust standard errors, clustered on judge name, are in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. All
    specifications use the sample of cases where guilt is not fully admitted and include controls for judge fixed effects,
    defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics; note that having a green in the triplet, and the
    corresponding interactions, are also included. The dependent variable in columns (1) – (4) is the share of charges
    resulting in a conviction, while in columns (5)-(7), it is whether there is at least one conviction. As a robustness
    check, column (3) excludes defendants with non-arabic, non-swedish names.




                                                                                                                    49!
!
Table 6. Robustness of Main Results to Controls
                                             (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)           (9)
                                                                            Dependent Variable = share of current offenses convicted
    any_vänster                             0.00671         0.0387        0.0414       0.0384        0.0341       0.0362         0.0352       0.0419        0.0299
    any_swededem                             -0.155*       -0.171*       -0.172*     -0.191**      -0.185**     -0.208**       -0.219**     -0.224**      -0.218**
    any_vänster*any_female_vic              0.120**       0.130**       0.131**       0.144**      0.133**       0.125**        0.127**      0.121**       0.135**
    any_swededem*any_female_vic              0.0838         0.0869        0.0894       0.114         0.115        0.144          0.147        0.153         0.154
    any_vänster*def_arabic name              -0.0217      -0.00188      -0.00520      -0.0219     0.000386      0.000956       0.000409     -0.00447       -0.0227
    any_swededem*def_arabic name            0.170**       0.217**       0.228**      0.259***     0.253***       0.248**        0.241**      0.250**       0.252**
    any_vänster*def<21                       -0.0610       -0.113*       -0.126*      -0.123*      -0.135**      -0.122*       -0.131**     -0.147**       -0.134*
    any_swededem*def<21                     0.281***     0.295***      0.281***      0.278***     0.266***      0.284***       0.296***     0.308***      0.319***
    def_arabic_name                         -0.00974       -0.0274       -0.0294      -0.0246       -0.0131      -0.0170        -0.0236      -0.0186       -0.0127
    any_female_vic                           -0.0272       -0.0284       -0.0277      -0.0226       -0.0363      -0.0227        -0.0235      -0.0203       -0.0289
    def_less21                               0.0138       0.00223       0.00376       -0.0314       -0.0319      -0.0378        -0.0409      -0.0319       -0.0124
    Judge Fixed Effects                        No            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Other Nämndemän Characteristics            No             No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Defendant Characteristics                  No             No            No          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Case Characteristics                       No             No            No           No           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Offense Type Categories                    No             No            No           No            No          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Criminal History                           No             No            No           No            No           No            Yes          Yes           Yes
    Hearing Year and Day of Week FE            No             No            No           No            No           No             No          Yes           Yes
    Prosecution Attorney FE                    No             No            No           No            No           No             No           No           Yes
    Each column presents the results of regressing the share of charges resulting in a conviction on the variables listed and the corresponding variables and
    interaction terms for the green party. No controls are included in column (1); each subsequent column includes the additional set of controls listed in the
    lower panel of the table. Robust standard errors, clustered on judge name, are used to determine significance, where* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Finally,
    all specifications condition on the sample who did not fully admit guilt.




                                                                                                                                                                50!
!
Table 7. The Effect of Triplet Majority

                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                         Dependent Variable: Share of Current Charges Convicted
                                                                         Case Characteristics:
                                                                           Arabic Sounding            Young (<21)
                                                      Female Victim        Named Defendant              Defendant
    any_vänster                                     -0.0126     -0.00634       0.0595       0.0621      0.108**      0.112**
                                                   (0.0520)     (0.0512)      (0.0377)     (0.0382)     (0.0424)     (0.0452)

    any_swededem                                    -0.0702      -0.0741       -0.0866      -0.0879      -0.0788      -0.0806
                                                   (0.0760)     (0.0769)      (0.0586)     (0.0582)     (0.0568)     (0.0568)

    any_vänster*Case Characteristic                0.148***      0.0496        -0.0115      -0.118      -0.153**     -0.187**
                                                   (0.0558)     (0.0750)      (0.0661)     (0.0749)     (0.0622)     (0.0855)

    any_swededem*case characteristic                0.0637       0.0374       0.260**      0.234*       0.239***     0.228**
                                                   (0.0958)      (0.103)      (0.100)      (0.127)      (0.0764)     (0.0891)

    any_vänster*Case Char*Majority ‘Left’                        0.123*                     0.191                     0.0619
                                                                (0.0705)                   (0.117)                   (0.0979)

    any_swededem*case char*Majority ‘Left’                       0.201*                     0.125                     0.0267
                                                                 (0.105)                   (0.144)                    (0.122)

    Any female Victim                               -0.0218      -0.0190      0.00252      0.00316      0.00295      0.00329
                                                   (0.0390)     (0.0388)      (0.0320)     (0.0315)     (0.0310)     (0.0307)

    Defendant Arabic Sounding Name                 -0.00483     -0.00560       -0.0236      -0.0194     -0.00146     0.00154
                                                   (0.0327)     (0.0327)      (0.0374)     (0.0371)     (0.0312)     (0.0317)

    Defendant < 21                                  -0.0268      -0.0212       -0.0235      -0.0180      -0.0303      -0.0261
                                                   (0.0347)     (0.0359)      (0.0357)     (0.0348)     (0.0432)     (0.0445)

    Majority ‘Left’                                              -0.0292                    -0.0132                  -0.00989
                                                                (0.0307)                   (0.0279)                  (0.0298)
    N                                                  961           961         961           961          961          961
    R-sq                                              0.219         0.224       0.217         0.222        0.225        0.228
    The dependent variable in each specification is the share of current charges resulting in conviction. All specifications
    include the full set of controls and same restrictions as main specifications (i.e. individuals who do not fully admit
    guilt). Specifically, controls for judge fixed effects, defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics are
    characteristics; note that having a green in the triplet, and the corresponding interactions, are also included. ‘Left’ is
    defined as vänster, miljö and social democratic parties. The case characteristic included in the interaction varies
    across columns and is denoted at the top of each column.




                                                                                                                      51!
!
Table 8. Peer Effects

                                        (1)                (2)                             (3)             (4)                            (5)            (6)
                                                          Dependent Variable: Share of Current Offenses Convicted by an Individual Nämndeman
                                                                                         arabic         nonarabic
                                  female victim      no female victim                  defendant        defendant                    defendant < 21 defendant >21
                                     cases                cases                          cases            cases                          cases          cases

    any_peers_vänster                0.127***            0.00606                              0.236***             0.0434                                -0.0298           0.0989***
                                     (0.0380)            (0.0430)                             (0.0793)            (0.0311)                               (0.0536)           (0.0333)

    any_peers_swededem                0.0517              -0.107                                0.276*            -0.0363                                 0.0835            -0.0333
                                     (0.0667)            (0.0771)                               (0.162)           (0.0501)                               (0.0945)           (0.0556)

    Judge Fixed Effects                 Yes                 Yes                                   Yes                Yes                                   Yes                 Yes
    Def/Offense/Case Controls           Yes                 Yes                                   Yes                Yes                                   Yes                 Yes
    Peer Characteristics                Yes                 Yes                                   Yes                Yes                                   Yes                 Yes
    Own Nämndemän FE                    Yes                 Yes                                   Yes                Yes                                   Yes                 Yes
    N                                  1471                1378                                   655               2194                                   801                2048
    R-sq                               0.537               0.577                                 0.760              0.427                                 0.644               0.413
The dependent variable in each each column is the share of current offenses that an idividual nämndeman votes to convict on. Each specification is still restricted to the sample for
which the defendant did not fully admit guilt and by defendant or case characteristics listed at the top of the column. All specifications include the baseline set of controls, as well as
nämndeman fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered on case, are in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                                              52!
!
Table 9. Which Nämndemän are Most Affected by Their Peers? Heterogeneous Peer Effects
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)                         (8)
                                                           Dependent Variable: Share of Current Charges Convicted by Individual Nämndeman
                                          all           females          males            <50           50-68            >68       <=3 yrs exp               >3 years exp
Panel A: Specifications that include interactions of own peer party and female victim
any_peers_vänster                       0.0313           0.0154         0.0658           0.0292         0.0448         -0.0112      -0.00797                     0.0502
                                       (0.0385)        (0.0497)        (0.0508)         (0.0992)       (0.0559)       (0.0615)      (0.0498)                    (0.0488)

Femvictim*any_peers_vänster             0.104**          0.115**           0.0867            0.179            0.104            0.126          0.169***           0.0731
                                        (0.0491)         (0.0579)         (0.0735)          (0.128)         (0.0686)         (0.0858)         (0.0629)          (0.0650)
Panel B: Specifications that include interactions of own peer party and defendant arabic sounding
any_peers_swededem                      -0.0394        0.00417          -0.0836         -0.125              -0.0710           0.0422           -0.0543          -0.0219
                                       (0.0495)        (0.0555)        (0.0714)        (0.0996)             (0.0675)         (0.0722)          (0.0738)         (0.0593)
Defarabic*any_peers_swededem           0.247**          0.235*         0.271**          0.156                0.331**          0.0572          0.438***          0.0612
                                        (0.109)         (0.128)        (0.133)         (0.162)               (0.140)          (0.207)          (0.136)          (0.141)
Panel C: Specifications that include interactions of own peer party and defendant young
any_peers_vänster                     0.0982***         0.0650        0.151***        0.138**               0.120**           0.0542          0.0909**          0.105**
                                       (0.0312)        (0.0401)       (0.0385)        (0.0633)              (0.0464)         (0.0495)         (0.0392)          (0.0447)

Youngdef*any_peers_vänster              -0.0559           0.0265          -0.136**          -0.121          -0.0795          -0.0213           -0.0427          -0.0716
                                        (0.0507)         (0.0603)         (0.0665)          (0.154)         (0.0667)         (0.0763)          (0.0729)         (0.0694)
any_peers_swededem                      -0.0364           0.0150           -0.110           -0.194*         -0.00372          0.0238          -0.00961          -0.0628
                                        (0.0525)         (0.0566)         (0.0752)          (0.102)         (0.0671)         (0.0726)         (0.0773)          (0.0627)
Youngdef*any_peers_swdem                0.218***            0.176         0.320***          0.393**           0.164             0.125          0.341**          0.223**
                                         (0.0744)          (0.111)         (0.103)           (0.153)         (0.126)           (0.130)         (0.148)          (0.0903)
N                                          2849             1470             1379              684            1217               948             1450              1399
Dependent variable = Share of Current Charges on which an individual nämndeman votes to convict . All specifications control for other peer characteristics,
defendant, offense, and case characteristics, judge fixed effects, and own nämndemän fixed effects. The full interaction of green, vänster, and swedish democrat
peers with the case characteristic of interest is included in each specification, but only the main variables of interest are presented. Note that the results of separate
regressions are presented in Panels A, B, and C; each panel considers interactions with a different case characteristics (female victim cases, Arabic named
defendant cases, and young defendant cases). Standard errors are in parentheses, and clustered by case. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                                                                                                                                             53!
!
Table 10. Own Party x Peer Party Interactions

                                                   (1)                       (2)                        (3)
                                                                       Dependent Variable =
                                             Share of current charges on which individual nämndeman votes to convict
    Ownvän*peervän                           0.182** (0.0722)                 ---                   0.0557 (0.0806)
    Owngre*peervän                            -0.0297 (0.0984)                ---                   0.0321 (0.0724)
    Ownsocdem*peervän                          0.0400 (0.0687)                ---                0.131*** (0.0471)
    OwnRight*peervän                          -0.0329 (0.0506)                ---                 0.0803* (0.0416)
    Ownswedem*peervän                        0.261** (0.119)                  ---                   0.202* (0.112)

    Ownvän*peervän*femvic                    -0.286**    (0.142)
    Owngre*peervän*femvic                        0.165   (0.126)
    Ownsocdem*peervän*femvic                   0.125*    (0.0744)
    OwnRight *peervän*femvic                  0.145**    (0.0606)
    Ownswdem*peervän*femvic                   -0.0543    (0.168)

    Ownvän*peerswdem                               ---                      0.0417    (0.112)            0.0743    (0.123)
    Owngre*peerswdem                               ---                      0.0865    (0.113)             0.112    (0.129)
    Ownsocdem*peerswdem                            ---                      0.0275    (0.0626)           0.0157    (0.0683)
    OwnRight *peerswdem                            ---                      0.0562    (0.0346)           0.0193    (0.0342)

    Ownvän*peerswdem*defarab                                                  0.222   (0.238)
    Owngre*peerswdem*defarab                                               0.510**    (0.212)
    Ownsocdem*peerswdem*defarab                                               0.164   (0.126)
    OwnRight *peerswdem*defarab                                            -0.0383    (0.0635)

    Ownvän*peervän*defyoung                                                                                0.221   (0.138)
    Owngre*peervän*defyoung                                                                              0.0541    (0.165)
    Ownsocdem*peervän*defyoung                                                                            -0.100   (0.0870)
    OwnRight *peervän*defyoung                                                                         -0.113**    (0.0557)
    Ownswdem*peervän*defyoung                                                                              0.174   (0.158)

    Ownvän*peerswdem*defyoung                                                                              0.125   (0.136)
    Owngre*peerswdem*defyoung                                                                              0.289   (0.232)
    Ownsocdem*peerswdem*defyoung                                                                         0.178*    (0.104)
    OwnRight *peerswdem*defyoung                                                                        0.103**    (0.0514)
 N                                                2835                         2835                        2835
Dependent variable = Share of Current Charges Resulting in Conviction . All specifications control for other
peer characteristics, defendant, offense, and case characteristics, judge fixed effects, and own nämndemän fixed
effects. Interactions with peer green are also included but not presented. OwnRight indicates that the nämndeman
is part of the moderate block (moderate, folk party, center party, or Christian Democrats) or a vägvalet party
member (local Gothenburg party that often votes with moderate block). Also note that --- indicates that the listed
variable is included in the regression, but that the results are not presented simply to ease readability of the table.
Standard errors are in parentheses, and clustered by case. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                    54!
!
Table 11. Simulation Exercise: Distinguishing Sway Effects Versus Dissent Aversion in the
Case Level Data

                                            (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                                       Any_curr_ Conv         Simulated         Any_curr_ Conv         Simulated
                                          (actual)            Conviction           (actual)            Conviction
    any_vänster                            -0.022               -0.020                0.062               0.054
                                           (0.043)              (0.044)              (0.032)             (0.034)

    any_swededem                            0.046                0.050               -0.033              -0.032
                                           (0.064)              (0.067)              (0.050)             (0.052)

    any_vänster*any_femalevic             0.164***              0.136**
                                           (0.059)              (0.060)

    any_swedem*any_femalevic               -0. 056              -0.067
                                           (0.088)              (0.092)

    any_vänster*def_arabic name                                                      -0.031              -0.038
                                                                                     (0.062)             (0.065)

    any_swedem*def_arabic name                                                      0.263***            0.249***
                                                                                     (0.083)             (0.093)

    def_arabic_name                         0.006               0.0066               0.0094               0.016
                                           (0.029)              (0.029)              (0.038)             (0.037)

    any_female_vic                         -0.025               -0.024               -0.013              -0.012
                                           (0.037)              (0.037)              (0.029)             (0.028)

    def<21                                 -0.016               -0.025               -0.017              -0.026
                                           (0.036)              (0.036)              (0.036)             (0.036)

    _cons                                 0.801***             0.813***             0.795***            0.804***
                                           (0.097)              (0.101)              (0.094)             (0.101)

    All specifications use the sample of cases where guilt is not fully admitted and include controls for judge fixed
    effects, defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics; note that having a green in the triplet, and the
    corresponding interactions, are also included. The dependent variable in the odd columns is the actual case
    outcome, i.e. whether there was at least one conviction. The dependent variable in the even columns is the
    simulated verdict, as described in the text. The coefficients and standard errors presented here are based on 500
    bootstrapped samples of size 888; this table present the mean and standard deviation of the estimated regression
    results for these 500 samples. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
!




                                                                                                                    55!
!
Table 12. Simulation Exercise: Distinguishing Sway Effects Versus Dissent Aversion in the Peer Effects Analysis

                                     (1)           (2)                                       (3)              (4)                                (5)               (6)
                                  female       no female                                   arabic          nonarabic                          Defendant         Defendant
                                   victim        victim                                  defendant         defendant                            < 21              >21
    Panel A: Dependent Variable = Actual Any Current Convictions
    any_peers_vänster            0.143***        -0.001                                   0.233**            0.054                              -0.010           0.094**
                                  (0.041)       (0.050)                                   (0.114)           (0.032)                             (0.095)          (0.037)

    any_peers_swededem                0.036            -0.022                              0.254             0.009                               0.031             0.025
                                     (0.081)           (0.099)                            (0.269)           (0.052)                             (0.187)           (0.060)


    Panel B: Dependent Variable = Simulated Conviction
    any_peers_vänster            0.105**         -0.013                                    0.146             0.027                              -0.007            0.066*
                                  (0.043)       (0.053)                                   (0.123)           (0.033)                             (0.094)           (0.038)

    any_peers_swededem                .036             -0.036                              0.237             0.002                               0.018             0.008
                                     (.083)            (0.102)                            (0.300)           (0.057)                             (0.201)           (0.064)

    Judge Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes                                 Yes               Yes                                 Yes              Yes
    Def/Offense/Case Controls          Yes              Yes                                 Yes               Yes                                 Yes              Yes
    Peer Characteristics               Yes              Yes                                 Yes               Yes                                 Yes              Yes
    Own Nämndemän FE                   Yes              Yes                                 Yes               Yes                                 Yes              Yes
This analysis is conducted using the individual nämndeman voting data, rather than the case level data. All specifications are restricted to the sample of cases where guilt is
not fully admitted and where complete data is observed for all nämndemän. The regression specifications are identical to those presented in Table 8, and include controls
for judge fixed effects, defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics; note that having a green in the triplet is also included. The dependent variable in Panel A
is the actual case outcome, i.e. whether there was at least one conviction, while the dependent variable in Panel B is the simulated verdict, as described in the text. The
coefficients and standard errors presented here are based on 500 bootstrapped samples of 888 cases, which are then transformed into the corresponding individual vote data
set. This table present the mean and standard deviation of the estimated regression results for these 500 samples. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                                  56!
!
    Appendix Table 1. Baseline Specification for All Parties
                                                      (1)                    (2)                       (3)
                                                       Dependent Variable: Share Resulting in Conviction
                                                                   Case Characteristics =
                                                Female victim           Arabic Def. Name          Young Defendnat
    any_vänster                                     -0.0623                   0.0575                  0.0894*
                                                   (0.0636)                  (0.0471)                 (0.0507)
    any_green                                      0.00752                    0.0308                   -0.0137
                                                   (0.0577)                  (0.0432)                 (0.0401)
    any_swededem                                    -0.0844                   -0.0803                  -0.0800
                                                   (0.0809)                  (0.0631)                 (0.0610)
    any_vän*case_characteristic                    0.221***                   -0.0438                  -0.120
                                                   (0.0722)                  (0.0909)                 (0.0808)
    any_green*case_characteristic                   0.0183                   -0.0359                  0.151***
                                                   (0.0735)                  (0.100)                  (0.0565)
    any_swededem*case_characteristic                0.0964                   0.233**                  0.270***
                                                    (0.101)                  (0.111)                  (0.0873)
    any_socdem                                      -0.0661                  0.00188                   -0.0230
                                                   (0.0655)                  (0.0573)                 (0.0595)
    any_kristdem                                    -0.0200                   0.0268                  0.00733
                                                   (0.0637)                  (0.0515)                 (0.0551)
    any_moderates                                 -0.0959**                   -0.0185                 -0.0560*
                                                   (0.0398)                  (0.0368)                 (0.0336)
    any_folk                                        -0.0165                  0.00885                  0.00379
                                                   (0.0540)                  (0.0449)                 (0.0459)
    any_center                                      0.0998                    -0.0242                 -0.00424
                                                   (0.0662)                  (0.0761)                 (0.0908)
    any_local                                       0.0575                    0.0419                  0.00819
                                                   (0.0452)                  (0.0440)                 (0.0423)
    any_socdem*case characteristic                  0.117                    -0.0499                   0.0293
                                                   (0.0749)                  (0.101)                  (0.0830)
    any_krist*case characteristic                   0.0550                   -0.0669                   0.0687
                                                   (0.0927)                  (0.108)                  (0.0868)
    any_mod*case characteristic                     0.122*                    -0.0294                  0.120*
                                                   (0.0626)                  (0.0834)                 (0.0682)
    any_folk*case characteristic                    0.0354                    -0.0445                  -0.0129
                                                   (0.0500)                  (0.0838)                 (0.0733)
    any_center*case characteristic                   -0.175                  -0.00165                   -0.125
                                                    (0.148)                   (0.287)                  (0.326)
    any_local*case characteristic                   -0.0547                  -0.0550                   0.129
                                                   (0.0727)                  (0.110)                  (0.0882)
    def_arabic                                     0.00321                   0.0802                   -0.00331
                                                   (0.0320)                  (0.170)                  (0.0323)
    any_female_vic                                 -0.233*                   0.00244                  0.00405
                                                   (0.123)                   (0.0317)                 (0.0300)
    def_less21                                      -0.0265                   -0.0228                   -0.167
                                                   (0.0321)                  (0.0336)                  (0.146)
 N                                                       961                      961                       961
 R-sq                                                   0.229                    0.220                     0.232
Robust standard errors, clustered on judge name, are in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01. All
specifications use the sample of cases where guilt is not fully admitted and include controls for judge fixed effects,
defendant, offense, case and nämndemän characteristics. Interactions between dummy variables for each party and the
case characteristic listed at the top of the column are presented.
                                                                                                                   57!
!
Appendix Table 2. Determinants of Individual Nämndemän Dissenting Opinions
                                              (1)                                      (2)
                                    Dependent Variable: Dissent from Verdict for at Least One Offense
                             ’Right’ (moderate, folk, kristdem,          ’Left’ (vänster, green, social dems)
                                    center) nämndemän                                nämndemän
    Own nämndemän Characteristics
    own_vänster                                                                  0.00455 (0.0098)
    own_green                                                                  -0.000136 (0.0101)
    own_sweddem                        0.0125 (0.0254)
    own_moderate                      -0.0119 (0.0158)
    own_folk/christian
    dem/center                       0.00252 (0.0167)
    own_male                         0.00723 (0.0080)                            0.00842    (0.0091)
    own_age                       -0.000565 (0.0004)                           -0.000039    (0.0003)
    own_nonswedish                   0.00718 (0.0195)                           0.000145    (0.0083)
    own_exp                       0.0000277 (0.0008)                            -0.00133    (0.0010)
    Peer Characteristics
    any_peers_green                     -0.00698    (0.0090)                      0.00846   (0.0127)
    any_peers_vänster                     0.0117    (0 .0122)                 -0.0116***    (0.0039)
    any_peers_sweddem                -0.0178***     (0.0057)                       0.0193   (0.0182)
    num_male_peers                      -0.00137    (0.0078)                    0.0116**    (0.0056)
    any_nonsw_peers                      0.00461    (0.0083)                     -0.00285   (0.0070)
    total_peer_experience             -0.00121*     (0.0007)                   -0.000342    (0.0005)
    peer_avgage                        0.000159     (0.0004)                   -0.000185    (0.0004)
    Defendant and Case Characteristics
    def_male                         0.0138***      (0.0051)                    -0.00770    (0.0122)
    def_less21                         -0.0132*     (0.0079)                    -0.00651    (0.0071)
    def_nonswedish                      0.0303*     (0.0170)                    -0.00338    (0.0089)
    def_arabic                          0.00786     (0.0106)                       0.0129   (0.0103)
    num_victims                         0.00269     (0.0033)                   -0.000197    (0.0024)
    any_female_vic                     -0.00885     (0.0095)                    -0.00316    (0.0058)
    num_defendants                   -0.000994      (0.0016)                     0.00266    (0.0026)
    partial_admission                   0.00261     (0.0087)                    -0.00204    (0.0065)
    num_offenses                        0.00524     (0.0056)                   -0.000657    (0.0026)
    any_robbery                         -0.0167     (0.0119)                    -0.0186*    (0.0105)
    any_rape                         0.0631***      (0.0232)                       0.0268   (0.0179)
    any_assault                        -0.00869     (0.0104)                     0.00478    (0.0079)
    any_aggassault                      0.00559     (0.0137)                     0.00848    (0.0114)
    any_unlaw_threat                    -0.00420    (0.0103)                    -0.00414    (0.0071)
    any_hom                             -0.0188*    (0.0109)                    -0.00440    (0.0086)
    any_drunkdrive                       -0.0243    (0.0159)                     0.00374    (0.0076)
    any_drugs                            -0.0206    (0.0146)                   -0.00784*    (0.0044)
    any_other_sex                        -0.0133    (0.0163)                     0.00836    (0.0133)
    any_other                            0.00168    (0.0098)                    -0.00303    (0.0086)
    _cons                                 0.0357    (0.0323)                       0.0205   (0.0313)
    N                                        1414                                    1350
    R-sq                                    0.053                                   0.023
    Robust standard errors, clustered on case number, are in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                                                                                58!
!
Appendix Table 3. Own Party Effects on Conviction by Case Characteristics

                                           (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                             Dependent Variable: Share of Current Charges On Which Individual Nämndeman Votes to Convict
                                     female victim   no female victim     arabic defendant      nonarabic        defendant < 21    defendant >21
                                        cases              cases                cases        defendant cases         cases             cases
    own_vänster                         0.0967**              0.0274               0.0805                0.0452               0.0475              0.0618*
                                        (0.0409)             (0.0518)             (0.0784)              (0.0385)             (0.0742)             (0.0365)

    own_green                            0.0271               0.0210                -0.132              0.00161              0.191**               -0.0245
                                        (0.0413)             (0.0508)             (0.0807)              (0.0368)             (0.0860)             (0.0369)

    own_swededem                        0.00766               -0.140               0.0948               -0.0831               0.183                -0.0958
                                        (0.0746)             (0.0937)              (0.168)              (0.0583)              (0.140)             (0.0641)

    own_moderate                        -0.0162               -0.0270              -0.0990              -0.0211              0.164**               -0.0203
                                        (0.0300)             (0.0395)             (0.0719)              (0.0251)             (0.0822)             (0.0257)

    own_fkrc (folk, christ,
    center)                             -0.00809              0.0340              -0.199**              0.0528*              0.169**               0.0225
                                        (0.0341)             (0.0465)             (0.0778)              (0.0301)             (0.0764)             (0.0288)
    Judge Fixed Effects                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
    Def/Offense/Case Controls             Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
    Peer Nämndemän FE                     Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
    N                                     1469                 1373                  657                  2185                 795                  2047
    R-sq                                  0.665                 0.677                  0.855              0.535               0.721                 0.532
    Dependent Variable = Share of Current Charges that Individual Nämndemän votes to convict on. The sample includes those individuals who did not
    fully admit guilt. Each column further restricts the sample to a sub-sample indicated at the top of the column. All specifications control for judge fixed
    effects, defendant, offense, and case charactersitics, as well as fixed effects for each nämndeman peer. In addition, own characteristics (other than party)
    are also included as controls. Robust standard errors, clustered on case, are in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01.



                                                                                                                                                                   59!
!
