                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE IMPACT OF DISABILITY BENEFITS ON LABOR SUPPLY:
         EVIDENCE FROM THE VA'S DISABILITY COMPENSATION PROGRAM

                                            David H. Autor
                                             Mark Duggan
                                            Kyle Greenberg
                                             David S. Lyle

                                         Working Paper 21144
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21144


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015




This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-05
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The views and findings expressed herein are those of the authors and do not purport to reflect the position
of the U.S. Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the Department of Defense, the SSA,
or the NBER. We are grateful to Josh Angrist, Orley Ashenfelter, Mary Daly, and seminar participants
at Arizona State University, the Federal Reserve Board, Princeton University, and Stanford University
for helpful comments. We are indebted to Luke Gallagher of the Army Office of Economic Manpower
Analysis for outstanding research assistance and to Mike Risha of the Social Security Administration
for assistance with all aspects of data development and interpretation. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by David H. Autor, Mark Duggan, Kyle Greenberg, and David S. Lyle. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Disability Benefits on Labor Supply: Evidence from the VA's Disability Compensation
Program
David H. Autor, Mark Duggan, Kyle Greenberg, and David S. Lyle
NBER Working Paper No. 21144
May 2015
JEL No. J22

                                             ABSTRACT

Combining administrative data from the U.S. Army, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the
U.S. Social Security Administration, we analyze the effect of the VA’s Disability Compensation (DC)
program on veterans’ labor force participation and earnings. The largely unstudied Disability Compensation
program currently provides income and health insurance to almost four million veterans of military
service who suffer service-connected disabilities. We study a unique policy change, the 2001 Agent
Orange decision, which expanded DC eligibility for Vietnam veterans who had served in-theatre to
a broader set of conditions such as type 2 diabetes. Exploiting the fact that the Agent Orange policy
excluded Vietnam era veterans who did not serve in-theatre, we assess the causal effects of DC eligibility
by contrasting the outcomes of these two Vietnam-era veteran groups. The Agent Orange policy catalyzed
a sharp increase in DC enrollment among veterans who served in-theatre, raising the share receiving
benefits by five percentage points over five years. Disability ratings and payments rose rapidly among
those newly enrolled, with average annual non-taxed federal transfer payments increasing to $17K
within five years. We estimate that benefits receipt reduced labor force participation by 18 percentage
points among veterans enrolled due to the policy, though measured income net of transfer benefits
rose on average. Consistent with the relatively advanced age and diminished health of Vietnam era
veterans in this period, we estimate labor force participation elasticities that are somewhat higher than
among the general population.


David H. Autor                                      Kyle Greenberg
Department of Economics, E17-216                    MIT Department of Economics
MIT                                                 77 Massachusetts Ave
77 Massachusetts Avenue                             Cambridge, MA 02139
Cambridge, MA 02139                                 kgreenb@mit.edu
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu                                      David S. Lyle
                                                    United States Military Academy
Mark Duggan                                         607 Cullum Road
Stanford University                                 West Point, NY 10996
Department of Economics                             David.Lyle@usma.edu
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
mgduggan@stanford.edu
Introduction

      This paper investigates the effect of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA’s) Disability

Compensation (DC) program on the labor supply of military veterans. Since the ratification of the U.S.

Constitution in 1789, the federal government has provided cash benefits to disabled veterans. During the

Civil War, the benefit was revised from a flat payment scheme to a graduated schedule based on disability

severity. Multiple governmental agencies administered Veterans’ benefits until the summer of 1930, when

they were consolidated under a new federal agency called the Veterans’ Administration.1

      We focus on a major legislative change that took effect in 2001, which generated a plausibly

exogenous increase in the generosity of disability benefits for one group of Vietnam Era veterans but not

another.2 Motivated by an Institute of Medicine study that linked exposure to Agent Orange and other

herbicides used by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War to the onset of type 2 diabetes, the VA in

July of 2001 expanded the medical eligibility criteria for Vietnam veterans to include diabetes as a

covered condition. This coverage expansion applied to veterans who served “in-theatre” in Vietnam,

Cambodia, or Laos during the 1964 to 1975 period. It did not, however, apply to the approximately 55

percent of Vietnam era veterans who did not serve in theatre during the war.

      The 2001 policy change coincided with a sharp acceleration in the number of veterans receiving DC

benefits, documented in Figure 1. Some of this overall increase was attributable to a much higher rate of

DC enrollment among veterans serving in the 1990s and 2000s than among their counterparts from earlier

service eras.3 But much of it was driven by the rise in DC enrollment among Vietnam era veterans. As

shown in Figure 2, the fraction of Vietnam era veterans receiving DC benefits had been trending up




1
    This was changed to the Department of Veterans Affairs in 1989.
2
 See Gruber (2000) for an analysis of a reform to the federal government’s disability program in all parts of Canada
except for Quebec that is estimated to have reduced labor supply.
3
  Veterans from the Gulf War and Global War on Terror are 2-3 times more likely than veterans from WWII or the
Korean War era to receive DC benefits. Shifts in the composition of veterans (as those from older eras die and the
recent era join the ranks) have contributed to a substantial increase in total DC enrollment.

                                                                                                                     1
gradually prior to the 2001 policy change so that 9 percent of Vietnam-era veterans received DC benefits

in that year. But there was a significant break in that trend after 2001 so that by 2013 more than 17

percent of Vietnam era veterans were receiving DC benefits. No similar changes in rates of DC

enrollment occurred for veterans from earlier service eras.4

      The policy-induced increase in DC enrollment provides an unusual opportunity to study how

disability benefits affect the labor supply of near elderly male veterans. Adopting the terminology used by

the military, we distinguish among ‘boots on the ground’ (BOG) Vietnam era veterans—the veterans

directly affected by the Agent Orange policy—with ‘not on ground’ (NOG) veterans, whose DC benefit

eligibility was not expanded. We analyze unique administrative data for a sample of more than 4 million

U.S. Army veterans to compare the evolution of labor market outcomes among BOG veterans to other

Vietnam era veterans who did not serve in the Vietnam theatre during the conflict there. By using other

Vietnam era veterans as our comparison group, we account for the possibility that veterans would have

retired sooner (or later) than non-veterans for reasons unrelated to the DC program. And given the large

number of years of pre-2001 data included in our research data, we can control for possible differential

trends between BOG and NOG veterans.

      A large body of research investigates the effects of U.S. federal disability programs on health,

employment, poverty, consumption and welfare.5 This research has focused almost exclusively on the

Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program, with early studies considering the effects on labor

force participation (Parsons, 1980; Bound, 1989; Bound and Waidmann, 1992) and subsequent studies

exploring the sensitivity of the program to economic conditions (Black et al, 2002) and the labor market

effects of changes in the program’s medical eligibility criteria and in effective replacement rates (Autor

and Duggan, 2003).6 One challenge for this research is that, because SSDI is a federal program, there is


4
    See Duggan, Rosenheck, and Singleton (2010) for a comparison to veterans from earlier service eras.
5
    See for example the Handbook chapter by Bound and Burkhauser (1999).
6
 The labor supply consequences of the federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program are rarely studied
because SSI largely serves individuals with extremely limited prior work histories (those with significant work
histories normally qualify for SSDI).

                                                                                                                  2
no natural comparison group against which to estimate the effects of the program. To address this issue,

more recent research has estimated the effect of SSDI on the labor supply of applicants and beneficiaries

by using variation in the propensity to award disability benefits across disability examiners (Maestas et al,

2013; Autor et al., 2014) and administrative law judges (French and Song, 2014). The findings from these

studies, which utilize large-scale administrative data sets on both SSDI enrollment and earnings, suggest

that labor force participation among marginal applicants—that is, those who would receive an SSDI

award from a lenient judge or examiner but not from a stricter one—declines by about thirty percentage

points as a result of receiving an SSDI award.7

    There has been much less research on the VA’s Disability Compensation program. Autor and Duggan

(2007), Autor et al (2011), and Coile et al (2015) use data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to

explore how labor force participation changed for male Vietnam-era veterans relative to similarly aged

non-veteran males after the 2001 policy change. All three studies demonstrate a significantly larger

decline in labor force participation among Vietnam-era veterans in the post-2001 period, though their

confidence intervals are compatible with a wide range of effect sizes. A concern with this body of work is

that veterans might retire sooner than non-veterans for reasons unrelated to the DC program.8 Using the

Vietnam-era draft lottery as an instrumental variable for Vietnam-era military service, Angrist et al (2010)

estimate that employment was lower and transfer income receipt was higher among low skilled veterans

than among low-skilled non-veterans. They hypothesize that the lower employment rate of Vietnam-era

veterans is due to the availability of Veterans Disability Compensation benefits. In related work on the

labor supply of veterans, Boyle and Lahey (2010) study the expansion of the Veterans Health Insurance


7
  Using an approach similar to Bound (1989), Chen and van der Klauuw (2008) estimate even smaller effects of
SSDI enrollment, with an upper bound of a 20 percent reduction in labor force participation. Results from Von
Wachter et al (2011) suggest labor supply effects may be larger for younger SSDI recipients. While SSDI reduces
the incentive to work among recipients, the results of a recent policy change in Norway suggest that disability
insurance recipients are responsive to changes in the magnitude of this incentive (Kostøl and Mogstad, 2014).
8
  Duggan et al (2010) use five years of data (odd-numbered years between 1997 and 2005) from the Veterans’
Supplement to the CPS to compare changes in labor force participation among Vietnam veterans who served in
theatre and other Vietnam era veterans. Given the small sample size, their estimates are very imprecise, as their
confidence interval includes the full range of possible effect sizes (zero effect or a one-for-one reduction in labor
force participation).

                                                                                                                        3
program to non-disabled veterans in the mid-1990s to analyze changes in labor force participation

stemming from increased real incomes and reductions in “job lock.”

    Using individual-level data from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, we document that DC

receipt and enrollment growth were higher among BOG than NOG veterans prior to 2001, but these gaps

were relatively stable. After 2001, however, the rate of DC enrollment grew much more rapidly among

BOG veterans, as shown in Figure 3. Between 2000 and 2006, the ratio of DC receipt among BOG

relative to NOG veterans rose from approximately two-to-one to three-to-one: almost one-in-four BOG

veterans in our analysis sample received DC benefits in 2006 versus one-in-twelve among veterans in our

NOG sample. This trend break was driven primarily by a sharp increase in the number of diabetes awards

to BOG veterans as shown in Figure 4. DC enrollment growth among BOG veterans shows essentially no

break in trend when one excludes DC recipients with a diabetes diagnosis (Figure 5). Using matched data

from the Social Security Administration, we also document a differential increase in SSDI enrollment

after 2001 among BOG veterans. A plausible channel for this effect, which is about one-tenth as large as

the corresponding change in DC enrollment, is that receipt of veterans disability benefits eases financial

constraints associated with exiting the labor force and applying for SSDI benefits. Moreover, since SSA

regulations require disability adjudicators to consider disability decisions of other federal agencies (U.S.

General Accounting Office, 2009), a veteran’s enrollment in DC may also increase the likelihood that he

or she applies for and ultimately receives Social Security disability benefits.

    By generating a sharp differential increase in DC enrollment among BOG veterans for reasons

unrelated to changing health, the Agent Orange policy change permits causal estimation of the effect of

DC program participation on the labor supply of near-elderly Vietnam veterans. Analyzing this policy-

induced variation, we find that labor force participation, defined as having strictly positive earnings for

the year in our administrative data, declined sharply among BOG relative to NOG veterans soon after the

2001 policy change. The results are similar for younger (born 1949-51) and older (born 1946-48) Vietnam

veterans in our analysis sample, suggesting that this pattern reflects an effect of the policy rather than a

tendency of BOG veterans to retire sooner than their NOG counterparts for reasons unrelated to the DC

                                                                                                               4
program. For every 100 individuals who entered the DC program as a result of the policy change, we

estimate that 18 drop out of the labor force. The magnitude of this decline reflects in part the size of the

cash transfers that DC beneficiaries receive. Among veterans who entered the DC program after 2001,

annual benefits averaged $10K in the first year of enrollment and $17K in the fifth year of enrollment.

Since DC benefits are not subject to state or federal taxation, their after tax value is 30 to 40 percent

greater than nominally equivalent labor income. Indeed, the increase in disability benefit income among

BOG veterans more than offset (on average) their reduction in earnings among BOG veterans, so that

total incomes of BOG relative to NOG veterans rose steadily after 2001.

    Combining our labor force participation and benefit receipt estimates, we obtain a non-participation

elasticity of 0.50. This estimate is larger than the figure of 0.16 reported by Coile and Gruber (2007) for

the elasticity of retirement of near-elderly adults with respect to Social Security and other retirement

wealth.9 Our estimates are highly consistent with the participation elasticities calculated by Boyle and

Lahey (2010), however, who studied labor supply of older non-disabled veterans ages 55 through 64 who

were granted access to VA health insurance in the mid-1990s.

    Distinct from the SSDI program, which provides income replacement for beneficiaries who are

unable to work due to disability, DC benefits are awarded as compensation for service-related reductions

in health and thus, for the most part, are not contingent on veterans’ past or present employment. This

observation would suggest that any DC-induced reduction in labor supply that we detect would be

attributable to a non-incentive income effect. However, nearly 14 percent of BOG veterans who were

receiving DC by the end of our sample window were receiving maximum DC benefits of approximately

$2,900 monthly because they were deemed unable to work (‘Individually Unemployable’ or IU) due to

their disability. For veterans receiving the IU benefit and those seeking it, the labor supply effects that we

estimate are likely to encompass both income and incentive effects.



9
  A venerable literature estimates labor supply elasticites, including Frisch (1959), Ashenfelter and Heckman (1974),
Abbott and Ashenfelter (1976), and Chetty (2012) among many key contributions. Very few studies estimate income
elasticites of participation, however. McClelland and Mok (2012) provide a recent review.

                                                                                                                   5
       The labor supply effects that we document acquire added significance in light of the rapid growth in

Disability Compensation enrollment, with annual benefit payments of $49.2 billion in 2013 (U.S.

Veterans Benefits Administration, 2014). Today’s veterans are substantially more likely than U.S.

veterans of earlier cohorts to obtain DC benefits; indeed, veterans who have exited military service since

2001 are more than three times as likely as were Vietnam era veterans to receive disability compensation

benefits soon after the completion of service. This cross-cohort contrast suggests that Veterans Disability

Compensation program costs may rise substantially beyond what would be predicted based on earlier

generations of veterans, a concern highlighted by Bilmes and Stiglitz (2008).

        The analysis proceeds as follows. Section I discusses the financial and labor force participation

incentives created by the Veterans Disability Compensation program. Section II describes the 2001 Agent

Orange decision that made type 2 diabetes a service-connected disability for veterans who served in the

Vietnam theatre. Section III details the construction of our data, which we use in Section IV to analyze

the impact of the Agent Orange decision on veterans’ enrollment in DC and their receipt of transfer

income from DC and two other federal disability programs, SSDI and Supplemental Security Income

(SSI). Section V presents reduced form estimates of the impact of the Agent Orange policy on labor force

participation and total labor earnings. Section VI combines these margins to provide instrumental

variables estimates of the impact of DC enrollment and total disability benefits payments on labor force

participation. Section VII documents the effect of the Agent Orange policy on total measured income

inclusive of disability benefits and net of any induced change in labor supply. Section VIII concludes.



I.      The Veterans Disability Compensation Program: Eligibility, Benefits and Work Incentives

       The DC program pays cash benefits and provides prioritized access to VA health facilities to military

veterans with service-connected medical conditions, meaning that they are caused or aggravated by their

military service. Unlike SSDI and SSI, federal programs that classify disability using a categorical (all-or-

nothing) determination, the DC program rates disability on a discrete scale with eleven gradations ranging

from zero to 100 percent in ten percent increments. Ratings depend on the type and severity of the


                                                                                                              6
disability, with more severe conditions receiving a higher rating.10 If the recipient receives ratings for

multiple disabilities, the recipient’s Combined Disability Rating (CDR) is an increasing, concave function

of the individual ratings, where concavity prevents the combined rating from exceeding 100 percent.11

A.   Eligibility and benefits

     Veterans seeking DC benefits apply to one of 56 regional offices of the Veterans Benefit

Administration (VBA), which collects necessary information and forwards the information to a Rating

Board. For each disability claimed, the Rating Board determines whether the disability is verified,

whether it is service connected, and if so, what rating it merits. During the 2000 fiscal year, more than 70

percent of those applying for DC sought benefits for more than one medical condition (U.S. Veterans

Benefits Administration, 2001). Applicants face one of three possible outcomes: outright rejection, an

award for some but not all conditions, or an award for all conditions. In 2006, current DC beneficiaries

averaged 2.97 disabilities per recipient, with the highest number of disabilities per capita among Gulf War

and Vietnam Era veterans, and the lowest number among WWII veterans (U.S. Veterans Benefits

Administration, 2007).

     Monthly benefits awarded by DC are an increasing and convex function of the veteran’s CDR. In

2014, a 10 percent award provided a monthly payment of $131 whereas a 100 percent award provided a

monthly payment of $2,858.12 Veterans receiving a CDR of 30 percent or higher and who have spouses,




10
   The range of possible ratings differs among disabilities. For example, type 2 diabetes can have a rating of 10, 20,
40, 60, or 100 percent. Arthritis can be assigned a rating of 10 or 20 percent. For a list of conditions and ratings see
http://www.warms.vba.va.gov/bookc.html. A disability with a 0 percent rating would not increase the monthly cash
benefit but would entitle the veteran to priority for health care through the Veterans Health Administration.
11
  If a claimant has multiple disabilities, only the claimant's ‘residual ability’ is considered when determining the
effect of each additional disability on the CDR. For example, if a veteran has two disabilities rated at 50%, his CDR
would be he equal to the sum of 50% for the first disability and 50% of his residual capacity of 50% for the second
disability, all rounded to the nearest increment of 10%. Thus, two disabilities rated at 50% results in a CDR of [0.5 +
(1 – 0.5) * 0.5] = 0.75, which is then rounded up to 0.80.
12
  The stated policy of the VBA that the DC benefits schedule reflects the average reduction in earnings capacity for
each value of the CDR. Since benefits determination depends only on CDR and family status, it is clear that the
benefit payment will exceed the earnings loss for some veterans and fail to meet the earnings loss of others. In 2014,
the monthly benefit schedule (by CDR) was: $131 (10%), $259 (20%), $401 (30%), $578 (40%), $822 (50%),
$1,041 (60%), $1,312 (70%), $1,526 (80%), $1,714 (90%), and $2,858 (100%).

                                                                                                                           7
dependent children, or surviving parents also receive modest additional benefits. The VBA also considers

employment capability for veterans with severe disabilities. Veterans who have single disabilities rated at

60 percent or above or a combined disability rating of at least 70 and one disability rated at least 40 can

qualify for the Individual Unemployability (IU) designation if VBA determines that they are unable to “to

secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disability.” Veterans

receiving the IU designation are provided cash payments at the 100 percent CDR level even if their CDR

is less than 100 percent.

     Veterans Disability Compensation benefits typically have longer award durations and fewer work

restrictions than other federal disability benefits. DC benefits are also not subject to federal income or

payroll tax; hence, a dollar in DC income is roughly equivalent to $1.30 to $1.50 in pre-tax earned

income, depending upon the recipient’s marginal tax rate. DC benefits generally do not offset and are not

offset by other federal transfer benefits, and, once awarded, are rarely retracted.13 Unlike federal SSDI

benefits, DC benefits do not terminate when a recipient reaches retirement age, even for recipients

receiving the IU benefit. Moreover, a veteran’s ongoing receipt of DC benefits is neither work-contingent

nor income-contingent, except for veterans who have received the IU rating.14 Thus, DC benefits are

roughly akin to an inflation-indexed annuity that provides monthly payments for as long as a veteran

remains alive.

     Appendix Table 1 summarizes DC cash benefits paid in fiscal year 2006, the final year for which we

have individual-level DC data in the analyses below. The first three columns enumerate the count of

recipients, the total dollars paid, and the average annual benefit in each CDR category at the end of fiscal

year 2006. The average annual payment to the 2.73 million DC recipients in this year was $10,862 per




13
  A Veteran may receive both DC and SSDI payments without any reduction in benefits from either program,
though SSI payments will generally be reduced or eliminated by DC payments.
14
   A veteran can lose the IU rating if his annual labor market earnings (measured by SSA earnings data) exceeds a
threshold amount, which was equal to $6,000 in 2004 and 2005. The General Accounting Office notes, however,
that “this process relies on old data, outdated and time-consuming procedures, insufficient guidance, and weak
eligibility criteria” (GAO 2006, p. 23).

                                                                                                                    8
capita, totaling approximately $29.6 billion for the year. Veterans with ratings between 0 and 20 percent

accounted for 44 percent of recipients but just 8 percent of dollars paid. Those with ratings at 70 percent

or above comprised 21 percent of the population and received 62 percent of the benefits payments.15

     Total DC benefits payments rose from $20.8 billion to $49.1 billion between 2001 and 2013 (in

constant 2013 dollars). Simultaneously, the estimated veteran population declined from 26.1 million to

22.1 million (VBA, 2002 and 2014). As a result of these changes, real annual DC expenditures per living

veteran increased by 180 percent (from $798 to $2,234).

B.   Work Incentives under DC

     The graduated scale of DC disability ratings creates a complex set of incentives. Though disability

ratings for DC recipients notionally depend exclusively on medical criteria rather than employment status,

veterans may nevertheless perceive that their disabilities will receive higher ratings if they are not

employed when applying to obtain or increase benefits. Veterans also face an incentive to repeatedly

reapply to increase their Combined Disability Ratings—and therefore their benefits—as their health

conditions evolve.16 One consequence is that veterans’ CDRs and benefit levels tend to rise steeply in the

years following enrollment, as shown in panels A and B of Table 1.17 This pattern of rapidly escalating

benefits following enrollment suggests that policies that induce veterans to obtain an initial DC award,

even at a low CDR, may lead to substantially larger claims over the longer term and discourage labor

force participation.

     The availability of the Individual IU designation is likely to amplify these incentives. The IU benefit

has significant monetary value: a 2006 General Accounting Office report found that the average present


15
  The average monthly benefit amounts for those with ratings between 0 and 20 percent are very close to the
baseline amounts because veterans with these ratings are not eligible for dependent benefits. The average amounts
paid for those rated 60 percent and higher are substantially greater than the baseline amounts because many of these
recipients are eligible for the 100 percent payment amount because they are receiving the IU benefit.
16
  In fact, we observe very few reductions in CDRs in our data, and it is possible that those few that exist reflect
coding errors. Veterans face little risk of having their CDRs reduced after the initial award.
17
  We describe the sample used to construct Table 1 in Section III below. Although our data codes DC receipt in
each year from 1998 through 2006, we can only determine what year DC was awarded if a veteran is observed not
receiving DC in a prior year. We can thus identify DC enrollment cohorts from 1999 forward, but not for 1998.

                                                                                                                      9
discounted incremental value of receiving an IU award in 2005 was approximately $300 to $460 thousand

for veterans age 20 (net of existing benefits), and was $89 to $142 thousand for veterans age 75 (U.S.

GAO, 2006).18 The availability of this benefit appears likely to induce at least some subset of work-

capable veterans to curtail labor force participation to qualify. Once the IU designation is awarded,

veterans face an incentive to maintain low earnings since the benefit is technically only available for those

with labor market earnings at or below the poverty level for a single individual (U.S. GAO, 2006).19

     The DC program may also alter work incentives through its interactions with other federal benefits

programs, SSDI in particular. Though the DC and SSDI programs have distinct disability screening

criteria, the medical information generated by the DC award may alert some veterans that they suffer

from impairments that could merit an SSDI award (and vice versa). Receipt of DC benefits may also

render the SSDI application process less financially onerous, since SSDI applicants must remain out of

the labor force for at least five months before receiving SSDI benefits. Because cash benefits from the

two programs are additive rather than offsetting, it is plausible that a veteran’s receipt of either DC or

SSDI benefits increases his odds of applying for the other.20



II.   The 2001 Agent Orange Decision, Type 2 Diabetes and ‘Service-Connectedness’

     For a disability to be classified as service-connected, it must be “a result of disease or injury incurred

or aggravated during active military service.” This criterion makes it straightforward for a veteran to

obtain compensation for a tangible injury that occurs during military service but significantly more



18
  Among veterans in our sample who received benefits at the 100 percent disability level in 2006, about half were
designated as IU. We henceforth do not distinguish between the IU benefit and 100 percent disability since many
DC recipients with 100 percent disability may have previously qualified for the IU benefit with a lower CDR.
19
   The fact that only veterans with severe disabilities (a CDR of 60 or higher) are eligible for the IU benefit might be
expected to deter all but the most disabled veterans. But the data in Table 1 indicate that very high CDRs are not
uncommon, even for veterans that initially enter with low or moderate CDRs. Among veterans awarded DC benefits
in 1999, only 15 percent qualified for either the IU benefit or 100 percent disability (panel C). Seven years later, in
2006, three times that number (45 percent) of the 1999 DC enrollment cohort was either receiving the IU benefit or
was 100 percent disabled.
20
  The combination of VA health benefits and Medicare benefits from SSDI may also be more attractive than either
individually since VA and Medicare differ in ailments covered, rapidity of access to treatment, size of co-pays, and
coverage of prescription drugs.

                                                                                                                      10
difficult to obtain compensation for a disease that develops later in life, such as cancer or heart disease.

Thus in 2006, the five most prevalent service-connected disabilities were primarily battle traumas:

hearing defects, tinnitus, general musculoskeletal disorders, arthritis due to trauma, and scars (U.S.

Veterans Benefits Administration, 2006). Nevertheless, disabilities that typically develop post-service are

also prevalent: post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and hypertensive vascular disease (high blood

pressure) were the sixth and ninth most prevalent service-connected disabilities in 2006.

       In November of 2000, type 2 diabetes was added to the list of compensable and presumptively

service-connected impairments for Vietnam veterans who had served in theatre due to their potential

exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange. This policy change substantially weakened the link between

service-connectedness and DC benefits for eligible veterans. The Agent Orange policy was years in the

making. The U.S. military applied more than 19 million gallons of herbicides to defoliate Vietnamese

jungle areas between 1962 and 1971, a quantity of defoliant sufficient to cover 8.5 percent of the

country’s land area (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2003).21 After the war ended, concern grew

among veterans that their exposure to the dioxins in Agent Orange would have long-term adverse

consequences. The VA responded by establishing the Agent Orange Registry in 1978. In 1991, Congress

enacted the Agent Orange Act, which charged the National Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Medicine

(IOM) with reviewing the evidence for a link between Agent Orange exposure and the prevalence of

certain medical conditions.

       In a series of reports, the IOM found insufficient evidence to establish an association between dioxin

exposure and diabetes. But the publication of two new studies in 1999 and 2000 that found an association

between dioxin exposure and diabetes turned the tide against this longstanding consensus (Calvert et. al.,

1999; Air Force Health Study, 2000). In October of 2000, the IOM concluded that there was

“limited/suggestive evidence of an association between exposure to the herbicides used in Vietnam or the




21
     Agent Orange accounted for more than 80 percent of the total amount of herbicide dispensed.

                                                                                                               11
contaminant dioxin and type 2 diabetes” (IOM, 2000). 22 This in turn prompted the Secretary of Veterans

Affairs’ decision to classify type 2 diabetes as presumptively service connected.

     The VA’s adoption of the Agent Orange policy offers an unusual opportunity: almost three decades

after the end of the Vietnam War, veterans who served in theatre were unexpectedly granted presumptive

eligibility for financially significant Disability Compensation benefits without a precipitating change in

health. This paper exploits the contrast in expanded benefits eligibility between in-theatre and not-in-

theatre veterans—whom we refer to as ‘boots on ground’ (BOG) and ‘not on ground’ (NOG) veterans—

to study the impact of benefits receipt on veterans’ labor supply.



III.   Data and Analytic Sample

     Our research draws on a unique set of linked administrative data sources. The first is a near census of

approximately four million veterans who left the Army between 1968 and 1985. The U.S. Army’s Office

of Economic and Manpower Analysis (OEMA) constructed this database by combining two files from the

Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC): the first DMDC file enumerates essentially every person who

left the Army between 1968 and 1985 (designated as the service member’s “loss year”); OEMA then

merged this “loss year” file with DMDC’s Vietnam file, which identifies the vast majority of veterans

who served in the Vietnam theatre.23 Approximately 36 percent of this sample served with boots on the

ground in Vietnam, Cambodia, or Laos during the Vietnam War era, and is therefore potentially directly

affected by the 2001 expansion of the DC program’s medical eligibility criteria. More than 35 percent of

the NOG sample had a start year of 1976 or later and thus did not serve during the Vietnam War era.24


22
   The same 2000 report by the National Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Medicine explained that any increased
risk of Type 2 diabetes due to Agent Orange appeared to be small and that family history, physical inactivity, and
obesity were far greater predictors of diabetes (IOM, 2000).
23
  The file does not include the comparatively small number of Army service members who died during service.
U.S. government archives record 38,224 Army service members who were killed in action in Vietnam.
24
  Veterans who were in the “loss year” file and the Vietnam file are in the BOG sample while veterans who were in
the “loss year” file but not the Vietnam file are part of the NOG sample. The Vietnam file contained loss year
information for approximately 25 percent of veterans, which explains why a small fraction of the BOG sample has a
loss year before 1968 or after 1985. Our final analysis sample, described below, excludes all veterans with loss years
before 1968 or after 1985, but does contain a few veterans who were in the Vietnam file but not in the “loss year”

                                                                                                                     12
Appendix Table 2 and Table 2 show summary statistics on the distribution of loss years, years-of-birth,

and start years for military service.

       We use three additional data sources to measure mortality, employment, and disability outcomes for

Vietnam era veterans. To measure DC participation, OEMA obtained from VA detailed information about

veterans’ enrollment and DC benefits received from VA programs in September of each year from 1998

through 2006. To account for mortality, OEMA merged their data to the Social Security Administration

Death Master File (DMF), which includes the year of death for any individual in the sample who died

prior to 2008. According to DMF data, approximately 13 percent of the 4.1 million individuals in the

sample were deceased by late 2007.

       To collect employment, earnings, SSDI, and SSI information, OEMA contracted with the U.S. Social

Security Administration (SSA) to match veterans in the OEMA data set to enumerate wage earnings and

Social Security benefits in each year from 1976 through 2007.25 This resulted in a successful match for

3.8 of the 4.1 million veterans in the full data set, with overall match rates exceeding 90 percent for both

BOG and NOG samples, as detailed in Appendix Table 3.

       Confidentiality rules prevent SSA from disclosing individual earnings or benefits data. SSA instead

provided statistics on earnings and benefits for cells containing five to nine veterans. These statistics

include the number of cell members with zero earnings, mean labor earnings, the number receiving SSDI

and SSI, and mean SSDI and SSI benefit amounts. In constructing cells, we grouped individuals with

similar background characteristics, including gender, race, BOG and NOG status, and year of birth. Our

final analysis sample consists of veterans who joined the military between 1966 and 1971, and were born

between 1946 and 1951 (see Table 2). See the data appendix for more details on the cell construction and

sample selection.

       Panel A of Table 3 compares the BOG and NOG samples. The fraction nonwhite is approximately



file. This group comprises only 1.25 percent of our final sample and our results are nearly identical when we exclude
them from our analysis.
25
     SSA required a match on social security number, last name, and date of birth of each individual to make a match.

                                                                                                                    13
equal in the two samples (11.3 and 11.8 percent, respectively) as is the fraction with positive earnings in

1998 (84.4 and 85.1 percent). Among those with a non-missing Armed Forces Qualification Test score

(AFQT), the average scores are also relatively close (52.1 and 53.4). And by construction, the average

year-of-birth and the average start year are comparable in the two groups. There are clear differences

between the BOG and NOG samples as well. BOG veterans are more than twice as likely as NOG

veterans to be receiving DC benefits in 2000 (14.3 versus 6.5 percent), just prior to the 2001 policy

change described above. This in part reflects the greater toll that military service took on those who

served in the Vietnam theatre.26

     An examination of trends in key outcome variables in the BOG and NOG samples prior to the 2001

policy change reveals many similarities: the fraction with zero earnings increased by similar, though not

identical, amounts for both samples between 1998 to 2000 (by 1.5 and 1.0 points for BOG and NOG

samples, respectively), as did the fraction receiving SSDI benefits (1.2 and 0.9 points for BOG and NOG

samples). Our analysis will control for any differential trends in outcome variables that precede the policy

change.

     A remaining concern with the primary analytic sample is that individuals who are matched in the SSA

data may systematically differ from those who are not. This is especially an issue for veterans who died

prior to 1997. As shown in columns 3 and 4 of panel B in Table 3, the fraction of veterans in the full

sample who were deceased as of 1997 was 6.2 and 6.1 percent in the full BOG and NOG samples but

only 4.8 and 2.9 percent in the SSA verified samples—though, notably, the fraction of veterans who died

between 1997 and 2007 in the BOG and NOG samples is closely comparable in both the full sample and

the SSA verified sample.27 The lower SSA match rate for deceased veterans is a consequence of SSA’s

record matching criteria, which require a match on subjects’ full names as well as SSN and date of birth.




26
  Additionally, members of the NOG sample are more likely to have missing data on education and less likely to be
missing AFQT score data.
27
  We constructed the sample summarized in panel B of Table 3 in the same manner as the sample summarized in
panel A, except that we did not exclude veterans who did not match with SSA earnings information.

                                                                                                               14
Due to poor optical character recognition, the NOG data contained a relatively high frequency of garbled

names. We worked with the credit information provider TransUnion to obtain names for those with

incomplete information.28 Due to limited availability of archival credit information prior to 1997,

TransUnion could not provide names for most veterans who passed away before that same year, leading

to a low overall match rate for NOG soldiers who died prior to 1997. Differential mortality match for the

BOG and NOG samples is not a major threat to the validity of our research design, however, since our

primary focus is on outcomes from 1998 forward. Thus, soldiers who were deceased as of 1997 are

excluded from the analysis.

     To benchmark the representativeness of the sample, we compare the OEMA data with a similarly

drawn group of males from the 2000 IPUMS Census file. Using the 5 percent Census IPUMS extract, we

draw a group of all males born between 1946 and 1951, and further limit the sample to (self-reported)

Vietnam-era veterans.29 Appendix Table 4 provides a side-by-side comparison of age, race, schooling,

annual earnings, and share with non-zero earnings in the OEMA and Census samples. Race and labor

force participation rates are closely comparable: the fractions of the OEMA and Census samples with

non-zero earnings are 84.1 percent and 82.2 percent, respectively, while the percent nonwhite are 11.3

and 13.3. Reflecting the fact that OEMA data code education at the time of military enlistment (average

age of 20) while the Census data code educational attainment in late adulthood, the OEMA sample reports

considerably lower educational attainment than the Census sample. Average earnings in the OEMA

sample are also about 10 percent lower than in the Census sample. This gap may reflect earnings

differences between Army veterans and those of other branches of the military. SSA data may also fail to

capture some earnings sources, including self-employment and non-covered work. Overall, our




28
  TransUnion performed this work pro bono. Our original sample had 1.7 million observations with a missing
name. TransUnion was able to provide names for 1.5 million of these observations upon confirming a match with
date of birth and social security number.
29
  The Census data do not allow us to distinguish among veterans according to their branch of military service. To
the extent that Army veterans are different from their counterparts serving in the Navy, Air Force, Marines, or Coast
Guard, we would expect some differences between the Census and OEMA samples.

                                                                                                                   15
comparison of OEMA and Census data provides some assurance that the OEMA sample is representative

of the target population of Vietnam era Army veterans, measured in terms of age, race, labor force

participation and earnings.



IV.   The Impact of the Agent Orange Policy on Receipt of Disability Benefits

     The Agent Orange policy spurred a steep rise in Disability Compensation enrollment, and may

potentially have had spillover effects on enrollment in other federal disability programs as well. We begin

by estimating impacts on DC enrollment, followed by SSDI and SSI enrollment, and finally, total federal

disability benefits.

A.   Enrollment in Veterans Disability Compensation

     Figure 3 plots the fraction of BOG and NOG veterans receiving DC benefits in September of each

year from 1998 through 2006. Prior to the Agent Orange change in 2001, DC enrollment was rising

somewhat more rapidly among BOG than NOG veterans. But DC enrollment among BOG veterans

accelerated substantially after 2001. Column 2 of panel A in Table 4 shows that BOG DC enrollment

increased by 0.4 percentage points per year between 1998 and 2000 (13.5 to 14.3) and by 1.6 percentage

points annually between 2001 and 2006 (15.0 to 23.0). In contrast, DC enrollment growth rates among

NOG veterans remained small and relatively steady, increasing from 0.1 percentage points per year

between 1998 and 2000 (6.3 to 6.5) to 0.2 percentage points per year between 2001 and 2006 (6.6 to

7.6).30 Data from the National Health Interview Survey (Schiller et al, 2010) indicate that the fraction of

individuals with diabetes varies substantially by race, with rates among blacks substantially higher than

among whites. Consistent with this fact, an examination of the trends in DC enrollment in Table 4 reveals

substantial differences by race in the BOG sample, with DC enrollment increasing about 40 percent more

among BOG nonwhites (19.3 to 30.2, 10.9 percentage points) than among BOG whites from 2001 to



30
   The policy change took effect in July of 2001 and we measure DC enrollment in September. Thus, our 2001 data
is arguably more “pre” than “post,” though it’s likely that the policy change did contribute to DC enrollment growth
between September 2000 and September 2001 in our data.

                                                                                                                  16
2006 (14.4 to 22.1, 7.7 percentage points).

      These raw differences in DC enrollment trends between BOG and NOG veterans may reflect

differences in veteran characteristics in addition to any impact of the Agent Orange policy. To account for

these factors, we estimate a set of OLS models that regress DC enrollment on a full set of controls for

veterans’ year-of-birth, race, and AFQT score quintile.31 For consistency with the subsequent analysis of

labor market outcomes, our DC variables are calculated as means over five to nine veterans grouped at the

level of SSA reporting cells.32 We estimate the following equation for 1998 through 2006, weighting each

cell-year by the number of individuals in the cell:

(1)      𝑌"# = 𝛼# + 𝛾( ×𝐵𝑂𝐺" +        -((.
                                      /000 𝛾# ×𝐵𝑂𝐺"    + 𝑋"#2 𝛽# + 𝜀"#

The outcome variable 𝑌"# is the percentage of cell 𝑗 enrolled in the DC program in September of year 𝑡,

and 𝐵𝑂𝐺" is an indicator variable that is set equal to one if veterans in cell 𝑗 are in the BOG sample and is

otherwise equal to zero (cells include either all BOG or all NOG veterans). The term 𝛼# is a vector of nine

indicator variables for each year considered, and 𝑋"# is a vector set of 14 variables corresponding to the

possible values of year-of-birth, AFQT quintile, and race.33 We interact each of these 14 indicator

variables with nine year-specific indicator variables to account for differential levels of growth rates in

DC enrollment by age, race, or AFQT level during the 1998 through 2006 period. The coefficient 𝛾(




31
   Veterans with low AFQT scores are more likely to enroll in DC (Autor et al 2011), and average scores differ
slightly between BOG and NOG veterans.
32
   SSA outcomes are only available at the cell level due to confidentiality restrictions, as discussed above. Because
we apply OLS models to cell means and weight by the number of individual observations in each cell, the cell level
estimates will be in most cases algebraically identical to those that we would obtain if cells were instead
disaggregated to individual level rows. The one exception to this dictum arises from the fact that ten percent of cells
in have more than one AFQT quintile represented within the cell. We assign the cell to the AFQT quintile nearest to
the cell’s mean AFQT quintile in these cases, meaning that the cell-level and corresponding individual level
regressions will differ slightly.
33
  In our sample there are six possible values of YOB (1946 through 1951), two possible values of race (white and
nonwhite), and six possible values of AFQT quintiles (we group those with a missing AFQT into a sixth category).
Given there are nine years of data used in these estimates, we are including 126 interactions. Veterans within each
cell have the same year-of-birth and race (by construction) and the vast majority also have the same AFQT quintile.
Data for each veteran is included in each of these nine years unless the veteran dies at some point between 1998 and
2006, in which case the veteran is dropped from the sample. Year-of-death is one of the variables used to construct
the cells, so typically the entire cell is dropped.

                                                                                                                     17
corresponds to the (conditional) baseline DC enrollment gap between BOG and NOG veterans in the base

year of 1998, while the coefficient vector 𝛾# estimates the difference in this gap in each subsequent year

1999 through 2006 relative to the enrollment gap in 1998.

    The statistically significant estimate of 6.97 for 𝛾( in the first column of panel A, Table 5 implies a 7

percentage point gap in DC enrollment between the BOG and NOG samples in the baseline year (1998)

after controlling for race, year-of-birth, and AFQT quintile, quite similar to the unconditional estimated

difference of 7.2 percentage points in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 (13.5 for BOG versus 6.3 for NOG).

The next eight rows of the first column in Table 5 display the estimates for 𝛾# in each year from 1999

through 2006. The statistically significant estimates of 0.33 and 0.59 for 𝛾/000 and 𝛾-((( imply that DC

enrollment was increasing more rapidly (by 0.3 percentage points annually) for the BOG than NOG

sample prior to the 2001 policy change. Beginning in 2001, these coefficients increase much more

rapidly, by about 1.4 percentage points per year, and reach a cumulative differential of 7.98 percentage

points by September of 2006. As shown in panels B and C of Table 5, the point estimates differ only

modestly by birth cohort (1946-48 and 1949-51), with slightly larger effects for the older than the

younger group (8.28 and 7.65 percentage points, respectively).

    The sharp break in trend for DC enrollment among BOG relative to NOG veterans motivates a

parameterized version of equation (1) found in even-numbered columns of Table 5. For this specification,

we replace the full set of year-by-BOG interactions with two linear time trends: a pre-2001 trend and a

post-2001 trend change, estimated relative to the pre-2001 trend:

(2) 𝑌"# = 𝛼# + 𝛾( ×𝐵𝑂𝐺" + 𝛿( ×𝐵𝑂𝐺" × 𝑡 − 1998 + 𝛿/ ×𝐵𝑂𝐺" × 𝑡 − 2001 ×1 𝑡 ≥ 2002 + 𝑋"#2 𝛽# + 𝜀"#

Here, 𝛿( captures the pre-existing trend in BOG relative to NOG DC participation just prior to the policy

change while 𝛿/ estimates any additional change in the BOG relative to the NOG trend following the

policy. We define 2002 to be the first post-policy year in this specification given that most of the time

from September 2000 to September 2001 occurred before the policy took effect in July 2001. To interpret

𝛿/ as the causal effect of the Agent Orange policy change on DC enrollment, we must assume that the



                                                                                                             18
pre-existing trend in the difference in DC enrollment between the BOG and NOG samples would have

continued after 2001.

       The estimates in the even-numbered columns of Table 5 highlight the significant trend increase in DC

enrollment among BOG relative to NOG veterans following the 2001 policy change. Because we treat

2001 as a pure pre-policy year, the estimate of 𝛿( in each case is slightly larger and the estimate of 𝛿/

slightly smaller than is suggested by the year-by-year estimates. The magnitude of the trend break is

similar between the two birth cohort groups (1946-48 and 1949-51). In panel A of Table 6, we split the

sample by race (white/nonwhite) and by AFQT score. The acceleration in DC enrollment is largest among

BOG veterans who are nonwhite and have relatively low (below the 40th percentile in the sample) AFQT

scores.34

       Figures 4 and 5 relate these enrollment trends to the Agent Orange policy. Figure 4 documents a steep

increase in the likelihood that BOG (but not NOG) veterans receive compensation for diabetes, both in

the year of current DC receipt and in the year of initial DC enrollment. As documented in Panel C of

Table 4, the fraction of DC beneficiaries receiving compensation for diabetes among BOG veterans rose

from 2.4 to 28.1 percent (25.7 points) between 2001 and 2006 versus 1.6 to 6.4 percent among NOG

veterans (4.8 points).35 Yet, as shown in Figure 5, there was only a modest increase in the fraction of

veterans receiving DC benefits absent a diabetes award. Thus, the rapid growth in DC enrollment appears

substantially accounted for by an influx of new diabetes awards. Figure 6 underscores that the increase in

DC enrollment was similarly rapid among older (YOB 1946-48) and younger (YOB 1949-51) Vietnam

veterans in our sample, as indicated by the regression estimates in Table 5.



34
     We drop cells with missing AFQT scores for these specifications.
35
  There are three likely reasons that DC receipt for diabetes increased in the NOG. One is that our data only
imperfectly classify BOG and NOG veterans; some veterans categorized as NOG may in fact have served in theatre
and hence presumptively qualified for service-connectedness for their type 2 diabetes. A second cause is that
administration of DC benefits appears to be somewhat discretionary. Even prior to the Agent Orange decision in
2000, 1.4 percent of BOG and 0.7 percent of NOG DC recipients were receiving compensation for service-
connected diabetes (panel C of Table 4). Finally, some NOG veterans may have served in Korea in 1968 or 1969.
This source of slippage does not invalidate our identification strategy provided that the post-2001 trend break in DC
receipt in BOG versus NOG veterans is induced by the Agent Orange Policy change, which seems quite plausible.

                                                                                                                   19
     The estimates so far capture the extensive margin impact of the Agent Orange policy on DC

participation. Panels B and C of Table 6 consider outcome measures that combine responses along the

extensive (enrollment) and intensive (rated severity) margins: Combined Disability Ratings (CDRs) and

annual benefits payments, both of which are continuous measures of DC participation.36 Both CDRs and

annual benefit payments rose significantly more rapidly for BOG than NOG veterans after 2001. Panel B

of Table 6 shows that prior to the Agent Orange policy, average CDRs of BOG relative to NOG veterans

were rising at 0.34 percentage points annually; after 2001, this differential trend tripled to 1.00 percentage

points annually (0.34 + 0.66). Similarly, panel C indicates that the year-over-year increase in annual mean

DC benefits paid to BOG relative to NOG veterans rose from $113 prior to the policy change to $305 per

year after 2001 ($113 + $192). Consistent with the estimates for DC enrollment by race and AFQT score,

the remaining columns of panels B and C demonstrate that CDRs and benefits payments increased more

rapidly among nonwhite than white BOG veterans, and more rapidly among low-AFQT than high-AFQT

BOG veterans.

B.   Enrollment in other Federal Disability Programs

     A significant constraint that some workers face when applying for SSDI benefits is that they are

unlikely to qualify for an award if they participate gainfully in the labor force while their case is being

decided (Autor et al., 2014). Knowledge of this fact may deter workers with residual work capacity from

applying for benefits since they would have to forfeit potential earnings in pursuit of an uncertain benefit.

Since, as we document below, many veterans did leave the labor force after becoming eligible for DC

benefits, it is plausible that a subset that would otherwise have been deterred from seeking SSDI benefits

would choose to pursue these benefits as an indirect consequence of the Agent Orange policy.37




36
  Veterans receiving the IU rating are coded with a CDR of 100 since they receive benefits at the 100 percent
disability level.
37
  Borghans et al (2014) find related evidence of program spillovers in disability receipt. On average, Dutch DI
recipients offset a €1.00 loss in DI benefits with a €0.30 increase in other social support programs. Duggan et al
(2007) find evidence that reductions in Social Security retirement benefits stemming from the rising U.S. Full
Retirement Age have lead to an increase in SSDI enrollment among cohorts facing a higher full retirement age.

                                                                                                                     20
       To examine these potential spillovers, we estimate models analogous to equation (2) where the

outcome variable is the probability of SSDI receipt among BOG and NOG veterans (again measured at

the level of SSA reporting cells). Reflecting the longer sample window available for the SSA outcomes,

these models include two additional “pre” years, 1996 and 1997, and one additional “post” year, 2007.

Panel A of Table 7 shows that, like DC enrollment, SSDI receipt was trending upward faster among BOG

than NOG veterans by 0.13 percentage points per year prior to the 2001 policy change. But this trend

accelerated after 2001, increasing to 0.25 percentage points (0.13 + 0.12) annually. Notably, the

magnitude of the estimated effect on SSDI is only about 10 percent as large as the corresponding estimate

for DC enrollment (compare column 1, panel A of Tables 5 and 6).38 These results suggest that the Agent

Orange policy likely spurred additional SSDI enrollment, which may in turn have magnified any

reduction in labor force participation among eligible veterans.

       In panel B of Table 7, we estimate models for receipt of SSI. Here, the estimates point in the opposite

direction: SSI enrollment was growing more rapidly among NOG than among BOG veterans prior to

2001, and this trend accelerated after 2001, in all likelihood because the additional DC transfer income

made some veterans ineligible for means-tested SSI benefits. The magnitude of the estimated break in

trend for SSI is only one-tenth as large as the corresponding estimate for SSDI, however.

       The final panel of Table 7 estimates equation (2) for disability income combining benefits payments

from all three federal disability programs: DC, SSDI, and SSI. These estimates only include data from

1998 through 2006 since we do not have DC data for 1996, 1997, and 2007. Inclusion of SSDI and SSI

benefits with DC benefits raises the differential trend increase in benefits payments for BOG relative to

NOG veterans by approximately an additional 15 to 20 percent (compare to panel C of Table 6). Across

all veterans in our sample, combined disability benefits were rising by $128 annually among BOG

relative to NOG veterans prior to the 2002 Agent Orange policy change. Commencing in 2002, this

differential trend rose to $354 ($128 + $226). This average masks considerable heterogeneity. For



38
     In estimates not displayed, we find impacts on SSDI receipt that are similar for the 1946-48 and 1949-51 cohorts.

                                                                                                                     21
veterans with high CDRs, DC benefits payments substantially exceed SSDI benefits for all but the highest

(pre-disability) earners; moreover, DC benefits are not subject to federal taxation. Thus, the bulk of the

impact of the Agent Orange policy on veterans’ transfer income accrues through the DC program.



V.   Consequences for Labor Force Participation

    We now consider impacts of the Agent Orange policy on veterans’ employment and earnings. Using

models analogous (1) and (2), we test whether the fraction of BOG veterans in the labor force declined

differentially relative to NOG veterans following the 2001 policy change. We again include data from

1996, 1997, and 2007 because of the longer sample window available for SSA outcomes.

A.   Impacts on labor force participation

    Table 8 considers the impact of the Agent Orange policy on labor force participation, measured as the

percentage of living veterans in an SSA reporting cell who have positive labor earnings. The first column

finds that labor force participation among BOG veterans in the baseline year of 1996 was slightly lower

(by 0.32 points) among BOG than NOG veterans. This participation gap was modestly expanding (i.e.,

becoming more negative) in the early part of our sample period, falling by an additional 0.81 points

between 1996 and 2001. This expansion accelerated after 2000, with the BOG relative to NOG labor

force participation rate falling by an additional 2.02 percentage points between 2001 and 2007. Column 2,

which fits the parameterized model in equation (2), shows the rate of divergence between BOG and NOG

veterans roughly doubled after the Agent Orange decision, from 0.15 percentage points per year to 0.33

percentage points (0.15 + 0.18) annually after 2001.

    Coupled with the evidence in Table 5 on DC enrollments, the results in Table 8 suggest that the

differential increase in DC enrollment among BOG veterans spurred a reduction in their labor supply. A

natural alternative interpretation, however, is that BOG veterans were in worse health than NOG

veterans—perhaps due to the rigors of in-theatre military service—leading to comparatively earlier

retirements in the 2000s for reasons unrelated to the 2001 policy change. If so, the accelerating decline in

LFP among BOG veterans after 2001 should primarily impact the oldest Vietnam veterans, with younger

                                                                                                             22
veteran cohorts exhibiting a similar LFP falloff as they approached these early retirement years in

subsequent years. Figure 7 and the remaining two panels of Table 8 explore these competing hypotheses

by again subdividing the sample into two birth cohorts of average ages 54 and 51 years at the time of the

policy change. Both the figure and the table reveal that labor force participation of BOG relative to NOG

veterans for both sets of birth cohorts dropped sharply soon after the policy change. The year-over-year

decline in BOG LFP relative to NOG LFP doubled after 2001 for both older (born 1946-48) and younger

(born 1949-1951) cohorts, rising from 0.17 to 0.36 percentage points (0.17 + 0.19) among the former

group, and from 0.14 to 0.32 percentage points (0.14 + 0.18) among the latter group. This trend break in

BOG relative to NOG labor force participation occurring simultaneously across birth cohorts after 2001

suggests that benefits expansion rather than early retirements explains the sharp drop in BOG labor force

participation following the Agent Orange decision.

     The upper panel of Table 9 explores these employment patterns by race and AFQT subgroup.

Declines in LFP generally mirror uptake of DC across demographic groups. Consistent with the Table 6

findings for DC enrollment, the fall in labor force participation among nonwhite and among low-AFQT

BOG relative to NOG veterans following the 2001 policy change is more pronounced than among white

and higher-AFQT veterans. These differences across groups are not statistically significant, however.

B.   Impacts on labor market earnings

     Alongside its extensive margin impact, receipt of DC benefits may spur veterans to reduce their work

hours or switch from full to part-time employment, thus reducing earnings conditional on ongoing

employment. We explore the effect of the Agent Orange policy on total labor force earnings by estimating

equation (2) for the log of mean cell earnings, excluding (of necessity) cells where all veterans have

exited the labor force.39 Panel B of Table 9 shows that earnings averaged about 2.6 log points lower




39
  We use the log of the mean rather than the mean of the log because of the cell-level aggregation of our earnings
data. We do not, however, adjust cell means for non-participation; if a cell contains five veterans each earning $25K
annually and one leaves the labor force, mean cell earnings falls to $20K. Thus, this measure incorporates intensive
and extensive margin adjustments.

                                                                                                                   23
among BOG than NOG veterans in our baseline year, and this gap was expanding by about 0.2 log points

per year through 2001. The earnings gap grew significantly more rapidly—by about 0.7 log points

annually (0.23 + 0.45)—following the 2001 policy change. Once again, the effects are larger for nonwhite

and low-AFQT veterans.

    Since these total earnings impacts combine extensive margin (participation) and intensive margin

(hours and wage) responses, we cannot directly infer whether they reflect changes in earnings among

incumbents or merely a reduction in the number of veterans working. The evidence in panel A of Table 9

suggests, however, that minority and low-AFQT veterans were particularly likely to exit the labor force

upon receiving DC benefits. If we hypothesize more generally that veterans with lower potential earnings

are most likely to exit the labor force in response to increased transfer income, we can compare extensive

margin and total earnings responses to assess evidence for intensive margin responses. Concretely,

suppose that earnings among those dropping out of the labor force are below the average of those still

working within the cell—that is, income effects are larger for low earnings workers. In this case, the

decline in log cell earnings will be smaller than the decline in log cell labor force participation.

Conversely, if the decline in log cell earnings exceeds the decline in log cell participation, this indicates

that either earnings is also falling on the intensive margin or, contrary to our assumption, higher earning

workers are exiting employment disproportionately.

    To facilitate earnings and employment comparisons, panel C of Table 9 reports estimates where the

dependent variable is the log of the fraction of veterans in a cell working (rather than simply the

percentage working, as in panel A). Comparing across panels B and C reveals that the decline in relative

earnings of BOG versus NOG veterans after 2001 is, in most cases, slightly larger than the relative

decline in labor force participation. In column 1, for example, the relative decline in log earnings of BOG

relative to NOG veterans expands by 0.45 log points per year after 2001 whereas the relative decline in

log LFP increases by only 0.36 log points per year. This pattern also holds for black and white veterans

considered separately, though it does not hold for lower and higher-AFQT veterans. We infer that the

Agent Orange policy likely induced a mixture of labor force exit and earnings reductions among

                                                                                                                24
beneficiaries, though the evidence on the latter margin is far from clear cut.




VI.   Comparing Labor Supply and Enrollment Impacts: Instrumental Variables Estimates

     Motivated by the evidence that the Agent Orange policy both raised DC enrollment and lowered

earnings among eligible veterans, we now use the Agent Orange policy as an instrumental variable for

receipt of DC benefits. This instrumental variables approach provides a valid estimate of the causal effect

of DC benefits on labor supply under the assumption that the Agent Orange policy only affects

employment and earnings through its impact on benefits enrollment and transfer payments. This exclusion

restriction is untestable of course, but the panoply of findings above confer credibility: we find a sharp

rise in DC receipt, DC payments, and total disability income among BOG relative to NOG veterans

following adoption of the Agent Orange policy; the rise in take-up was equally steep and pronounced

among younger and older veterans, and was greatest among nonwhite and low-AFQT veterans; and in all

cases, take-up responses are paralleled by differential employment and earnings drops among BOG

relative to NOG veterans that occur among both older and younger veterans, and which are slightly more

pronounced among nonwhite and low-AFQT vets.

     Table 10 presents instrumental variables of equation (2) for the impact of DC participation on labor

force participation, where the endogenous variable in panel A is the percentage of a cell enrolled in DC.40

The 2SLS estimate in column (1) finds that each percentage point increase in DC enrollment reduces the

fraction of veterans working by 0.18 points—that is, approximately one veteran exits the labor force for

every five veterans newly awarded DC benefits. Comparing across rows of this table, we find slightly

larger employment effects for nonwhite and low-AFQT veterans, consistent with our maintained

hypothesis that participation among these groups is more elastic. Notably, the (scaled) labor force

participation impact is estimated to be slightly (though not significantly) larger for younger than older



40
  We limit the sample to the years 1998 through 2006 for which DC measures are available, rather than the longer
sample window of 1996 through 2007 for which SSA earnings data are available. The instrumental variable for DC
enrollment is 𝐵𝑂𝐺" × 𝑡 − 2001 ×1 𝑡 ≥ 2002 .

                                                                                                               25
veterans, again underscoring that the results are unlikely to be simply driven by differential trends in early

retirement among BOG relative to NOG veterans.

     By specifying DC participation as the endogenous variable, the panel A estimate does not account for

policy-induced increases in DC benefits along the intensive margin—higher benefits among incumbents,

and greater potential benefits among new enrollees. We relax this restriction in panel B by making our

endogenous variable the sum of disability income (DC, SSDI and SSI benefits). This variable captures

changes in transfer payments among both new enrollees and incumbents.41 The panel B estimates find

that each thousand dollars in disability benefits payment reduces the probability of a veteran working by

approximately 0.80 percentage points, with slightly larger impacts among nonwhite veterans (0.97 points)

and slightly smaller impacts among older veterans (0.70 points). Scaling these estimates by the mean rate

of labor force participation (84.7 points) and mean year 2000 earnings (in constant $2013 dollars) of

$52.5K (Appendix Table 4) implies an extensive margin labor force participation elasticity of -0.50. This

is similar in magnitude to the estimates reported by Boyle and Lahey (2010), who study the labor supply

of a relatively comparable set of veterans who were nearing retirement in the mid-1990s. We also cannot

rule out that the participation elasticity we obtain incorporates both pure (non-incentive) income effects

from increased transfer income and additional incentive effects stemming from the potential availability

of IU and SSDI benefits. Fully distinguishing these incentive and non-incentive effects remains a ripe

topic for future work.

     To what degree is this causal effect driven by changes in labor force participation among incumbent

DC recipients—many of whom received a higher combined disability ratings and corresponding benefit

increases as a consequence of the Agent Orange policy—rather than by changes in participation among

new enrollees? Appendix Table 5 probes this question by comparing the evolution of CDRs among

veterans according to DC enrollment status as of 1998 (the earliest year for which we have enrollment




41
  Because cells receive no disability payments in a given year, we specify the disability payment measure in real
dollars rather than taking the logarithm.

                                                                                                                    26
data). Column 1 reports estimates of equation (2) for all veterans in our sample where the left hand side

variable is a veteran’s combined disability rating. Column 2 includes only veterans enrolled in the DC

program as of 1998, while column 3 excludes veterans not enrolled in DC as of 1998. Comparing the

column 2 and 3 estimates reveals that CDRs were increasing more rapidly among 1998 BOG incumbent

DC recipients than among their NOG counterparts prior to the policy change, but that there is only a

modest acceleration in this trend after 2001. Specifically, CDRs were increasing by about 0.8 percentage

points more annually among the BOG incumbents than the NOG incumbents between 1998 and 2001,

and this differential increased only modestly to 1.1 percentage points annually from 2002 forward (0.84 +

0.26). In contrast, the acceleration among new BOG entrants after 2001 (column 2) is much larger,

increasing from 0.20 to about 1.0 percentage points annually after 2001(0.22 + 0.73). Thus the Agent

Orange policy change generated a much larger impact on the DC status of BOG veterans who had not

already enrolled in DC prior to the policy change than it did on incumbent recipients, suggesting that

labor supply impacts are likely driven primarily by new DC entrants.

     Panel B of Appendix Table 5 complements this evidence by comparing labor force participation

trends between cells with a high density of DC incumbents and those with a low density of DC

incumbents.42 Column 1 reports estimates of equation (2) for all veterans in our sample, while column 2

restricts our sample to cells where at least one third of veterans (“high density”) were enrolled in DC as of

1998 and column 3 restricts our sample to cells where less than one third of veterans (“low density”) were

enrolled in DC as of 1998.43 Following the 2001 policy change, the rate of divergence among BOG

relative to NOG veterans actually attenuated slightly for cells with a high density of incumbents (from

0.35 to 0.29 points per year), but nearly tripled for cells with a low density of incumbents (from 0.11 to


42
  While the SSA outcome cells never combine BOG and NOG veterans, they often combine a mixture of DC and
non-DC enrollees, and this fraction changes over time as enrollment evolves. It would have been invalid to construct
cells based on eventual DC enrollment, of course, since DC enrollment is an outcome of the analysis.
43
  We cannot fully distinguish labor force participation effects for incumbents and potential entrants because labor
force participation rates are determined at the cell level and cells are not stratified on DC enrollment. For example,
consider a cell with two veterans who were enrolled in DC as of 1998 and three veterans who were not enrolled as
of 1998. If all five veterans had positive earnings in 1998, but only four had positive earnings as of 2006, we are
unable to determine whether the veteran who dropped out of the labor force was enrolled in DC as of 1998 or not.

                                                                                                                     27
0.32 points per year). This pattern again suggests that the differential decline in labor force participation

among BOG relative to NOG veterans after 2001 is driven primarily by veterans induced to enroll in DC

by the Agent Orange policy rather than by policy-induced changes in behavior among incumbent

recipients.



VII.   Impacts on Total Earnings

     Since the Agent Orange policy precipitated a rise in transfer payments and fall in employment and

earnings among eligible veterans, its net impact on incomes of BOG relative to NOG veterans is

ambiguous. We compare trends in total measured income (earnings plus the sum of DC, SSDI and SSI

benefits) between BOG and NOG veterans in Table 11, again limiting to the years 1998 through 2006,

where we have all earnings and benefits variables available. Since we have already established that

employment and earnings respond endogenously to policy-induced shifts in disability transfer income (as

theory would predict), the current exercise should be viewed as descriptive rather than inferential; the net

impact of the Agent Orange policy on veterans’ income combines exogenous policy impacts and

endogenous behavioral responses.

     The first column of Table 11 (panel A) shows that, at the start of sample window in 1998, measured

incomes of BOG veterans were slightly lower than those of NOG veterans, with gaps of 0.75 log points

overall, 0.80 log points among nonwhites, and 0.70 log points among whites.44 Notably, incomes were

significantly higher (by 3.7 log points) among low-AFQT BOG veterans and significantly lower (by 2.5

log points) among high-AFQT BOG veterans (relative to their NOG counterparts). Recall, we saw earlier

in panel B of Table 9 that labor earnings of BOG veterans averaged up to 5 log points below that of NOG

veterans. Thus, comparing Tables 9 and 11 reveals that disability transfer income largely made up the

difference between BOG and NOG veterans, and resulted in substantially higher income for low-AFQT

BOG veterans relative to low-AFQT NOG veterans, consistent with the findings of Angrist et al (2010)



44
  These reported earnings are covariate adjusted since they derive from the Table 11 regression estimates. Raw
differences are similar, however, as may be inferred from Table 3.

                                                                                                                 28
for low-education veterans.

    The second and third rows of Table 11 summarize the evolution of the BOG/NOG income differential

before and after the Agent Orange policy. Prior to the policy change, BOG veterans were on a slightly

more positive total income trend than NOG veterans, with average annual incomes in the full sample

rising by 0.20 log points annually in relative terms. This differential trend steepened significantly

following the policy change, jumping from 0.20 to 0.71 log points (0.20 + 0.51) annually. For nonwhites

and low-AFQT veterans, the increase in the trajectory was steeper, rising from 0.27 to 1.31 log points

annually for the former group, and from 0.33 to 1.19 log points for the latter. While the Agent Orange

policy sharply reduced employment and earnings among eligible veterans, the Table 11 estimates make

clear that the policy-induced rise in transfer income more than offset these earnings reductions.

    As a final characterization of these net policy and behavioral effects, the lower panel of Table 11

summarizes the net impact of DC enrollment on total earnings, where DC enrollment is instrumented with

the Agent Orange policy. The outcome variable for these estimates is cell total income—earnings plus

disability benefits—and the endogenous variable is again DC enrollment. The point estimate of 0.52 for

the full sample implies that - if a cell increased from 0 to 20 percent enrolled in DC - then average total

veteran income in the cell would increase by about 10.4 percent. In interpreting this sizable impact, note

that we found above that only one in five (18 percent of) newly enrolled veterans exited the labor force as

a consequence of the Agent Orange policy. For the remaining four-fifths, enrollment in DC raised transfer

income while generating only minimal offsetting reductions in labor income, thus unambiguously raising

total income. Of course, average incomes of Vietnam era veterans were modest in the early 2000s and

remained modest net of transfer benefits following the Agent Orange policy change. Nevertheless, this

policy had the unusual effect of increasing average veteran incomes, inclusive of the foregone earnings of

the approximately one in five newly enrolled DC recipients induced to exit the labor force.



VIII.  Discussion

    This paper provides evidence that the policy-induced increase in enrollment in the VA’s Disability


                                                                                                              29
Compensation program had a significant effect on the labor supply of Vietnam-era veterans. We estimate

that 18 percent of individuals who became eligible for the DC program as a result of the policy change

dropped out of the labor force. Analyses that explore the effect on average earnings support the

conclusion that DC enrollment substantially lowered labor supply among Vietnam-era veterans who

served in the Vietnam theatre during the conflict there. These effects appear to be driven by those made

newly eligible for DC benefits rather than by increases in benefits among those already receiving DC

prior to the 2001 policy change. The increase in transfer income more than offsets the reduction in

earnings, so that average income among BOG veterans increased relative to their counterparts who did

not serve in theatre. Combining policy-induced increases in transfer income and reductions in labor force

participation, we estimate an extensive margin labor supply elasticities of -.50, which is somewhat larger

than consensus estimates, though not implausible for this near-elderly population of Vietnam era veterans

in diminished health.

    It is also likely that the income effect of DC income on employment and earnings is augmented by the

interaction between DC enrollment and veterans’ potential eligibility for Individual Unemployability and

SSDI benefits, both of which provide strong incentives against gainful labor force participation.

Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that the Agent Orange decision affected enrollment in two other

federal disability programs, raising enrollment in SSDI by approximately one recipient for every ten

veterans newly enrolled in DC, and slightly reducing enrollment in the means-tested SSI program (though

the estimated effects are an order of magnitude smaller than for SSDI). In addition, 14 percent of Vietnam

era veterans within our sample received IU status by 2006. Among veterans who enrolled in DC the year

after the Agent Orange policy change, fully one-third received IU status or a CDR of 100 by 2006 . Since

IU benefits are only available to veterans with earnings at or below the poverty threshold for a single

individual, the rapid growth of IU designations among newly enrolled DC beneficiaries underscores the

potential for the graduated DC benefit program to generate unintended labor supply impacts. Analyzing

the dynamic interaction between these incentive and non-incentive effects of disability benefit programs

is a worthy goal for future research.

                                                                                                           30
IX.   Data Appendix

A.   Construction of Cells in the BOG and NOG Samples

To construct cells for matching individuals in the BOG and NOG samples with SSA data, we group
individuals based on their values of certain background characteristics, including their gender, race, year
of birth, and so forth. The list of variables used to form cells, ranked in the order in which the grouping
occurred, is as follows:

    1.     Gender (male or female)
    2.     Race (white or nonwhite)
    3.     Death year (e.g. 1985)
    4.     Year-of-birth (e.g. 1946)
    5.     Start year (e.g. 1966)
    6.     Education at entry (e.g. 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 for hsd, hsg, smc, clg, clg-plus)
    7.     AFQT score quintile (e.g. 2)
    8.     Loss year (e.g. 1972)
    9.     Region of residence (e.g. Northeast)


Before forming cells, we determined which individuals could be verified upon matching to the SSA data.
A match would be verified if the social security number, date of birth, and at least six letters of the last
name could be matched in the two data sets. We construct cells from the verified BOG and NOG samples
so that there are between five and nine individuals in each cell. Each cell consists only of individuals in
the BOG or in the NOG. The number of variables used in the grouping varies across cells. This occurs
because in some cases, a cell reaches a size of five to nine after grouping on a relatively small number of
variables. If a cell is between 10 and 29 individuals, we do not split further, but instead split the cell into
the maximum number of cells with size five or more after sorting on the next matching variable to
maximize similarity within the cells. If a cell has fewer than five individuals then we re-merge it with an
adjacent cell. If a cell with fewer than five individuals is merged with an adjacent cell to form a new cell
with more than nine individuals, the merged cell is split in two.

The distribution of the cell size for the verified NOG sample is:

                         In Cell of Size              Frequency                   Percentage
                                5                     1,388,440                      58.86
                                6                      657,696                       27.88
                                7                      171,269                        7.26
                                8                       70,048                        2.97
                                9                       71,271                        3.02
                             Total                    2,358,724                     100.00

The corresponding distribution for the verified BOG sample is:

                         In Cell of Size              Frequency                   Percentage
                                5                      942,415                       65.19
                                6                      328,338                       22.71
                                7                       92,785                        6.42
                                8                       41,120                        2.84
                                9                       40,878                        2.83
                             Total                    1,445,536                     100.00

                                                                                                             31
The frequency distribution for the number of variables used in the BOG and NOG cell formation is as
follows (thus 206,780 in the BOG matched on variables 1 through and including 8):

                      Number of Vars                    # in NOG                       # in BOG
                           1                                 0                              0
                           2                                89                             61
                           3                               3,391                          4,149
                           4                              38,087                         30,716
                           5                              86,671                         62,807
                           6                              80,909                         65,140
                           7                             174,281                        162,909
                           8                             397,667                        206,780
                           9                            1,577,629                       912,974
                         Total                          2,358,724                      1,445,536


B.   Construction of the Analysis Sample

Appendix Figure 1A diagrams the construction of the sample used in our analysis. The “loss year” file
and the Vietnam file combine to form our baseline OEMA sample of 4.1 million veterans. After merging
the OEMA sample to VA disability data, the SSA Death Master File, and SSA earnings information, we
restrict our sample to 3.8 million veterans who had valid SSA earnings data. As seen in Table 2, the
number of BOG veterans in our database is largest in the 1966 through 1971 start years; veterans who
began their service after 1971 tended not to serve in the Vietnam theatre while those entering before 1966
are much less likely to be included in our sample since many in the latter group left the Army prior to
1968, the first year of our “loss year” file. We therefore restrict both the BOG and NOG samples to
veterans who have a start year between 1966 and 1971 inclusive, which reduces our sample to 1.9 million
veterans.45 We further restrict attention to individuals born between 1946 and 1951 inclusive, with 1.5
million veterans remaining. We next exclude approximately 150,000 veterans who have missing loss
years, loss years before 1968, or loss years after 1985. We finally drop an additional 8,000 veterans who
are in SSA cells where not all veterans have the same birth year, at least one veteran in the cell has a start
year before 1966 or after 1971, or at least one veteran in the cell has a loss year before 1968 or after 1985.
Our final sample includes 1.351 million veterans of the U.S. Army who began their service between 1966
and 1971 and were born between 1946 and 1951. For the analysis, we converted this final sample into a
1996-2007 panel of 15.2 million (year) x (individual) observations, or 2.9 million (year) x (cell)
observations, as depicted in Appendix Figure 1B.46




45
   For the nearly 200,000 veterans with missing start years, we imputed their start year based on the median start
year for other veterans in the sample with the same date of birth. This has little bearing on our final sample as nearly
all veterans with missing start years have missing loss years and are therefore excluded from our analysis.
46
  A veteran who dies in year t is dropped from the analysis sample in year t and in all subsequent years. Because
year-of-death is one of the variables used when constructing cells, typically all members of a cell die in the same
year (if any die). The number of surviving cells falls by approximately 4.8 percent from 1996 to 2007. We restrict
our panel to 1998 through 2006 for all specifications where the outcome is based on VA disability data.

                                                                                                                      32
References

Abbott, Michael and Orley Ashenfelter. 1976. “Labour Supply, Commodity Demand and the
       Allocation of Time,” Review of Economic Studies, 43(3), 389 – 411.

Air Force Health Study. 2000. "Air Force Health Study: An Epidemiological Investigation of
       Health Effects in Air Force Personnel Following Exposure to Herbicides. 1997 Follow-up
       Examination Results." Brook Air Force Base: Air Force Research Laboratory.

Angrist, Josh, Stacey Chen, and Brigham Frandsen. 2010. “Did Vietnam Veterans Get Sicker in
       the 1990s? The Complicated Effects of Military Service on Self-Reported Health.”
       Journal of Public Economics, 94(11), 824-837.

Ashenfelter, Orley and James J. Heckman. 1974. “The Estimation of Income and Substitution
      Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 42(1), 73-85.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
       Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 157-206.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2007. “Distinguishing Income from Substitution Effects
       in Disability Insurance.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 97, 119-
       124.

Autor, David H., Mark G. Duggan, and David Lyle. 2011. “Battle Scars? The Puzzling Decline
       in Employment and Rise in Disability Receipt among Vietnam Era Veterans.” American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101, 339-344.

Autor, David H., Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen and Alexander Strand. 2014. “Does Delay
       Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force
       Participation and Earnings of Disability Applicants.” MIT Working Paper, December.

Bilmes, Linda J. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2008. The Three Trillion Dollar War: The True Cost of
       the Iraq Conflict. New York: W.W. Norton and Company.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. “The Impact of Economic Conditions on
       Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.”American
       Economic Review, 92, 27-50.

Borghans, Lex, Anne Gielen, and Erzo Luttmer. 2014. “Social Support Substitution and the
      Earnings Rebound: Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity in Disability Insurance
      Reform.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4), 34-70.

Bound, John. 1989. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants."
      American Economic Review, 79(3), 482-503.

Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann. 1992. "Disability Transfers, Self-Reported Health, and the
      Labor Force Attachment of Older Men: Evidence from the Historical Record." Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 1393-1419.

                                                                                                 33
Bound, John and Richard Burkhauser. 1999. "Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs Targeted
      on People with Disabilities." Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3 (eds. Orley
      Ashenfelter and David Card), Amsterdam, North-Holland.

Boyle, Melissa A. and Johanna Lahey. 2010. “Health Insurance and the Labor Supply Decisions
       of Older Workers: Evidence from a US Department of Veterans Affairs Expansion.”
       Journal of Public Economics, 94(7-8), 467-478.

Calvert, G., Sweeney, M., Deddens, J. and D. Wall. 1999. “An Evaluation of Diabetes Mellitus,
       Serum Glucose, and Thyroid Function among U.S. Workers Exposed to 2, 3, 7, 8-
       tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.” Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 56(4), 270-
       276.

Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw. (2008) “The Work Disincentive Effects of the
       Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2), 757-784.

Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
       and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica, 80(3), 969-1018.

Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber. 2007. “Future Social Security Entitlements and the
       Retirement Decision.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2), 234–246.

Coile, Courtney, Mark Duggan and Andrew Guo. (2015) “Veterans’ Labor Force Participation:
       What Role Does the VA’s Disability Compensation Program Play?” forthcoming in
       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.

Duggan, Mark, Perry Singleton and Jae Song. 2007. “Aching to Retire? The Rise in the Full
      Retirement Age and its Impact on the Disability Rolls.” Journal of Public Economics,
      91(7), 1327-1350.

Duggan, Mark, Robert Rosenheck and Perry Singleton. 2010. “Federal Policy and the Rise in
      Disability Enrollment: Evidence for the VA's Disability Compensation Program.”
      Journal of Law and Economics, 53, 379-398.

French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2), 291-337.

Frisch, Ragnar. 1959. “A Complete Scheme for Computing All Direct and Cross Demand
        Elasticities in a Model with Many Sectors,” Econometrica, 27(2), 177-196

Gruber, Jon. 2000. “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply,” Journal of Political
       Economy, 108, 1162-1183.

Institute of Medicine. 2000. “Veterans and Agent Orange: Herbicide/Dioxin Exposure and Type
        2 Diabetes.” Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

Kostøl, Andreas and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “How Financial Incentives Induce Disability
       Insurance Recipients to Return to Work.” American Economic Review 104(2): 624-55.

                                                                                               34
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexei Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance Receipt
      Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
      Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103(5), 1797-1829.

McClelland, Robert and Shannon Mok. 2012. “A Review of Recent Research on Labor Supply
      Elasticities.” Congressional Budget Office Working Paper #2012-12, October.

Parsons, Donald. 1980. “The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation.” The Journal of
       Political Economy 88: 117-134.

Schiller, Jeannine, Jacqueline Lucas, Brian Ward, Jennifer Peregoy. 2010. “Summary Health
        Statistics for U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2010.” Vital and Health
        Statistics, 10(252).

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. 2003. “Agent Orange Brief.” Environmental Agents
       Service, (131) A1.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 2006. “VA Should Improve Its Management of Individual
       Unemployability Benefits by Strengthening Criteria, Guidance, and Procedures.” Report
       GAO-06-309.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 2009. “Social Security Disability:Additional Outreach and
       Collaboration on Sharing Medical Records Would Improve Wounded Warriors’ Access
       to Benefits.” Report GAO-09-762.

U.S. Veterans Benefits Administration. Selected Years. “Veterans Benefits Administration
       Annual Benefits Report.” Available online at http://www.vba.va.gov/reports.htm.

Von Wachter, Till, Joyce Manchester, and Jae Song. 2011. “Trends in Employment and Earnings
     of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the SSDI Program.” American Economic Review,
     3308-3329.




                                                                                                35
                                                                           Figure 1. Number and Percentage of Veterans Enrolled in DC
                                               4.0                                                                                                                               18
Number of Veterans Enrolled in DC (Millions)




                                               3.5                                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                       Percentage of Veterans Enrolled in DC
                                               3.0                                                                                                                               12



                                               2.5                                                                                                                               9



                                               2.0                                                                                                                               6



                                               1.5                                                                                                                               3



                                               1.0                                                                                                                               0
                                                  1988     1990     1992     1994      1996     1998     2000     2002       2004     2006     2008    2010     2012      2014
                                                                                                                Year

                                                                                          Number Enrolled                Percent Enrolled (All Vets)

                                               Notes: This figure reports the number of veterans enrolled in the Veterans' Disability Compensation (DC) program (left axis) and
                                               the percentage of living veterans enrolled in DC (right axis). Prior to 1999, all data comes from Annual Statistical Abstracts of the
                                               United States. From 1999 through 2014, annual DC enrollment numbers are from Veterans' Benefits Administration Annual Reports
                                               and the number of veterans in the U.S. comes from VetPop 2007, VetPop2010, and VetPop2014.
                                                                                  Figure 2. DC Enrollment as a Percentage of Vietnam Era Veterans
                                                    20




                                                    16
Percentage of Vietnam Era Veterans Enrolled in DC




                                                    12




                                                    8




                                                    4




                                                    0
                                                     1988       1990       1992       1994       1996       1998       2000       2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012
                                                                                                                         Year


                                                         Notes: This figure reports the annual percentage of Vietnam era Veterans who received any DC benefits. See sources from Figure 1.
                                                                         Figure 3. Percentage of BOG and NOG Veterans Enrolled in DC
                                              25
Percentage of BOG/NOG sample enrolled in DC




                                              20




                                              15




                                              10




                                              5




                                              0
                                               1998           1999             2000             2001            2002             2003            2004             2005           2006
                                                                                                                Year
                                                                                                    BOG Veterans             NOG Veterans
                                                   Notes: This table reports the annual percentage of BOG and NOG veterans who received any DC benefits between 1998 and 2006.
                                              Figure 4. Prevalance of DC Benefits for Diabetes in BOG and NOG Samples
                               7


                               6
Percentage of BOG/NOG Sample




                               5


                               4


                               3


                               2


                               1


                               0
                                1999             2000              2001               2002               2003              2004               2005                 2006
                                                                                             Year

                                   BOG, Diabetes Benefits                                                 BOG, Diabetes Benefits During Year of DC Enrollment
                                   NOG, Diabetes Benefits                                                 NOG, Diabetes Benefits During Year of DC Enrollment

                               Notes: This table reports the annual percentage of BOG and NOG veterans who were enrolled in DC and who received DC benefits for
                               diabetes. The series "BOG, Diabetes Benefits During Year of DC Enrollment" refers to the percentage of veterans in the BOG sample
                               who were enrolled in DC, received benefits for diabetes, and began receiving diabetes benefits the same year they enrolled in DC.
                                               Figure 5. Percentage of BOG and NOG Veterans Enrolled in DC without Diabetes
                               18


                               16


                               14
Percentage of BOG/NOG sample




                               12


                               10


                               8


                               6


                               4


                               2


                               0
                                1999              2000               2001                2002               2003               2004                2005   2006
                                                                                                  Year
                                                                                       BOG Veterans            NOG Veterans
                                    Notes: This table reports the annual percentage of BOG and NOG veterans who were enrolled in DC but did not receive
                                    compensation for diabetes.
                                                 Figure 6. BOG DC Receipt Relative to NOG by Year of Birth Cohort
                              9

                              8

                              7
Percentage Point Difference




                              6

                              5

                              4

                              3

                              2

                              1

                              0
                               1998           1999             2000             2001             2002            2003             2004             2005                2006
                                                                                              Year

                                                                  YOB 1946-1948                                  YOB 1949-1951



                              Notes: This table reports the absolute percentage point difference between BOG DC receipt and NOG DC receipt for two veteran birth
                              cohorts: 1946-1948 and 1949-1951. The vertical line indicates the year of the Agent Orange policy change. Each series is normalized to
                              the BOG-NOG difference in DC receipt as of year 1998.
                                                           Figure 7. BOG LFP Relative to NOG by Year of Birth Cohort
                                0


                              -0.5
Percentage Point Difference




                               -1


                              -1.5


                               -2


                              -2.5


                               -3


                              -3.5
                                  1996       1997        1998        1999        2000         2001        2002        2003        2004        2005         2006          2007
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                     YOB 1946-1948                                     YOB 1949-1951


                                Notes: This table reports the absolute percentage point difference between BOG labor force participation (LFP) and NOG LFP for two
                                veteran birth cohorts: 1946-1948 and 1949-1951. The vertical line indicates the year of the Agent Orange policy change. Each series is
                                normalized to the BOG-NOG difference in LFP as of year 1996. Labor force participation is defined as positive earnings.
              Table 1. Evolution of Disability Compensation (DC) Benefits by Year of DC Enrollment
                                        DC Enrollment Cohorts 1999-2006
 Year of                                                  Outcome Year
Enrollment       1999          2000         2001       2002        2003         2004        2005          2006
                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)           (8)
                                       A. Mean Combined Disability Rating
   1999           41.8         45.5        49.7      53.5         57.7           60.3         62.3        63.6
   2000                        44.1        50.0      55.0         59.4           62.3         64.6        66.3
   2001                                    41.2      46.2         52.3           56.6         60.6        62.6
   2002                                              38.7         46.0           50.9         54.8        57.6
   2003                                                           41.8           47.8         52.2        55.2
   2004                                                                          43.0         48.5        51.5
   2005                                                                                       41.3        45.1
   2006                                                                                                   39.1
                                    B. Mean Annual DC Payment ($2013)
   1999          10,773      12,577    14,389     15,734     17,325             18,347      19,083       19,822
   2000                      11,714    14,295     16,090     17,756             18,923      19,799       20,701
   2001                                10,709     12,603     14,991             16,715      18,329       19,317
   2002                                            9,611     12,432             14,368      15,878       17,153
   2003                                                      10,650             13,007      14,735       16,099
   2004                                                                         11,114      13,222       14,521
   2005                                                                                     10,335       11,922
   2006                                                                                                   9,590
                                  C. Percentage Receiving IU Award or 100 CDR
   1999           15.3         20.9        26.4         31.3       36.7       40.5            43.2        44.7
   2000                        17.6        25.2         31.3       37.1       41.5            44.6        46.5
   2001                                    15.3         20.8       28.0       33.5            38.6        40.7
   2002                                                 12.3       20.1       25.9            30.4        33.2
   2003                                                            15.1       21.9            27.0        30.0
   2004                                                                       16.8            22.5        25.6
   2005                                                                                       14.4        17.7
   2006                                                                                                   11.5
                               D. Percentage Receiving Compensation for Diabetes
   1999            0.8         1.1         2.5         7.9        11.0        12.4            13.8        14.8
   2000                        0.5         2.3         9.4        12.1        13.4            14.6        15.8
   2001                                   15.3        37.6        38.6        39.4            39.9        40.4
   2002                                               58.5        59.0        59.5            59.7        59.9
   2003                                                           48.6        49.1            49.6        50.1
   2004                                                                       42.7            43.7        44.5
   2005                                                                                       39.9        40.8
   2006                                                                                                   40.9
Notes: This table reports the progression of Disability Compensation (DC) benefits for veterans in the sample
described in the data appendix. Each row corresponds to a DC enrollment cohort. Each column corresponds to a
particular year. In panel A, veterans with an IU award are given a CDR of 100. In panel B, mean annual DC payments
are in $2013.
                                       Table 2. Distribution of Year of Birth and Start Year in OEMA Sample
                     A. Year of Birth Distribution                                                   B. Start Year Distribution
                   NOG Veterans                    BOG Veterans                                    NOG Veterans                   BOG Veterans
  Birth                    Percent of                        Percent of                                   Percent of                     Percent of
  Year       Observations NOG   Sample      Observations   BOG   Sample       Start Year    Observations NOG    Sample    Observations BOG    Sample
   (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)            (5)               (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)

 ≤1935           45,287         1.75           123,079          8.26          ≤1955           36,885          1.42           106,389          7.14
  1936            2,665         0.10            13,933          0.93           1956            1,776          0.07            12,132          0.81
  1937            2,840         0.11            13,250          0.89           1957            1,779          0.07            12,107          0.81
  1938            3,548         0.14            14,212          0.95           1958            2,485          0.10            15,181          1.02
  1939            4,813         0.19            15,024          1.01           1959            2,254          0.09            14,769          0.99
  1940            7,522         0.29            17,947          1.20           1960            2,339          0.09            14,192          0.95
  1941           10,865         0.42            23,911          1.60           1961            4,018          0.15            16,002          1.07
  1942           18,988         0.73            34,477          2.31           1962            4,359          0.17            15,689          1.05
  1943           29,298         1.13            47,114          3.16           1963            4,778          0.18            15,895          1.07
  1944           38,786         1.49            60,134          4.03           1964            6,362          0.25            18,357          1.23
  1945           48,100         1.85            80,247          5.38           1965            9,675          0.37            26,859          1.80
  1946           72,463         2.79           131,973          8.86           1966           38,014          1.46            88,681          5.95
  1947          108,739         4.19           227,042         15.23           1967           96,939          3.74           174,641         11.72
  1948          165,733         6.39           227,941         15.29           1968          196,281          7.56           263,378         17.67
  1949          155,513         5.99           191,467         12.85           1969          199,973          7.71           263,700         17.69
  1950          143,759         5.54           134,445          9.02           1970          163,525          6.30           149,738         10.05
  1951          141,803         5.46            72,982          4.90           1971          191,736          7.39            60,564          4.06
  1952          165,508         6.38            37,175          2.49           1972          215,043          8.29            15,087          1.01
  1953          141,310         5.45            15,720          1.05           1973          144,792          5.58             3,053          0.20
  1954          157,134         6.05             5,849          0.39           1974          187,413          7.22             1,753          0.12
  1955          162,502         6.26              919           0.06           1975          162,643          6.27             1,802          0.12
 ≥1956          968,018        37.30             1,518          0.10          ≥1976          920,849         35.48             3,624          0.24
                                                                              Missing          1,276          0.05           196,766         13.20
  Total        2,595,194       100.00         1,490,359       100.00            Total       2,595,194        100.00         1,490,359       100.00

Notes: Panel A reports the distribution of birth years in the original OEMA sample for the BOG and NOG subsamples. Panel B reports the distribution of
start years. A start year is the year a veteran entered the Army.
                          Table 3. Characteristics of the BOG and NOG Samples
                                           A. SSA Verified Sample               B. Full Sample
                                             BOG             NOG             BOG            NOG
                                               (1)            (2)             (1)            (2)
% Verified in SSA Data                       100.0           100.0                95.7            89.0
% with Start Yrs 1966-71                     100.0           100.0               100.0           100.0
% with YOB 1946-1951                         100.0           100.0               100.0           100.0
% Deceased by 1997                             4.8             2.9                 6.2             6.1
% Deceased by 2006                             9.9             7.9                11.5            11.0
% Nonwhite                                    11.3            11.8                11.8            12.7
% Missing Education                            1.1            15.3                 1.2            14.3
% HS Dropout                                  31.4            23.3                31.4            24.3
% HS Grad                                     48.1            37.1                48.3            38.0
% Some College                                14.5            14.4                14.3            14.2
% College Grad                                 4.8             9.2                 4.7             8.6
% More than College                            0.2             0.8                 0.2             0.7
% Missing AFQT Score                          26.4            19.1                25.8            17.7
Average AFQT Score                            52.1            53.4                51.7            52.5
Average Year of Birth                       1948.4          1948.6              1948.4          1948.7
Average Start Year                          1968.4          1969.0              1968.4          1969.0
Average Loss Year                           1971.1          1971.4              1971.1          1971.4
% on DC in 1998                               13.5             6.3                13.5             6.2
% on DC in 2000                               14.3             6.5                14.2             6.4
% on DC in 2006                               23.0             7.6                22.9             7.5
Mean Annual DC Payment in 1998              10,529           9,993              10,600          10,137
Mean Annual DC Payment in 2000              12,078          10,750              12,140          10,888
Mean Annual DC Payment in 2006              15,935          12,543              15,982          12,658
Mean Annual DC Pay in 1998 if >0            10,530           9,993              10,600          10,137
Mean Annual DC Pay in 2000 if >0            12,079          10,751              12,140          10,889
Mean Annual DC Pay in 2006 if >0            15,935          12,543              15,982          12,658
% Positive Earnings in 1998                   84.3            85.1
% Positive Earnings in 2000                   82.8            84.1
% Positive Earnings in 2006                   71.3            74.4
Ln(Cell Mean Earnings) in 1998               10.67           10.70
Ln(Cell Mean Earnings) in 2000               10.66           10.69
Ln(Cell Mean Earnings) in 2006               10.37           10.44
% on SSDI in 1998                              5.6             4.6
% on SSDI in 2000                              6.8             5.5
% on SSDI in 2006                             12.6             9.7
% on SSI in 1998                               0.7             1.0
% on SSI in 2000                               0.7             1.0
% on SSI in 2006                               0.7             1.3
Observations                                765,852         585,017            806,698         659,283

Notes: Panel A reports summary statistics for veterans in the BOG and NOG samples described in Section
III and the data appendix. Panel B includes veterans who did not verify with the Social Security
Administration, but makes all other sample restrictions described in the data appendix. All earnings and DC
payment values are in $2013. Disability, employment, and earnings information only reflect living veterans.
          Table 4. DC Receipt and Diabetes Compensation among BOG and NOG Veterans, 1998-2006

                        Full Sample                          Whites                     Nonwhites
   Year             NOG           BOG                 NOG             BOG          NOG          BOG
                     (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)
                                          A. Percentage Enrolled in DC
   1998              6.3          13.5                 6.0           13.0           9.0          17.1
   1999              6.4          13.9                 6.1           13.4           9.2          17.7
   2000              6.5          14.3                 6.2           13.8           9.3          18.2
   2001              6.6          15.0                 6.3           14.4           9.4          19.3
   2002              6.8          16.4                 6.4           15.8           9.7          21.4
   2003              7.0          18.3                 6.6           17.6          10.0          24.0
   2004              7.2          19.9                 6.8           19.1          10.3          26.0
   2005              7.4          21.4                 7.0           20.6          10.6          28.2
   2006              7.6          23.0                 7.2           22.1          10.9          30.2
                        B. Mean Annual DC Payment, Conditional on DC Enrollment
   1998             9,993       10,529          9,989         10,476          10,011            10,859
   1999            10,356       11,284         10,324         11,206          10,515            11,765
   2000            10,750       12,078         10,690         11,987          11,055            12,635
   2001            11,089       12,763         11,022         12,654          11,427            13,422
   2002            11,225       13,109         11,135         12,976          11,675            13,908
   2003            11,665       13,992         11,537         13,835          12,310            14,923
   2004            11,991       14,773         11,850         14,577          12,702            15,933
   2005            12,237       15,420         12,082         15,207          13,018            16,688
   2006            12,543       15,935         12,381         15,696          13,363            17,358
              C. Percentage Receiving Compensation for Diabetes, Conditional on DC Enrollment
   1998
   1999              1.4          0.7                  1.2            0.6          2.2            1.3
   2000              1.4           0.7                 1.2             0.6         2.2            1.3
   2001              1.6           2.4                 1.4             2.2         2.5            3.9
   2002              3.3          13.3                 3.0            12.4         4.8           18.3
   2003              4.4          19.6                 4.0            18.4         6.3           26.2
   2004              5.2          22.9                 4.8            21.8         7.2           30.0
   2005              5.8          25.6                 5.4            24.4         7.8           32.8
   2006              6.4          28.1                 6.0            26.9         8.4           35.2

Notes: Panel A of this table reports the percentage of veterans in the BOG and NOG samples who were
enrolled in the DC program between 1998 and 2006. Panel B reports the mean monthly disability payments (in
$2013) for veterans who were enrolled in the DC program between 1998 and 2006. Panel C reports the
percenage of DC enrolled veterans who received compensation for diabetes. 1998 is not included in panel C
because our data include specific conditions for 1999 through 2006 only.
                        Table 5. DC Receipt in the BOG versus NOG samples from 1998-2006
                               Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell Enrolled in DC
                                   A. All                   B. YOB: 1946-1948           C. YOB: 1949-1951
                              (1)            (2)             (1)           (2)           (1)          (2)

BOG                            6.97***        6.91***            7.12***        7.06***           6.83***         6.77***
                              (0.06)         (0.05)             (0.09)         (0.07)            (0.09)          (0.07)
BOG * (YR-1998)                               0.40***                           0.40***                           0.40***
                                             (0.02)                            (0.03)                            (0.03)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                             0.99***                           1.04***                           0.93***
(YR≥2002)                                    (0.03)                            (0.05)                            (0.05)
BOG * (YR99)                   0.33***                           0.34***                          0.32**
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR00)                   0.59***                           0.58***                          0.61***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR01)                   1.18***                           1.18***                          1.18***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR02)                   2.46***                           2.55***                          2.37***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR03)                   4.08***                           4.22***                          3.92***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR04)                   5.39***                           5.58***                          5.18***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR05)                   6.71***                           6.93***                          6.45***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.12)
BOG * (YR06)                   7.98***                           8.28***                          7.65***
                              (0.09)                            (0.13)                           (0.13)

Outcome Mean (1998)                  10.36                             10.75                              9.94
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)                2,142,029                         1,104,897                         1,037,132

Notes: This table reports estimates of equations (1) and (2) where the dependent variable is the percentage of each cell
enrolled in the Disability Compensation program each year. Panel A includes all veterans in our sample and other
panels restrict the sample to veterans in the specified group. Each cell has one observation for each year between 1998
and 2006. All regressions include year fixed effects and fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-
quintile)x(year), (year of birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where race is defined as white or nonwhite and veterans with
a missing AFQT score are grouped into a sixth AFQT category. All regressions weight each observation according to
the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
    Table 6. Disability Compensation Outcomes in the BOG versus NOG samples from 1998-2006
                             All         Nonwhites       Whites      AFQT<45        AFQT≥45
                             (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)

                       A. Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell enrolled in DC
BOG                          6.91***         7.72***         6.80***          8.33***          5.93***
                            (0.05)          (0.17)          (0.05)           (0.10)           (0.07)
BOG * (YR-1998)              0.40***         0.61***         0.37***          0.52***          0.31***
                            (0.02)          (0.08)          (0.03)           (0.05)           (0.03)
BOG * (YR-2001) *            0.99***         1.27***         0.95***          1.19***          0.81***
(YR≥2002)                   (0.03)          (0.11)          (0.04)           (0.06)           (0.05)
Outcome Mean (1998)          10.36           13.44            9.96           11.55            8.98
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)        2,142,029        232,540        1,909,489        660,866          988,801

             B. Dependent Variable: Cell Mean Combined Disability Rating (CDR)
BOG                       2.88***         3.39***      2.81***         3.83***                 2.48***
                        (0.03)           (0.10)       (0.03)          (0.06)                  (0.04)
BOG * (YR-1998)           0.34***         0.50***      0.32***         0.47***                 0.26***
                        (0.01)           (0.05)       (0.01)          (0.03)                  (0.02)
BOG * (YR-2001) *         0.66***         0.96***      0.63***         0.83***                 0.51***
(YR≥2002)               (0.02)           (0.07)       (0.02)          (0.04)                  (0.03)
Outcome Mean (1998)           3.96            5.25            3.79           4.75             3.19
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)        2,142,029        232,540        1,909,489        660,866          988,801

                        C. Dependent Variable: Cell Mean Annual DC Payment
BOG                           766***          930***        744***      1,072***                673***
                             (10)            (35)          (11)          (20)                  (13)
BOG * (YR-1998)               113***          159***        107***        158***                 85***
                              (5)            (17)           (5)          (10)                   (6)
BOG * (YR-2001) *             192***          290***        179***        239***                145***
(YR≥2002)                     (7)            (24)           (7)          (14)                   (9)
Outcome Mean (1998)          1,076           1,425           1,031           1,323             851
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)        2,142,029        232,540        1,909,489        660,866          988,801


Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) where the dependent variable is the outcome indicated
in the panel heading. Each cell has one observation for each year between 1998 and 2006. All regressions
include year fixed effects and fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of
birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where race is defined as white or nonwhite. Column 1 includes all
veterans in our sample; all other columns restrict the sample to veterans in the specified group. Columns
1-3 group veterans with a missing AFQT score into a sixth AFQT category while columns 4-5 exclude
veterans with missing AFQT scores. In panel B, veterans with an IU rating are coded as having a
Combined Disability Rating (CDR) of 100. In panel C, mean annual DC payments are in $2013. All
regressions weight each observation according to the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                Table 7. SSDI, SSI, and Total Disability Income in the BOG versus NOG samples
                                   All          Nonwhites           Whites        AFQT<45               AFQT≥45
                                   (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)                   (5)
                            A. Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell Receiving SSDI
BOG                               0.74***          1.14***           0.69***         1.12***               0.81***
                                 (0.04)           (0.12)           (0.04)          (0.07)                 (0.04)
BOG * (YR-1996)                   0.13***          0.19***           0.13***         0.14***               0.11***
                                 (0.01)           (0.04)           (0.01)          (0.02)                 (0.01)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                 0.12***          0.06              0.12***         0.12***               0.10***
(YR≥2002)                        (0.02)           (0.06)           (0.02)          (0.04)                 (0.02)
Outcome Mean (1996)                4.51              6.69              4.23              6.77              3.08
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)             2,862,513          310,987          2,551,526          883,832          1,321,309

                             B. Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell Receiving SSI
BOG                               -0.238***       -0.353***         -0.222***        -0.328***            -0.063***
                                 (0.012)         (0.055)           (0.012)          (0.028)              (0.013)
BOG * (YR-1996)                   -0.025***       -0.024            -0.025***        -0.038***            -0.015***
                                 (0.004)         (0.016)           (0.003)          (0.008)              (0.004)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                 -0.013**        -0.052**          -0.008           -0.036***            -0.004
(YR≥2002)                        (0.006)         (0.026)           (0.006)          (0.013)              (0.006)
Outcome Mean (1996)                0.90              2.26              0.73              1.54              0.50
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)             2,862,513          310,987          2,551,526          883,832          1,321,309

      C. Dependent Variable: Annual Disability Income (DC Ben + SSDI Ben + SSI Ben), 1998-2006 only
BOG                              861***          1,061***         835***        1,197***         772***
                                (13)              (44)           (14)           (26)            (17)
BOG * (YR-1998)                  128***            178***         121***         172***           98***
                                 (6)              (21)            (6)           (12)             (8)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                226***            325***         214***         277***          173***
(YR≥2002)                        (9)              (30)            (9)           (18)            (11)
Outcome Mean (1998)                1,608            2,181              1,535            2,093             1,225
Total Income Mean (1998)          53,639            38,276            55,601            39,549            59,663
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)             2,142,029          232,540          1,909,489          660,866           988,801
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) where the dependent variable is the outcome indicated in each
panel heading. In panels A and B, each cell has one observation for each year between 1996 and 2007. Panel C only
includes observations from 1998 through 2006 since DC outcomes are not available in other years. Annual
disability benefits in panel C are in $2013. All regressions include year fixed effects and fixed effects for each
combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where race is defined as white
or nonwhite. Column 1 includes all veterans in our sample and columns 2-5 restrict the sample to veterans in the
specified group. Columns 1-3 group veterans with a missing AFQT score into a sixth AFQT category while
columns 4-5 exclude veterans with missing AFQT scores. All regressions weight each observation according to the
number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
              Table 8. Labor Force Participation in the BOG versus NOG samples from 1996-2007
                     Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell with Positive Annual Earnings
                                A. All                    B. YOB: 1946-1948              C. YOB: 1949-1951
                           (1)            (2)               (1)           (2)             (1)          (2)
BOG                       -0.32***       -0.33***           0.00          0.02           -0.82***     -0.87***
                         (0.08)         (0.05)            (0.10)        (0.07)          (0.11)       (0.08)
BOG * (YR-1996)                          -0.15***                        -0.17***                     -0.14***
                                        (0.02)                          (0.02)                       (0.02)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                        -0.18***                        -0.19***                     -0.18***
(YR≥2002)                               (0.03)                          (0.04)                       (0.04)
BOG * (YR97)              -0.16                            -0.15                         -0.16
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR98)              -0.31***                         -0.29**                       -0.33**
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR99)              -0.45***                         -0.38**                       -0.52***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR00)              -0.77***                         -0.79***                      -0.75***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR01)              -0.81***                         -0.87***                      -0.76***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR02)              -1.01***                         -1.06***                      -0.96***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR03)              -1.34***                         -1.45***                      -1.23***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR04)              -1.74***                         -1.92***                      -1.55***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR05)              -2.15***                         -2.27***                      -2.03***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR06)              -2.43***                         -2.56***                      -2.29***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
BOG * (YR07)              -2.83***                         -2.93***                      -2.73***
                         (0.11)                           (0.15)                        (0.16)
Outcome Mean (1996)                 85.70                             86.56                            84.80
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)               2,862,513                         1,476,423                        1,386,090


Notes: This table reports estimates of equations (1) and (2) where the dependent variable is the percentage of each cell
with positive annual earnings. Panel A includes all veterans in our sample and panels B and C restrict the sample to
veterans in the specified group. All regressions include year fixed effects and fixed effects for each combationation of
(AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where race is defined as white or nonwhite and
veterans with a missing AFQT score are grouped into a sixth AFQT category. All regressions weight each observation
according to the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                Table 9. LFP and Earnings in the BOG versus NOG samples from 1996-2007
                              All          Nonwhites         Whites        AFQT<45                AFQT≥45
                              (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)                   (5)
                         A. Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell with Earnings>0
BOG                           -0.33***        -2.50***         -0.05             -0.88***            -0.92***
                             (0.05)          (0.18)           (0.06)            (0.10)              (0.07)
BOG * (YR-1996)               -0.15***        -0.19***         -0.15***          -0.16***            -0.11***
                             (0.02)          (0.05)           (0.02)            (0.03)              (0.02)
BOG * (YR-2001) *             -0.18***        -0.22**          -0.18***          -0.20***            -0.15***
(YR≥2002)                    (0.03)          (0.09)           (0.03)            (0.05)              (0.03)
Outcome Mean (1996)           85.70            78.18             86.67            81.70             89.08
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)         2,862,513         310,987          2,551,526         883,832          1,321,309

                            B. Dependent Variable: 100 x Ln(Cell Mean Earnings)
BOG                            -2.59***        -4.68***        -2.30***         0.02                 -4.10***
                              (0.18)          (0.62)          (0.18)          (0.32)                (0.23)
BOG * (YR-1996)                -0.23***        -0.33*          -0.21***        -0.27***              -0.13*
                              (0.05)          (0.18)          (0.05)          (0.10)                (0.07)
BOG * (YR-2001) *              -0.45***        -0.77***        -0.41***        -0.40**               -0.27**
(YR≥2002)                     (0.08)          (0.30)          (0.09)          (0.16)                (0.11)
Outcome Mean (1996)          1,065.83         1,032.25          1,070.12         1,038.31          1,080.45
Earnings Mean (1996)         49,848            35,449           51,691            36,656           55,709
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)         2,855,305         308,923          2,546,382         879,962          1,320,155

                  C. Dependent Variable: 100 x Ln(Percentage of Cell with Earnings>0)
BOG                        -0.29***         -3.57***          0.13            -1.20***               -1.14***
                          (0.08)           (0.31)           (0.09)           (0.17)                 (0.10)
BOG * (YR-1996)            -0.21***         -0.31***         -0.20***         -0.24***               -0.16***
                          (0.02)           (0.09)           (0.03)           (0.05)                 (0.03)
BOG * (YR-2001) *          -0.36***         -0.52***         -0.35***         -0.44***               -0.29***
(YR≥2002)                 (0.04)           (0.15)           (0.04)           (0.08)                 (0.05)
Outcome Mean (1996)           -17.85           -28.26            -16.51           -23.28            -13.25
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)         2,855,305         308,923          2,546,382         879,962          1,320,155


Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) where the dependent variable is the outcome indicated in
each panel heading. Each cell has one observation for each year between 1996 and 2007. Panels B and C
exclude cells with 0 mean annual earnings. All earnings outcomes are in $2013. All regressions include year
fixed effects and fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of birth)x(year), and
(race)x(year), where race is defined as white or nonwhite. Column 1 includes all veterans in our sample and
columns 2-5 restrict the sample to veterans in the specified group. Columns 1-3 group veterans with a missing
AFQT score into a sixth AFQT category while columns 4-5 exclude veterans with missing AFQT scores. All
regressions weight each observation according to the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                   Table 10. 2SLS Estimates of DC Receipt and Annual Disability Benefits on Labor Force Participation
                                Dependent Variable: Percentage of Cell with Positive Earnings. 1998-2006.

                                            YOB: 1946-      YOB: 1949-
                                  All         1948            1951            Nonwhites          Whites         AFQT<45          AFQT≥45
                                  (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)
                                        A. Endogenous Variable: Percentage of Cell Enrolled in DC
DC Enrollment                    -0.18***      -0.16***      -0.21***         -0.25**           -0.17***            -0.20***         -0.17**
                                (0.04)        (0.06)        (0.07)           (0.11)            (0.05)              (0.07)           (0.07)

Outcome Mean (1998)              84.7           85.5            83.9             77.1             85.7             80.5             88.3
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)           2,142,029      1,104,897       1,037,132         232,540         1,909,489         660,866          988,801

                                B. Endogenous Variable: (DC Benefits + SSDI Benefits + SSI Benefits)/1000
(Disability Benefits)/1000       -0.80***     -0.70***       -0.94***        -0.97**         -0.77***               -0.84***         -0.82***
                                (0.18)       (0.23)         (0.28)          (0.42)          (0.19)                 (0.28)           (0.31)

Outcome Mean (1998)              84.7           85.5            83.9             77.1             85.7             80.5             88.3
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)           2,142,029      1,104,897       1,037,132         232,540         1,909,489         660,866          988,801


Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of DC receipt on labor force participation (panel A) and annual disability benefits on
labor force participation (panel B). The instrument for all estimates is (BOG)x(year - 2001)x1(year ≥ 2002). All regressions include a main
effect for (BOG), a (BOG)x(year - 1998) time trend, year fixed effects, and fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year),
(year of birth)x(year), and (race)x(year). Annual disability benefits are in $2013. Each cell has one observation for each year between 1998
and 2006 and all regressions weight each observation according to the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                 Table 11. Earnings plus Disability Income in the BOG versus NOG samples
           Dependent Variable: 100 x Ln(Earnings + DC Ben + SSDI Ben + SSI Ben), 1998-2006 only
                                 All          Nonwhites           Whites       AFQT<45       AFQT≥45
                                 (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)
                             A. Reduced Form Effect of Agent Orange Policy Change
BOG                               -0.75***       -0.80            -0.70***         3.66***               -2.53***
                                 (0.17)          (0.53)          (0.18)           (0.28)                (0.23)
BOG * (YR-1998)                    0.20**         0.27             0.19**          0.33**                 0.23**
                                 (0.08)          (0.25)          (0.08)           (0.13)                (0.11)
BOG * (YR-2001) *                  0.51***        1.04***          0.45***         0.86***                0.34**
(YR≥2002)                        (0.11)          (0.36)          (0.12)           (0.19)                (0.16)
Outcome Mean (1998)              1,074.05         1,043.42          1,077.96         1,048.71          1,087.39
Total Income Mean (1998)          53,639           38,276            55,601           39,549            59,663
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)             2,137,665         231,235          1,906,430         658,480           988,152

            B. 2SLS Estimates of DC Receipt on 100 x Ln(Earnings + DC Ben + SSDI Ben + SSI Ben)
                           Endogenous Variable: Percentage of Cell Enrolled in DC
DC Enrollment                      0.52***           0.83***          0.47***           0.73***          0.42**
                                  (0.12)            (0.29)           (0.13)            (0.16)           (0.20)
Outcome Mean (1998)              1,074.05         1,043.42          1,077.96         1,048.71          1,087.39
Total Income Mean (1998)          53,639           38,276            55,601           39,549            59,663
# OBS (Cell)x(Year)             2,137,665         231,235          1,906,430         658,480           988,152
Notes: Panel A of this table reports estimates of equation (2) where the dependent variable is 100 times the log of
each cell's mean annual earnings and total disability income. Panel B reports 2SLS estimates of the effects of DC
receipt on the same outcome. The instrument in panel B is (BOG) x (year - 2001) x 1(year ≥ 2002) and the
endogenous variable is the percentage of the cell enrolled in DC. Each cell has one observation for each year
between 1998 and 2006, which are the years where DC information is available. Cells with 0 mean annual earnings
are excluded. Earnings and disability income values are in $2013. All regressions include year fixed effects and
fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where
race is defined as white or nonwhite. Column 1 includes all veterans in our sample and columns 2-5 restrict the
sample to veterans in the specified group. Columns 1-3 group veterans with a missing AFQT score into a sixth
AFQT category while columns 4-5 exclude veterans with missing AFQT scores. All regressions weight each
observation according to the number of veterans in the cell. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                     Appendix Figure 1A. Data Diagram

             Army Loss Files                               Department of Defense
               1968-1985                                       Vietnam File


                                 Original OEMA Sample
                                    N = 4.086 million



                                       SSA Earnings                   SSA Mortality
       VA DC Data
                                           Data                           Data



                                  SSA Verified Sample
                           N = 3.804 million, Cells = 694,589


                        YOB: 1946-1951, Start Year: 1966-1971
                          N = 1.508 million, Cells = 283,278


                    Exclude Veterans with Missing Loss Years,
                  Loss Years before 1968, or Loss Years after 1985
                        N = 1.359 million, Cells = 255,222

                                   Cell Restrictions*
                           N = 1.351 million, Cells = 253,122
*Cell restrictions limit to the sample to cells where all veterans have the same birth year
    (466 observations dropped), all veterans have start years between 1966 and 1971
    (2,677 observations dropped), all veterans have loss years between 1968 and 1985
    (4,681 observations dropped), and no veterans have a missing loss year (80
    observations dropped).
        Appendix Figure 1B. Annual Observations Breakdown


                                 Full Sample (One Year)
                            N = 1.351 million, Cells = 253,122




                                       1996-2007 Panel

                             N = 1.351 mil x 12 = 16.212 mil
                             Cells = 253,122 x 12 = 3.037 mil




                 1996-2007 Panel after removing deceased Veterans**

                                        N = 15.166 mil
                                       Cells = 2.863 mil




**A deceased veteran is removed from the panel in the year of his death and all years
    following. If only a fraction of the cell is deceased in a particular year, all cell level
    averages are recomputed to reflect averages among living veterans only.
              Appendix Table 1. Percentage of DC Recipients and Average Annual Benefit by CDR and Service Era in 2006

                                                                             Share with Each Rating by Service Era
  CDR        Recipients    Payments (2013 Mean Annual            Gulf        Vietnam        Korea          WW II        Peacetime
                             $ Millions)    Benefit

       0%         14,291              $15        $1,030             0.1%           0.3%          2.4%           1.4%          0.4%
      10%        775,346           $1,212        $1,563            27.3%          21.8%         30.6%          33.0%         37.3%
      20%        417,721           $1,275        $3,052            17.8%          13.3%         13.0%          12.5%         17.8%
      30%        334,931           $1,742        $5,202            15.3%          10.6%         12.4%          13.1%         11.0%
      40%        259,834           $1,956        $7,530            12.5%           9.0%          8.2%           8.1%          8.0%
      50%        161,568           $1,709       $10,577             7.2%           5.9%          5.4%           5.8%          4.7%
      60%        184,264           $3,236       $17,564             7.0%           7.0%          7.6%           7.1%          5.7%
      70%        165,257           $4,263       $25,799             4.8%           8.5%          5.5%           5.4%          4.2%
      80%        113,404           $3,252       $28,678             3.4%           5.7%          4.1%           4.1%          2.7%
      90%         60,546           $1,896       $31,310             1.7%           3.1%          2.3%           2.3%          1.4%
     100%        238,662           $9,051       $37,926             3.0%          14.7%          8.5%           7.2%          7.0%

     Total     2,725,824          $29,608       $10,862           694,813       947,598        159,804       328,044       595,565

Source: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2006 Annual Benefits Report. Average annual benefit payments are in $2013 (millions).
                   Appendix Table 2. Distribution of Loss Year in OEMA Sample

                            A. NOG Veterans                             B. BOG Veterans
                                   Percent of NOG                               Percent of BOG
  Loss Year           Observations       Sample                  Observations        Sample

    1960                         -           0.00                             1          0.00
    1961                         -           0.00                             2          0.00
    1962                         -           0.00                             2          0.00
    1963                         -           0.00                             2          0.00
    1964                         -           0.00                             8          0.00
    1965                         -           0.00                            25          0.00
    1966                         -            0.00                          140          0.01
    1967                         -            0.00                          250          0.02
    1968                      17,787          0.69                        7,128          0.48
    1969                      83,222          3.21                      165,959         11.14
    1970                     265,968         10.25                      258,909         17.37
    1971                     241,772          9.32                      273,725         18.37
    1972                     122,400          4.72                      219,993         14.76
    1973                     164,026          6.32                       77,013          5.17
    1974                     175,414          6.76                       51,296          3.44
    1975                     162,983          6.28                       32,696          2.19
    1976                     160,387          6.18                       26,037          1.75
    1977                     146,516          5.65                       23,410          1.57
    1978                     129,296          4.98                       21,334          1.43
    1979                     141,220          5.44                       19,612          1.32
    1980                     137,754          5.31                       15,946          1.07
    1981                     119,916          4.62                       12,921          0.87
    1982                     128,458          4.95                       12,153          0.82
    1983                     141,806          5.46                       11,393          0.76
    1984                     131,090          5.05                       11,597          0.78
    1985                     125,179          4.82                       10,857          0.73
    1986                         -            0.00                        6,052          0.41
    1987                         -           0.00                         5,089         0.34
    1988                         -           0.00                         5,684         0.38
    1989                         -           0.00                         5,212         0.35
    1990                         -           0.00                         4,392         0.29
    1991                         -           0.00                         3,501         0.23
    1992                         -           0.00                         3,671         0.25
    1993                         -           0.00                         2,563         0.17
   Missing                       -           0.00                       201,786         13.54

     Total                 2,595,194         100.00                   1,490,359         100.00

Notes: This table reports the distribution of loss years within the NOG and BOG groups of the
original OEMA sample. A loss year is the year a veteran exited the Army.
               Appendix Table 3. SSA Verification Rate by Start Year

                          A. NOG Veterans                      B. BOG Veterans
                                      SSA Match                           SSA Match
  Start Year             Obs            Rate                 Obs            Rate

   ≤1944                    6,970             86.5              8,209             95.8
    1945                    1,321             85.3              2,808             96.4
    1946                    2,057             88.2              3,943             97.2
    1947                    2,027             87.3              3,754             96.4
    1948                    3,752             87.8              5,988             96.3
    1949                    3,846             88.6              4,794             95.8
    1950                    5,400             82.2              8,286             95.0
    1951                    4,275             82.4             13,569             95.3
    1952                    1,925             82.8             13,125             98.0
    1953                    1,983             81.5             15,593             98.6
    1954                    1,522             82.4             13,370             98.9
    1955                    1,807             84.3             12,950             99.0
    1956                    1,776             84.8             12,132             98.8
    1957                    1,779             88.1             12,107             99.0
    1958                    2,485             88.4             15,181             98.9
    1959                    2,254             91.0             14,769             98.9
    1960                    2,339             93.5             14,192             99.0
    1961                    4,018             93.6             16,002             98.8
    1962                    4,359             91.4             15,689             98.5
    1963                    4,778             91.4             15,895             98.4
    1964                    6,362             91.5             18,357             98.5
    1965                    9,675             91.6             26,859             98.2
    1966                   38,014             94.4             88,681             98.8
    1967                   96,939             93.3            174,641             97.2
    1968                  196,281             92.3            263,378             95.5
    1969                  199,973             87.0            263,700             93.1
    1970                  163,525             87.1            149,738             98.8
    1971                  191,736             86.6             60,564             99.4
    1972                  215,043             86.2             15,087             99.5
    1973                  144,792             85.6              3,053             98.8
    1974                  187,413             85.8              1,753             99.1
    1975                  162,643             88.2              1,802             98.6
   ≥1976                  920,849             96.3              3,624             99.1
   Missing                  1,276             81.7            196,766             99.4
    Total               2,595,194              90.9           1,490,359            97.0
Notes: This table reports SSA verification rates for veterans by start year and BOG or
NOG status.
                          Appendix Table 4. Comparison of Census and Army/SSA Demographics and Earnings Data for Year 1999

                                               A. Army/SSA Verified Sample (1999)                         B. Vietnam Veterans born 1946-1951: 2000 Census
                                             All           Whites            Nonwhites                        All              Whites          Nonwhites
                                             (1)             (2)                (3)                           (1)                (2)               (3)
Age in 1999                                 50.5            50.5               50.3                          50.7               50.7              50.5
                                            (1.5)           (1.5)              (1.5)                         (1.6)              (1.6)             (1.6)
Race
 White                                      88.7                100.0                 0.0                     86.7                100.0                 0.0
 Nonwhite                                   11.3                 0.0                 100.0                    13.3                 0.0                 100.0
Education
 HS Dropout                                 27.3                 26.9                 30.7                    5.2                  4.7                 8.3
 HS Grad                                    43.6                 42.9                 49.2                    39.3                 39.1                41.0
 Some College                               14.7                 15.3                 10.4                    29.7                 29.1                33.4
 College Grad                               6.9                  7.5                  2.4                     15.9                 16.6                11.3
 More than College                          0.4                  0.5                  0.1                     9.9                  10.5                6.0
Positive Earnings                           84.1                 85.0                 76.5                    82.2                 83.1                76.3
Annual Earnings ($2013)
 Mean                                      52,512               54,570              36,376                   58,488              60,909               42,703
                                          (76,853)             (80,899)            (24,652)                 (65,224)            (67,114)             (48,337)
 Mean (if >0)                              61,053               62,898              46,566                   71,158              73,303               55,935
                                          (80,366)             (84,600)            (27,209)                 (65,378)            (67,174)             (48,170)
 Median                                    45,530               47,123              33,879                   48,941              49,220               36,356
          Observations                   1,286,921            1,141,340             145,581                 203,781              178,601              25,180


Notes: This table reports summary statistics for veterans in the SSA verified sample and veterans in the 2000 census. Panel A maintains the same sample
restrictions described in the data appendix and further restricts to veterans who were still alive as of 1999. All statistics in panel A are from 1999. Panel B
reports summay statistics for veterans in the 5 percent 2000 Census IPUMS extract who were born between 1946 and 1951. All earnings are in $2013.
         Appendix Table 5. DC Progression and LFP for Pre-Existing Beneficiaries and New Beneficiaries
                                A. CDR (Individual Level)                         B. LFP (Cell Level)
                                                    Not Enrolled
                                       Enrolled in    in DC by                       High DC_98 Low DC_98
                       All Veterans DC by 1998          1998         All Veterans        Cell          Cell
                            (1)            (2)            (3)              (1)            (2)          (3)
BOG                           2.87***         2.55***        -0.01             -0.66***       -0.71***         0.21***
                             (0.03)          (0.18)         (0.02)            (0.06)         (0.27)          (0.07)
BOG * (YR-1998)               0.34***         0.84***         0.22***          -0.15***       -0.35***        -0.11***
                             (0.01)          (0.08)         (0.01)            (0.03)         (0.13)          (0.03)
BOG * (YR-2001) *             0.66***         0.26**          0.73***          -0.18***        0.06           -0.21***
(YR≥2002)                    (0.02)          (0.12)         (0.01)            (0.04)         (0.17)          (0.04)

Outcome Mean (1998)           3.96           38.21           0.00              84.68         77.23           85.58
# OBS                     11,376,787      1,165,699      10,211,088         2,372,076       244,709       2,127,367
Years                      1998-2006      1998-2006       1998-2006         1998-2007      1998-2007      1998-2007



Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2) where the dependent variable is a veteran's Combined Disability
Rating (panel A), or the percentage of the veteran's cell with positive annual earnings (panel B). In panel A, column 1
includes all veterans in the sample, column 2 only includes veterans who initially enrolled in DC in 1998 or earlier,
and column 3 only includes vetearns who were not enrolled in DC as of 1998. Veterans with an IU award are given a
CDR of 100. In panel B, column 1 includes all cells, column 2 only includes cells where at least one third of veterans
in the cell were enrolled in DC as of 1998, and column 3 includes cells where fewer than one third of veterans in the
cell were enrolled in DC as of 1998. All regressions in panel A are at the individual level while regressions in panel
B are at the cell level and are weighted by the number of veterans in a cell in a particular year. All regressions
include year fixed effects and fixed effects for each combationation of (AFQT-quintile)x(year), (year of
birth)x(year), and (race)x(year), where race is defined as white or nonwhite and veterans with a missing AFQT score
are grouped into a sixth AFQT category. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
