                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHEN SHOULD GOVERNMENTS SUBSIDIZE HEALTH? THE CASE OF MASS
                          DEWORMING

                                            Amrita Ahuja
                                             Sarah Baird
                                         Joan Hamory Hicks
                                           Michael Kremer
                                           Edward Miguel
                                           Shawn Powers

                                        Working Paper 21148
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21148


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2015

We thank Felipe Gonzalez for research assistance and Jessica Harrison for helpful comments. Baird,
Hamory Hicks, Kremer, and Miguel gratefully acknowledge support from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health & Human Development (Grant Number R01HD044475). In the
interests of transparency around potential conflicts of interest, we note that USAID and the Douglas
B. Marshall, Jr. Family Foundation support deworming. Also, Amrita Ahuja is the chair of the board
of Evidence Action, a nonprofit organization which supports governments in scaling mass school-based
deworming programs. This is a voluntary position with no associated remuneration. The content of
this article is solely the responsibility of the authors, and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development, the
U.S. National Institutes of Health, USAID, the Douglas B. Marshall, Jr. Family Foundation, Evidence
Action, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21148.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Amrita Ahuja, Sarah Baird, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and
Shawn Powers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Should Governments Subsidize Health? The Case of Mass Deworming
Amrita Ahuja, Sarah Baird, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel, and Shawn
Powers
NBER Working Paper No. 21148
May 2015
JEL No. H2,H51,I1,I12,I15,I2,I20,I25,I3,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

We discuss how evidence and theory can be combined to provide insight on the appropriate subsidy
level for health products, focusing on the specific case of deworming. Although intestinal worm infections
can be treated using safe, low-cost drugs, some have challenged the view that mass school-based deworming
should be a policy priority. We review well-identified research which both uses experimental or quasi-
experimental methods to demonstrate causal relationships and adequately accounts for epidemiological
externalities from deworming treatment, including studies of deworming campaigns in the Southern
United States, Kenya, and Uganda. The existing evidence shows consistent positive impacts on school
participation in the short run and on academic test scores, employment, and income in the long run,
while suggesting that most parents will not pay for deworming treatment that is not fully subsidized.
There is also evidence for a fiscal externality through higher future tax revenue, which may exceed
the cost of the program. Our analysis suggests that the economic benefits of school-based deworming
programs are likely to exceed their costs in places where worm infestations are endemic. This would
likely be the case even if the benefits were only a fraction of estimates in the existing literature.


Amrita Ahuja                                        Michael Kremer
Douglas B. Marshall Jr. Family Foundation           Harvard University
600 Jefferson Street, Suite 310                     Department of Economics
Houston, Texas 77002                                Littauer Center M20
amrita.b.ahuja@gmail.com                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                    and NBER
Sarah Baird                                         mkremer@fas.harvard.edu
Department of Global Health
Milken Institute School of Public Health            Edward Miguel
George Washington University                        Department of Economics
950 New Hampshire Ave NW 4th Floor                  University of California, Berkeley
Washington, DC 20052                                530 Evans Hall #3880
sbaird@gwu.edu                                      Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                    and NBER
Joan Hamory Hicks                                   emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
CEGA, Center for Effective Global Action
207 Giannini Hall, Univ of CA, Berkeley             Shawn Powers
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                             Senior Policy Manager
jrhamory@berkeley.edu                               Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab
                                                    30 Wadsworth St
                                                    E53-320
                                                    Cambridge MA 02142
                                                    smpowers@mit.edu
1. Introduction

        Moving from empirical evidence to policy judgments requires the implicit or explicit use of

theory, both in order to assess the relevance of evidence on existing policy and to make normative

judgments. For example, randomized trials have established that take-up of mosquito nets, water

treatment products, and deworming pills are very sensitive to price in particular contexts. Theory is

needed to make reasonable inferences about price sensitivity of demand for the same goods in other

contexts, let alone for other health goods. Kremer and Glennerster (2011), for example, argue that

price sensitivity is often the case for goods used to prevent disease or treat non-acute disease. Even

if one is willing to make this generalization, however, determining whether subsidies are justified

requires a normative analysis.

        In this paper, we discuss how evidence and theory might be combined to provide insight on

appropriate subsidies for the prevention and treatment of communicable diseases, focusing on the

case of deworming. Intestinal worm infections are among the most widespread diseases globally,

affecting over a billion people mainly in low income countries (Hotez et al., 2006). School-age

children have particularly high infection rates and play an important role in spreading disease (Hotez

et al., 2006). Infections can lead to malnutrition, listlessness, organ damage, and internal bleeding (de

Silva et al., 2003; Crimmins and Finch, 2005). Safe, low-cost drugs are available to treat intestinal

worm infections, and are the standard of medical care. In fact, because treatment is inexpensive and

safe but diagnosis is relatively expensive, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommends

periodic mass treatments in areas where worm infections are above certain thresholds. However,

some have challenged this WHO policy, accepting that those who are known to be infected should

be treated, but questioning whether the existing evidence base is strong enough to support mass

treatment (Taylor-Robinson et al., 2012).




                                                                                                         3
        What evidence could one gather to shed light on the question of what public policy is

appropriate? That may depend in part on one’s normative theoretical perspective, and one could

imagine a range of such perspectives. For example:

1) A strong libertarian view might be that families have different needs and that parents should

    decide how to spend resources themselves, so that it is inappropriate for the state to take their

    money in taxes and then decide to subsidize one particular type of expenditure over another.

2) In a welfare economics/public finance approach, individuals are presumed to make decisions that

    maximize their own welfare, but government intervention may be justified in cases where

    individual actions create externalities for others. In particular, subsidies may be appropriate if

    use of the good creates positive externalities. This could include health externalities from

    reductions in the transmission of infectious disease, as well as fiscal externalities if treatment of

    children increases their long-run earnings and tax payments.

3) A third approach focuses on cost effectiveness in achieving policymaker goals (and need not assume that

    the policymaker’s goal is to maximize a weighted sum of household utilities). For example,

    policymakers may seek to achieve universal primary education (as in the Millennium

    Development Goals), or to maximize GNP growth subject to constraints, which in turn will lead

    them to undertake investments with high rates of return. The standard welfare

    economics/public finance approach assumes that consumers will maximize their own welfare,

    treats them as rational and informed, and abstracts from conflicts within the household (for

    example, between parents and children). This cost effectiveness approach does not do that, but

    of course it potentially risks efficiently achieving goals that are not those of most citizens.

4) From a human rights perspective, individuals might be seen as having a right to good health care.

    Under this approach, one might argue that children have a basic right to treatment for easily and

    cheaply treated medical conditions.


                                                                                                             4
        Note that under the first approach, there may not be any evidence that would make

deworming subsidies appropriate, and under a strong enough form of the final perspective, subsidies

for mass deworming might be appropriate under any evidence that does not challenge the medical

appropriateness of deworming for infected individuals and its safety for those without infections. In

this article we will review the evidence on deworming to try to shed light on what might be

normatively appropriate under perspectives 2 through 4.

        We will argue first that deworming is highly responsive to price. Second, we will review

evidence on the cost-effectiveness and economic returns of deworming as an investment, including

epidemiological and fiscal externalities associated with deworming. Finally, we will compare the

costs associated with the two leading policy options in endemic areas, namely, mass treatment versus

the screening and treatment of those found to be infected.

        The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background information

on worm infections, and describes the studies we draw upon to inform our argument. Section 3

summarizes evidence on the impact of price on take-up of deworming treatment. Section 4 reviews

evidence on the educational and economic impacts of deworming treatment, and discusses fiscal

externalities. Section 5 compares the costs of mass treatment to the costs of screening and then

treatment of the infected. Section 6 concludes.



2. Background on Intestinal Worms

        Roughly one in four people are infected with soil transmitted helminthes (STH) in endemic

countries (Pullan et al., 2014), and a further 187 million individuals are infected with schistosomiasis,

mostly in Africa (Hotez et al., 2006). These two types of worms follow different modes of disease

transmission. STH (which include hookworm, whipworm, and roundworm) are transmitted via eggs

deposited in the local environment when individuals defecate in their surroundings or do not


                                                                                                        5
practice proper hygiene after defecating, while the schistosomiasis parasite is spread through contact

with infected fresh water. Due to their transmission mechanisms, school-aged children are especially

vulnerable to these worm infections (Hotez et al., 2006).

       The potential health consequences of worm infections are generally agreed to depend on the

number of worms in the body, rather than a simple binary indicator of infection status, but there is

no scientific consensus on the functional form of this relationship. Some have argued that treating

worm infections once or twice per year can improve child appetite, growth, and physical fitness

(Stephenson et al., 1993), and reduce anemia (Guyatt et al., 2001; Stoltzfus et al., 1997). Deworming

may also strengthen the immunological response to other infections, such as malaria (Kirwan et al.,

2010) and HIV (Kjetland et al., 2006). Furthermore, chronic parasitic infections in childhood

generate inflammatory (immune defense) responses and elevated cortisol levels that lead energy to

be diverted from growth, and this may produce adverse health consequences throughout the life

course, including organ damage, atherosclerosis, impaired intestinal transport of nutrients, and

cardiovascular disease (Crimmins and Finch, 2005).

       Safe, low-cost drugs are available to treat worm infections, and are the standard of medical

care (Horton, 2000; Keiser and Utzinger, 2008; Perez et al., 2012). Because treatment is inexpensive

and safe but diagnosis is relatively expensive (requiring lab analysis of a stool sample), the WHO

recommends periodic mass school-based treatments in areas where worm infections are above

certain thresholds (WHO, 2014). Mass school-based deworming involves administering deworming

drugs to all children at a school in an area where worms are endemic, without individual diagnosis.

The Copenhagen Consensus, the Disease Control Priorities Project, Givewell, and the Abdul Latif

Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) have reviewed the evidence for, and comparative cost-




                                                                                                        6
effectiveness of, a wide range of development interventions, and have consistently ranked

deworming as a priority for investment.2

         Despite this recommendation, some have challenged the view that mass deworming of

school-children should be a policy priority, contending that the evidence on mass treatment

programs is of poor quality or inconclusive and is therefore insufficient to justify these programs

(Taylor-Robinson et al., 2012; Hawkes, 2013), although they do not dispute that those known to be

infected with worms should be treated.

         By randomizing at the individual level, most studies on deworming in the public health

literature fail to consider the potential for epidemiological externalities from treatment, where

treatment can improve outcomes not only for the person treated but also others by reducing the

chance of disease transmission (Bundy et al., 2009). The underlying biological mechanisms suggest

that treating infected people can prevent them from spreading infection, and existing evidence

suggests that such externalities can be substantial.

         Bundy et al. (1990) examine a case in which all 2-15 year olds on the island of Montserrat,

West Indies, were treated with single dose albendazole four times over a 16 month period. At the

end of the trial, the authors find substantial reductions in infection rates not only for the targeted

individuals (where greater than 90% of the target population received treatment), but also for adults

aged 16-25 (even though less than 4% received treatment), suggesting large positive epidemiological

externalities.

         More recently, Miguel and Kremer (2004) study a cluster-randomized school-based

deworming program in rural western Kenya during 1998-1999, where students were treated with

albendazole twice per year (and some schools were additionally treated with praziquantel once per

year). The authors find large reductions in worm infection prevalence among treated individuals,

2See, for instance, Hall and Horton (2008), Disease Control Priorities Project (2008), Givewell (2013), and J-PAL Policy
Bulletin (2012).

                                                                                                                       7
untreated individuals attending treatment schools, and individuals in schools located near treatment

schools. In particular, after just one year of treatment the authors estimate an 18 percentage point

reduction in the proportion of moderate-to-heavy infections among untreated individuals attending

treatment schools (p-value <0.05), and a 22 percentage point reduction among individuals attending

a school within 3 kilometers of a treatment school (p-value < 0.05) (Miguel and Kremer, 2004).3

         Ozier (2014) studies this same school-based deworming program in Kenya, but focuses on

children who were 0 to 2 years old when the program was launched and who lived in the catchment

areas of the participating schools. These children were not directly treated themselves but could

have benefited from the positive within-community externalities generated by mass school-based

deworming. Ten years after the program, Ozier (2014) estimates average test score gains of 0.3

standard deviation units (p-value < 0.01). These children likely benefited primarily through reduced

transmission of worm infections, and consistent with this hypothesis, the effects were twice as large

among children with an older sibling in one of the schools that received the program.

         Together, these three studies provide strong evidence for the existence of large, positive, and

statistically significant deworming externality benefits within the communities that received mass

treatment. Because of this, studies that are randomized at the individual level – rather than the

cluster level, which provides geographic separation between treatment and control groups, thereby

allowing for a study of treatment externalities – likely greatly underestimate the impacts of treatment.

         In what follows, we consider findings from well-identified studies that investigate the effect

of deworming on educational and economic outcomes. We consider a study to be well-identified if it

both (1) uses experimental or quasi-experimental methods to demonstrate causal relationships, and

(2) incorporates a cluster design to take into account the potential for infectious disease externalities.


3Miguel and Kremer (2014) provide an updated analysis of the data in Miguel and Kremer (2004), correcting some
errors in the original analysis. Throughout this paper we still cite Miguel and Kremer (2004), but use the updated
numbers where appropriate.

                                                                                                                     8
In particular, we review evidence from three deworming campaigns in widely different times and

contexts—one in the U.S. South in the early 20th century and two in East Africa at the turn of the

21st century.

           Bleakley (2007) analyzes the impact of hookworm eradication in the U.S. South, exploiting a

program launched by the non-governmental Rockefeller Sanitary Commission in 1910. After

detecting hookworm infection rates of 40 percent among school-aged children in the region, the

Commission sponsored traveling dispensaries that administered treatment to infected individuals in

affected areas and educated local physicians and the public about prevention. In their own follow-up

analysis, the commission reports a 30 percentage point decrease in infection rates across the infected

areas (Bleakley, 2007).4 To assess the impact of this intervention on educational and economic

outcomes, Bleakley (2007) uses quasi-experimental methods, comparing changes in counties with

high baseline worm prevalence to changes in low baseline prevalence counties over the same period.

           The second deworming campaign we discuss is an NGO-sponsored school-based treatment

program which was phased into 75 schools in a rural district of western Kenya during 1998-2001.

This area was characterized by high baseline helminth infection rates, at over 90 percent among

school-children. The program entailed provision of deworming drugs to treat STH (twice per year)

and schistosomiasis (once per year), as well as provision of educational materials on worm

prevention. Due to administrative constraints of the NGO, schools were phased into the program in

three groups, where each school was assigned to a group through list-randomization. The first group

began deworming treatment in 1998, the second group in 1999, and the final group in 2001.

           Several papers have explored various aspects of this Kenyan program. In what follows, we

focus on the Miguel and Kremer (2004) paper mentioned above, which analyzes the short-run

impact of the program on education and health outcomes, and Baird et al. (2014), which follows up


4   This measure includes the direct impact on the treated as well as indirect impacts accruing to the untreated population.

                                                                                                                           9
with participants a decade later to assess the long-run impact of the program. We also discuss

Kremer and Miguel (2007), which studies the behavioral response to a change in the price of

deworming treatment in this program.

        The third campaign we consider was a program delivered by community-based organizations

during 2000-2003 across 48 parishes in 5 districts in eastern Uganda. This program area was also

characterized by high worm prevalence, with an infection rate of over 60 percent in children aged

between five and ten years old (Kabatereine et al., 2001). Treatment was provided during “child

health days”, in which parents were offered multiple health and nutrition interventions for children

aged 1 to 7. Using a cluster-randomization approach, parishes were randomly assigned to receive

either the standard intervention, which included Vitamin A supplementation, vaccines, growth

monitoring and feeding demonstrations, or to receive deworming treatment in addition to the

standard package (Croke, 2014).

        Alderman et al. (2006) explore the short-run impacts of this program on child health, and

find that mass treatment led to improvements in child weight. Croke (2014) studies the longer term

educational impacts on these children 7-8 years after the program. In particular, he exploits data on

academic test scores that were collected as part of an unrelated set of national learning assessments

by an NGO. This data exists for 22 of the 48 parishes in the original randomized study, of which 12

received the standard treatment and 10 received deworming in addition to the standard package.



3. Impact of Pricing on Take-Up

        Before turning to the evidence on the educational and economic impacts of deworming, we

first discuss evidence on the impact of pricing on take-up. Under standard welfare economics, the

ratio of infra-marginal to marginal consumers will be important in determining optimal tax and

subsidy policy, since the fiscal costs of increasing subsidies are proportional to the number of infra-


                                                                                                      10
marginal consumers, while the benefits of any positive epidemiological or fiscal externalities depend

on the number of marginal consumers who will be induced to deworm by subsidies. Such

considerations will also be important from a cost effectiveness perspective. From a human rights

perspective, if parents are not willing to pay for treatment, then the larger society may have an

obligation to make treatment free and convenient so children can be treated.

         Kremer and Miguel (2007) study the behavioral response to a change in the price of

deworming treatment in the context of the Kenyan school-based deworming program. The

implementing NGO had a policy of using community cost-recovery in its projects to promote

sustainability and confer project ownership on its beneficiaries. Thus, starting in 2001, a random

subset of participating schools were allocated to pay user fees for the deworming treatment, with the

average cost of deworming per child set at US$0.30 (about one-fifth of the cost of drug purchase

and delivery through this program). The authors find that this cost-sharing reduced take up by 80%,

from 75 percent to 19 percent. This result is consistent with findings observed for other products

for disease prevention and treatment of non-acute conditions such as bednets for malaria, and water

treatment.5

         A more detailed examination of the data on the observed price elasticity of demand suggests

that insights from behavioral economics may be important in explaining these results. Cost-sharing

came in the form of a per-family fee, so that families with more children effectively faced a lower

per-child price. Kremer and Miguel (2007) find no evidence that adoption is sensitive to these

variations in positive price, despite the high sensitivity to there being a positive price at all.6

Moreover, the authors find that user fees did not help target treatment to the sickest students:

students with moderate to heavy worm infections were not more likely to pay for the drugs in the

5 See Dupas (2014), Kremer and Glennerster (2011), Kremer and Holla (2009), and JPAL Policy Bulletin (2011) for
reviews of the literature of the impact of prices on adoption of health interventions.
6 Other studies (e.g., Banerjee et al., 2010) also suggest that adoption of health interventions may be particularly sensitive

to prices near zero.

                                                                                                                           11
cost-sharing schools. In standard models of human capital investment, people weigh the opportunity

costs of an investment against the discounted value of returns (Becker, 1993). Small fees should not

make much difference unless people happen to be right at the margin of whether or not to make the

investment. In fact, relatively small short-run costs (e.g. $0.30 per deworming pill) appear to generate

large movements in adoption, consistent with models of time inconsistent preferences (Laibson,

1997). To the extent that people are subject to behavioral biases, there may be a stronger rationale

for policymakers basing decisions on deworming programs on their educational and economic cost-

effectiveness rather than on conventional public finance criteria.



4. Education and Labor Market Impacts of Deworming

        In this section we summarize the existing evidence on the impact of deworming on

education and labor market outcomes. These direct benefits will help inform the cost-effectiveness

perspective, while the fiscal externalities resulting from labor market impacts will be important from

a welfare economics perspective. The combination of the findings that many parents will not

purchase deworming medication for their children and that deworming affects children’s educational

and economic outcomes raises concerns from the perspective of the human rights of the child. To

the extent that governments are committed to ensuring that the rights of children are protected,

there may be a stronger case for free mass deworming.



4.1 School Participation

        Early work on the links between deworming and education focuses on simple correlations

between worm infection levels and school participation, and finds a significant positive relationship

between infection rates and school absenteeism (p<0.001) (Nokes and Bundy, 1993). More recently,

clustered evaluations have tried to carefully identify the causal effect of deworming on school


                                                                                                       12
participation, and avoid issues of confounding that may underlie simple correlations (Bundy,

Walson, and Watkins, 2013).7

         In his difference-in-difference study of the U.S. South, Bleakley (2007) finds that between

1910 and 1920 counties characterized by higher worm prevalence prior to the deworming campaign

saw substantial increases in school enrollment, both in absolute terms and relative to areas with

lower infection rates. The author estimates that a child infected with hookworm would have been 20

percentage points less likely to be enrolled in school than a non-infected child, and was also 13

percentage points less likely to be literate. His estimates suggest that due to the deworming

campaign, a county with a 1910 infection rate of 50% would experience an increase in school

enrolment of 3-5 percentage points and an increase in attendance of 6-8 percentage points, relative

to a county with no infection problem. Because his analysis is performed at the county (and state)

level, these results encompass any within-county (state) externality effects, but not spillovers across

counties (states).

         Since Bleakley (2007) is not randomized, one concern is that something other than

deworming is driving the difference in outcomes detected for children. However, the finding

remains significant when controlling for a number of potentially confounding factors, such as state-

level policy changes during that period and the demographic composition of high- and low-worm

load areas. In addition, Bleakley (2007) finds no significant differences in adult outcomes, including

literacy and labor force participation, across counties with higher and lower prevalence over the

period of the deworming campaign. Since adults had much lower infection rates and hence were

7 There are also a number of early studies that assessed impacts on school attendance using individually randomized
evaluations. For example, Watkins, Cruz, and Pollitt (1996) study deworming treatment of children aged 7-12 years in
rural Guatemala and find no impact on school attendance. However, this study is not cluster randomized, thus limiting
the ability to interpret the results. Furthermore, attendance in this study is measured through the use of school register
data, which excludes any students who have dropped out during the study. Since dropping out is very likely correlated
with treatment status, there is a high risk that this gives a biased picture of school participation over time. We might also
be concerned about the potential for school officials to overstate attendance due to their awareness of the program and
the data collection. Simeon et al. (1995) studies deworming treatment among Jamaican children aged 6-12, and also finds
no impact on school attendance. However, this study is also randomized at the individual level.

                                                                                                                          13
unlikely to benefit as much from deworming, the lack of a difference in adult outcomes bolsters the

case that deworming, and not something else, was driving the enrollment surge in areas that

previously had high hookworm prevalence.

       Miguel and Kremer (2004) also provide evidence on the impact of deworming on school

participation through their cluster-randomized evaluation of the school-based deworming program

in Busia, Kenya. The authors find substantially greater school participation in schools that had been

assigned to receive deworming than in those that had not yet been phased in to the program.

Participation increased not only among treated children, but also among untreated children in the

treatment schools (e.g. girls of reproductive age, who at that time were not approved for mass drug

administration) and among pupils in schools located near treatment schools. The total increase in

school participation, including these externality benefits, was 8.5 percentage points (Miguel and

Kremer, 2004). As discussed in Dhaliwal et al. (2012), these results imply that deworming is one of

the most cost-effective ways of increasing school participation.



4.2 Academic Test Scores

       In their study of the Kenyan deworming program, Miguel and Kremer (2004) do not find

effects on cognition or a short-run effect on academic test scores. However, the long-run follow-up

evaluation of the same intervention (Baird et al., 2014) finds that among females, deworming

increased the rate of passing the national primary school exit exam, by almost 25 percent (9.6

percentage points on a base of 40 percent). One hypothesis is that the children receiving treatment

were too old for any potential gains in cognitive function, but learned more simply through

increased school participation.

       In the long-run follow-up of the cluster-randomized Uganda deworming program, Croke

(2014) analyzes the English, Math, and combined test scores comparing treatment and control, as


                                                                                                    14
well as looking at whether the impact is greater for those who received multiple deworming

treatments as compared those who were dewormed once. The study finds that children in treatment

villages have significantly higher scores as compared to those in control villages, with effect sizes

ranging from 0.15 to 0.36 standard deviations. Effect sizes also more than double for children who

were dewormed more than once, but the difference in coefficients is only significant for Math

scores.8



4.3 Employment and Income

           Bleakley (2007) uses data from the 1940 U.S. census to compare adult outcomes among birth

cohorts who entered the labor force before and after the deworming campaign in the U.S. South.

Adults who had more “exposure” to deworming as children were significantly more likely to be

literate and had higher earnings as adults. He finds a 43% increase in adult wages among those

infected as children. This effect is large enough to suggest that hookworm infections could have

explained as much as 22 percent of the income gap between the U.S. North and South at the time.

Given initial infection rates of 30%-40%, hookworm eradication would therefore imply a long-run

income gain of 17% (based on 43% increase in wages and a 40% infection rate) (Bleakley, 2010).

           Children who were treated for worms in Kenya also had better outcomes later in life. Baird

et al. (2014) consider females and males separately, given the different set of family and labor market

choices they face in this context (Pitt, Rosenzweig, and Hassan, 2012). They find that Kenyan


8 Since the 22 communities included in the Croke (2014) analysis were not randomly selected, although the original
assignment was random, there may be concern that the results are driven by long-term differences in these communities
as opposed to the deworming treatment. Croke (2014) addresses this issue by showing that the communities are similar
on many variables related to adult outcomes (e.g., ownership of phones and televisions, access to water and electricity,
and measures of female empowerment). To further support his econometric identification strategy, Croke (2014) also
explores the pattern of test scores of all children tested in these parishes. The youngest children would have been too
young to receive more than two rounds of deworming, while the oldest children, at age 16, would have never received
the program. Thus, one would expect that if effects are truly from the deworming intervention, then the impacts would
be lower at the two extremes and higher for children in the middle age group, which is what the study finds.


                                                                                                                      15
females who received more deworming treatment have higher school enrollment and are more likely

to pass the national primary school exit exam. They are also more likely to grow cash crops, and

reallocate labor time from agriculture to entrepreneurship. Treated males work 3.5 more hours per

week, spend more time in entrepreneurial activities, and are more likely to work in higher-wage

manufacturing jobs.

        The increases in earnings allow Baird et al. (2014) to compute an annualized internal rate of

return (IRR) of 32-52 percent to deworming, depending on whether health spillovers are included.

This is high relative to other investments, implying deworming is cost effective on economic

grounds, even without counting any health benefits.

        Furthermore, because deworming increases labor supply, it creates a fiscal externality though

its impact on tax revenue. In fact, Baird et al. (2014) estimate that the net present value (NPV) of

increases in tax revenues greatly exceed the cost of the program. The fiscal externalities are thus

sufficiently strong that a government could potentially reduce tax rates by instituting free mass

deworming. Deworming thus easily satisfies the weaker conditions required for the benefit to exceed

the costs to taxpayers.



5. The Cost of Mass Treatment Programs versus Screened Treatment

        The WHO recommends mass treatment once or twice a year in regions where worm

prevalence is above certain thresholds (WHO, 2014). Screening followed by treatment of those

testing positive for worms is far less practical and more costly than mass treatment of infected and

uninfected children without diagnostic testing. From a practical perspective, screening programs are

also logistically difficult, requiring collection of stool samples, and more than 20 minutes of health

worker time per sample collected (Speich et al., 2010). For a national program like the current one in




                                                                                                         16
Kenya, this would result in the need for approximately 1,200 health workers focused full time on

such testing each year.

         Turning attention to costs, delivering deworming medicine for soil-transmitted helminths

through school-based programs is estimated to cost approximately US$0.35 per child per round of

treatment, including delivery costs (Givewell, 2014). Diagnosis of worm infections, on the other

hand, is far more expensive and complicated, requiring skilled staff. Taylor-Robinson et al. (2012)

state that screening for worm infections is not recommended by the WHO because the cost of

screening is 4 to 10 times that of the treatment itself. Speich et al. (2010) estimate that the cost per

child of testing via the Kato-Katz test, the most commonly used method for testing for worms in

the field, is US$1.88 in 2013 dollars. Assuming that the test has a specificity of 100 percent (i.e.,

identifies 100 percent of infections) and that all the children who are screened are also present on

the day that treatment is provided, the cost per infection treated would be more than six times

higher with treatment following screening as compared to mass treatment without screening.

         The numbers above, however, ultimately underestimate the cost of screening.9 First, tests for

worms do not identify all infections. Estimates of the specificity for the Kato-Katz method range

from about 91 percent to about 52 percent (Barda et al., 2013; Assefa et al., 2014). With a specificity

of 52 percent, the cost per infection treated would be about 12 times higher for screened treatment

as compared to mass treatment. Second, a large number of infections would remain untreated. The

fact that screened treatment programs need to reach infected children a second time to treat them,

and that it is unlikely they can reach each child who was tested, makes screening even less cost-

effective, and leaves even more infections untreated.




9Another screening approach could be to simply ask individuals if they have experienced any of the common side
effects of worm infections. While cheaper and potentially useful in environments where stool testing is not practical, this
screening method would likely be very imprecise.

                                                                                                                        17
          The vast majority of the 870 million children at risk of worm infections (Uniting to Combat

Neglect Tropical Diseases, 2014) could be treated each year via mass deworming programs at a cost

of approximately 300 million dollars a year, which is feasible given current health budgets. The cost

of treating them via screened programs would likely be closer to 2 billion dollars annually, if not

higher.



6. Conclusion

          The WHO recommends mass treatment once or twice a year in regions where worm

prevalence is above 20 and above 50 percent, respectively (WHO, 2014). Deworming is currently

being implemented as policy in many parts of the developing world, with recent estimates suggesting

that 280 million children (out of 870 million in need) are treated for worms, many via school-based

and community based integrated neglected tropical disease programs (Uniting to Combat Neglect

Tropical Diseases, 2014).

          Our analysis suggests that the WHO recommendations would pass a cost effectiveness test,

and that they would also pass a welfare economics test. Of course, more evidence would be useful

and some uncertainty remains.10 Although our conclusions are based on evidence from two radically

different contexts (East Africa at the turn of the 21st century and the U.S. South at the turn of the

20th century), the impact of deworming will of course vary to some degree with the local context,

including circumstances such as type of worm, worm prevalence and intensity, co-morbidity, the

extent of school participation in the community, and labor market factors.

          The most commonly used deworming drugs – albendazole, mebendazole and praziquantel –

have all been through clinical trials, have been approved for use by the appropriate regulatory bodies

in multiple countries, and have shown to be efficacious against a variety of worm infections and also

10There is no contradiction in believing that subsidizing deworming is worthwhile given currently available evidence,
and believing that it is worthwhile to conduct additional studies generating further evidence to inform future decisions.

                                                                                                                        18
to have minimal side effects (Fenwick et al., 2003; Horton, 2000; Keiser and Utzinger, 2008; Perez

del Villar et al., 2012). This means that the decision of whether to expend resources on deworming is

one that can be made based on comparing expected benefits and costs, given the available evidence.

         It is worth noting that deworming would be highly cost effective in many settings on

educational and economic grounds alone, even if its benefits were to be only a fraction of those

estimated in Kenya, Uganda, and the southern United States. In particular, even if the impact of

deworming on school participation is only 1/10th of that estimated in Miguel and Kremer (2004), it

would still be among the most highly cost effective ways of boosting school participation.

Furthermore, labor markets effects half as large as those estimated in Baird et al. (2014) would be

sufficient for deworming to generate enough tax revenue to fully cover its costs.11 A sophisticated

welfare analysis would be explicitly Bayesian, taking into account policymakers’ priors and their

assessment of their specific context, and under a Bayesian analysis recognizing all these

considerations would not need to place very substantial weight on the evidence discussed here for

the economic benefits of these policies to exceed their costs.




11Note that this estimate is conservative, only taking into account direct deworming benefits, and ignoring positive
externality benefits.

                                                                                                                       19
References

Alderman, Harold, Joseph Konde-Lule, Isaac Sebuliba, Donald Bundy, and Andrew Hall (2006).

    “Increased Weight Gain in Preschool Children Due to Mass Albendazole Treatment Given

    During ‘Child Health Days’ in Uganda: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial.” British Medical

    Journal, 333, 122-6.

Assefa L.M., T. Crellen, S. Kepha, J.H. Kihara, S.M. Njenga, R.L. Pullan, and S.J. Brooker (2014).

    “Diagnostic Accuracy and Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Methods for Detection of Soil-

    Transmitted Helminths in a Post-Treatment Setting in Western Kenya.” PLoS Neglected Tropical

    Diseases, 8(5): e2843.

Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel (2014). “Worms at Work:

    Long-Run Impacts of Child Health Gains.” Unpublished Manuscript.

Banerjee, Abhijit Vinayak, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Dhruva Kothari (2010).

    "Improving Immunisation Coverage in Rural India: Clustered Randomised Controlled

    Evaluation of Immunisation Campaigns with and without Incentives." British Medical Journal,

    340(7759): 1291.

Barda, Beatrice, Henry Zepherine, Laura Rinaldi, Giussepi Cringoli, Roberto Burioni, Massimmo

    Clementi, and Marco Albonico (2013). “Mini-FLOTAC and Kato-Katz: helminth eggs watching

    on the shore of lake Victoria.” Parasites & Vectors, 6: 220.

Becker, Gary (1993). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to

    Education. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Bleakley, Hoyt (2007). “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the

    American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(1):73-117.

Bleakley, Hoyt (2010). “Health, Human Capital, and Development”. Annual Review of Economics, 2:

    283-310.


                                                                                                      20
Bundy, D.A.P., Michael Kremer, Hoyt Bleakley, Matthew C. Jukes, and Edward Miguel (2009).

   “Deworming and Development: Asking the Right Questions, Asking the Questions Right.”

   PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 3(1), e362.

Bundy, Donald A.P., Judd L. Walson and Kristie L. Watkins (2013). “Worms, wisdom and wealth:

   why deworming can make economic sense.” Trends in Parasitology, 29(3): 142-148.

Bundy, D.A.P, M.S. Wong, L.L. Lewis and J. Jorton (1990). “Control of geohelminths by delivery of

   targeted chemotherapy through schools.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and

   Hygiene. 84:115-120.

Crimmins, Eileen M., and Caleb E. Finch (2005). “Infection, inflammation, height, and longevity”,

   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(2): 498-503.

Croke, Kevin (2014). “The long run effects of early childhood deworming on literacy and numeracy:

   Evidence from Uganda.” Unpublished Manuscript.

de Silva, NR, S Brooker, PJ Hotez, A Montresor, D Engels, and L Savioli (2003). “Soil-transmitted

   helminth infections: updating the global picture.” Trends in Parasitology, 19(12): 547-51.

Dhaliwal, Iqbal, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Caitlin Tulloch (2012). “Comparative cost-

   effectiveness analysis to inform policy in developing countries: a general framework with

   applications for education.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab.

Disease Control Priorities Project (2008). “Deworming Children Brings Huge Health and

   Development Gains in Low-Income Countries.” Available at www.dcp2.org, accessed October

   14, 2014.

Dupas, Pascaline (2014). “Getting essential health products to their end users: Subsidize, but how

   much?” Science, 345: 1279-1281.




                                                                                                        21
Fenwick, Alan, Lorenzo Savioli, Dirk Engels, N. Robert Bergquist, and Matthew H. Todd (2003).

   “Drugs for the control of parasitic diseases: current status and development in schistosomiasis.”

   Trends in Parasitology, 19(11): 509-515.

Givewell (2013). http://www.givewell.org/charities/top-charities. Accessed October 14, 2014.

Givewell (2014). http://www.givewell.org/international/top-charities/deworm-world-initiative.

   Accessed October 14, 2014.

Guyatt, H.L., A. Brooker, C.M. Kihamia, A. Hall, and D.A. Bundy (2001). "Evaluation of efficacy of

   school-based anthelmintic treatments against anaemia in children in the United Republic of

   Tanzania." Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 79(8): 695-703.

Hall, Andrew and Sue Horton (2008). “Best Practice Paper: Deworming.” Copenhagen Consensus

   Center, Denmark.

Hawkes, Nigel (2013). “Deworming debunked.” British Medical Journal, 346:e8558.

Horton, J (2000). "Albendazole: a review of anthelmintic efficacy and safety in humans." Parasitology,

   121 Suppl: S113-32.

Hotez, Peter J, Donald A. P. Bundy, Kathleen Beegle, Simon Brooker, Lesley Drake, Nilanthi de

   Silva, … Lorenzo Savioli (2006). “Helminth Infections: Soil-transmitted Helminth Infections

   and Schistosomiasis” in Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries (2nd edition), (eds.) Dean T

   Jamison, Joel G Breman, Anthony R Measham, George Alleyne, Mariam Claeson, David B

   Evans, Philip Musgrove. Washington DC: World Bank.

J-PAL Policy Bulletin (2011). “The Price is Wrong.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty

   Action Lab.

J-PAL Policy Bulletin (2012). “Deworming: A Best Buy for Development.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul

   Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab.




                                                                                                             22
Kabatereine N, Tukahebwa E. Brooker S, Alderman H, Hall A (2001). “Epidemiology of intestinal

   helminth infections among schoolchildren in southern Uganda.” East African Medical Journal, 78:

   283-6.

Keiser, J. and J. Utzinger (2008). "Efficacy of current drugs against soil-transmitted helminth

   infections: systematic review and meta-analysis." Journal of the American Medical Association,

   299(16): 1937-48.

Kirwan, Patrick, Andrew L Jackson, Samuel O Asaolu, Sile F Molloy, Titilayo C Abiona, Marian C

   Bruce, … and Celia V Holland (2010). "Impact of repeated four-monthly anthelmintic treatment

   on Plasmodium infection in preschool children: a double-blind placebo-controlled randomized

   trial." BMC Infectious Diseases, 10: 277.

Kjetland EF, Ndhlovu PD, Gomo E, Mduluza T, Midzi N, Gwanzura L, Mason PR, … and

   Gundersen SG (2006). “Association between genital schistosomiasis and HIV in rural

   Zimbabwean women.” AIDS, 20(4): 593-600.

Kremer, Michael, and Rachel Glennerster. (2011). “Improving Health in Developing Countries:

   Evidence from Randomized Evaluations” in Handbook of Health Economics (Vol. 2), (eds.) Mark V.

   Pauly, Thomas G. Mcguire and Pedro P. Barros, Elsevier Press.

Kremer, Michael, and Alaka Holla (2009). “Pricing and Access: Lessons from Randomized

   Evaluations in Education and Health” in What Works in Development: Thinking Big and Thinking

   Small, eds. W. Easterly and J. Cohen. Washington: Brookings Institution Press.

Kremer, Michael, and Edward Miguel (2007). “The Illusion of Sustainability.” Quarterly Journal of

   Economics, 112(3): 1007-1065.

Laibson, David (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

   102(2) :443-477.




                                                                                                    23
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer (2004). “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and

   Health in the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159-217.

Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer (2014). “Guide to Replication of Miguel and Kremer (2004).”

   Accessible at http://emiguel.econ.berkeley.edu/research/worms-identifying-impacts-on-

   education-and-health-in-the-presence-of-treatment-externalities.

Nokes, C. and D.A.P. Bundy (1993). “Compliance and absenteeism in school children: implications

   for helminth control.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 87: 148-152.

Ozier, Owen (2014). “Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-Term Effects of Early

   Childhood Deworming.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #7052.

Perez del Villar L, Burguillo FJ, Lopez-Aban J, Muro A. 2012. "Systematic Review and Meta-

   Analysis of Artemisinin Based Therapies for the Treatment and Prevention of Schistosomiasis.”

   PLoS ONE, 7(9): e45867.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan (2012). “Human Capital Investment and

   the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy.” American Economic Review. 102(7):

   3531-3560.

Pullan, R.L., J.L. Smith, R. Jasrasaria, S.J. Brooker (2014). “Global numbers of infection and disease

   burden of soil transmitted helminth infections in 2010.” Parasites and Vectors, 7:37.

Simeon, Donald T., Sally M. Grantham-McGregor, Joy E. Callender and Michael S. Wong (1995).

   “Treatment of Trichuris trichiura Infections Improves Growth, Spelling Scores and School

   Attendance in Some Children.” The Journal of Nutrition, 125(7): 1875-1883.

Speich, Benjamin, Stefanie Knopp, Khalfan A Mohammed, I Simba Khamis, Laura Rinaldi,

   Giuseppe Cringoli, David Rollinson and Jürg Utzinger (2010). Parasites & Vectors, 3(71): 1-11.

Stephenson, L.S., MC Latham, EJ Adams, SN Kinoti and A Pertet (1993). "Physical fitness, growth

   and appetite of Kenyan school boys with hookworm, Trichuris trichiura and Ascaris


                                                                                                             24
   lumbricoides infections are improved four months after a single dose of albendazole." The Journal

   of Nutrition, 123(6): 1036-1046.

Stoltzfus, R.J., Chwaya HM, Tielsch JM, Schulze KJ, Albonico M, and Savioli L (1997).

   “Epidemiology of iron deficiency anemia in Zanzibari schoolchildren: the importance of

   hookworms”, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 65(1): 153-9.

Taylor-Robinson, David C., Nicola Maayan, Karla Soares-Weiser, Sarah Donegan, and Paul Garner

   (2012). “Deworming drugs for soil-transmitted intestinal worms in children: effects on

   nutritional indicators, haemoglobin and school performance.” Cochrane Database of Systematic

   Reviews, Issue 11. Art. No.: CD000371.

Uniting to Combat Neglected Tropical Diseases. 2014. “Delivering on Promises and Driving

   Progress”. Available at

   http://unitingtocombatntds.org/sites/default/files/document/NTD_report_04102014_v4_sing

   les.pdf. Accessed October 14, 2014.

Watkins WE, Cruz JR, and Pollitt E (1996). “The effects of deworming on indicators of school

   performance in Guatemala.” Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,

   90(2):156-61.

World Health Organization (2014). “Soil-transmitted helminth infections” Fact Sheet N°366.

   http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs366/en/, accessed October 17, 2014.




                                                                                                    25
