NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NOTE ON OPTIMAL PUBLIC
ENFORCEMENT WITH SETTLEMENTS
AND LITIGATION COSTS

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Daniel L. Rubinfeld

Working Paper No. 2114

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2114
December 1986

A Note on Optimal Public Enforcement with
Settlements and Litigation Costs

ABSTRACT

This note reexamines the theory of optimal public
enforcement when litigation costs are incurred if the
defendant is prosecuted at trial, and when an out-of-court
settlement is possible. Using a numerical example, it is
shown that settlements and litigation costs can
substantially alter the optimal system of public
enforcement. It is also shown that failing to take these
considerations into account can significantly lower the
achievable level of social welfare.

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305

Daniel L. Rubinfeld
School of Law
Boalt Hall
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720

1.

Introduction
Economic analyses of optimal public enforcement examine the enforcement

authority's choice of the probability of detection and the level of the

penalty.[l] The authority's problem is to choose the probability and the
penalty so as to maximize social welfare. Two implicit assumptions are made
in these analyses: first, that all violators who are detected are prosecuted
at trial; and second, that the prosecutor's and the defendant's litigation

costs are zero.[2] Each of these assumptions is substantially contrary to
fact.

The overwhelming majority of all violators who are caught are not

prosecuted at trial, but rather settle out of court. For example, over ninety
percent of all criminal cases are disposed of in this way through the process
of "plea bargaining;" similarly, most civil cases brought by administrative
agencies are disposed of without resorting to trial. [3]

To some extent, the propensity to settle out of court is due to the high

cost of litigating cases that go to trial. In private civil litigation, there
is evidence that the parties' litigation costs can exceed the amount received
by a successful plaintiff. [4] Litigation costs associated with public
enforcement also are likely to be high, in part because of the high standard
of proof that often must be met (as, for example, in criminal prosecutions).
The contribution of this note is to incorporate these two "real world"
facts- -settlements and litigation costs- - into the model of optimal public

enforcement, and to examine their implications for the choice of the

probability of detection and the level of the penalty. A simple model of
public enforcement with these features is presented in section 2. Some
numerical calculations are then performed in section 3.[5)

1

2. The Model[6J
Individuals are assumed to be risk neutral and identical, except for the

private gain they obtain from engaging in an activity which imposes harm on

others. If an individual undertakes the activity, he faces some probability
of being caught. If he is caught and the case goes to trial, he will incur
litigation costs and, with some probability, will be found liable and have to
pay a fine.

(The model easily could incorporate nonmonetary sanctions.)

Alternatively, the individual may settle out of court. An individual will
engage in the activity if his private gain exceeds his expected payment- -the

sum of the expected defense cost (i.e., the defense cost times the probability
that he is caught and the case goes to trial), the expected fine (the fine

times the probability that he is caught and loses at trial), and the expected
out-of-court settlement (the settlement amount times the probability that he
is caught and the case settles out of court).
Both the probability of an out-of-court settlement and the amount of the

settlement are assumed to be exogenous.[7] This assumption is made in order
to focus on the effects of these considerations on the optimal probability of
detection and on the optimal level of the penalty.

The following notation will be used to describe the individual's problem
more precisely:

g

— gain to an individual from engaging in the activity,

h(.) —

probability

density of gain among individuals,

g'

— maximum possible gain,

p

—

probability

r

—

probability

that an individual who engages in the
activity will be caught,
that an individual who is caught goes

to trial,

2

q

—

probability

f

—

fine

collected from an individual who is found liable,

b

—

cost

of defense if an individual goes to trial,

s

— settlement paid by an individual who settles out of

that an individual who goes to trial is
found liable,

court.

Given this notation, an individual will undertake the activity if
(1)

g >

E(p,f),

where
E(p,f) —

(2)

p[r(qf+b)+(l-r)s].

In other words, an individual will engage in the harmful activity if his gain

exceeds his expected payment, E(.). His expected payment can be decomposed
into three parts: the expected fine, prqf; the expected defense cost, prb; and
the expected settlement, p(l-r)s.
Also, let:

N(p,f) — number of individuals who engage in the activity,
—

e

external

cost or harm from engaging in the activity,

n(p,f) — number of individuals who are caught (—

pN(p,f)).

There are two types of costs borne by the public enforcement authority- -

detection

costs and prosecution costs. Let:

c(p,N) —

cost

to the enforcement authority of catching
fraction p of those individuals who engage in
the activity.

Detection costs are assumed to be increasing in both p and N (c1(.) >

> 0).

0,

c2(.)

Thus, for example, if the number of violations is one thousand, it is

more costly to catch one hundred violators (with p — . 1) than it is to catch
ten violators (with p —

.01).

And it is more expensive to catch 10 percent of

a million violators than it is to catch 10 percent of a thousand violators.

3

Finally, let:

= cost to the enforcement authority of prosecution. [81

a

It is assumed that there is no cost to the enforcement authority of imposing
fines.

Social welfare equals the sum of the gains to individuals who engage in
the activity less the harm they cause, less the cost of catching them, and
less the private and public costs associated with trials:

W — J _g'gh(g)dgeN(p,f)
-

(3)

-

c(p,N(p,f))

-

n(p,f)r(a+b).

E(p,f)

The problem of the enforcement authority is to maximize social welfare,
W, through the choice of the fine, f, and the probability of detection, p.
The optimal values of the variables will be indicated by asterisks.
Since an individual cannot pay more than his wealth, the maximum

effective fine equals the individual's wealth less his cost of defense. If
individuals are risk neutral and fines are socially costless to impose (as is
assumed here), it is well known that the optimal fine equals the maximum fine;
thus,

f*=y-b,

(4)

where,

y

—

initial wealth

of individuals.

The reason for this result is simple. If the fine were less than y-b, the
fine could be raised and the probability of detection lowered so as to keep

the expected payment of violators, E(.), the same. Social welfare would rise
because the cost of catching individuals would fall.

Given that f* —

y-b,

the optimal probability of detection is determined

by maximizing social welfare (3) with respect to p. Assuming an interior

4

solution, the resulting first-order condition can be written as:[9J
[e-E(.)}[-dN(.)/dp} —

(5)
{cl(.)-c2( .)

[-dN(.)/dp])

+

[dn(.)/dp]r(a+b).

The left-hand side of (5) is the marginal benefit of raising the probability
of detection, which equals the reduction in the number of individuals engaging
in the activity, -dN(.)/dp, times the harm caused by each net of their gains,

e-E(.).[lO] The right-hand side is the marginal cost of raising the
probability, which has two elements--detection costs and litigation costs.

The terms in braces represent the effects on detection costs. The first term,
c1(.), is the direct cost of raising the probability of detection, holding

constant the number of individuals engaging in the activity. The second term
in braces represents the savings in detection costs due to a reduction in the

number of individuals who undertake the activity. The final term is the
effect on litigation costs associated with the change in the number of
violators who are caught.[ll]
It is easy to see that settlements and litigation costs affect the

optimal system of public enforcement. Since f* — y-b, the optimal fine falls
as the defendant's litigation costs rise.
The effects of settlements and litigation costs on the optimal
probability are less obvious because a number of terms in the first-order

condition, (5), are affected. Everything else equal, the possibility of a
settlement lowers the expected payment, E(.), of an individual who engages in
the harmful activity, assuming that the settlement amount will be less than

his expected payout at trial (including his litigation costs). Thus,
settlements will tend to increase the number of individuals engaging in the

harmful activity, N(.), and the number who are caught, n(.). The possibility

5

of settlement also will have the effect of decreasing average litigation

costs, r(a+b). Similarly, an increase in the litigation costs of the
defendant will increase the expected payment of someone who engages in the
harmful activity, which will reduce the number of individuals who choose to do

so. Also, an increase in the prosecutor's litigation costs will have a direct
effect on average litigation costs.
When all of these factors are taken into account, it is not clear whether
settlements and litigation costs will tend to increase or decrease the optimal
probability of detection, or by how much.

3. An Example
Although the preceding discussion shows that the optimal system of public
enforcement depends on the likelihood that a case will be settled and on the
costs of litigation if the case is tried, it does not suggest the magnitudes

involved. In this section, calculations of the optimal probability of
detection and optimal fine are performed using a special case of the more

general model. It will be shown that the fact that most cases settle and that
there are substantial litigation costs can significantly change the optimal

system of public enforcement. The importance of taking these considerations
into account will be measured by comparing the level of social welfare
achieved under optimal public enforcement to the level of social welfare that
would result if the probability and fine were set under the incorrect
assumption that all cases are litigated and that litigation costs are zero.
It will be assumed in this section that the probability density of gains,
h(.), is uniform between 0 and g', and that the cost of detection function,

c(p,N), is given by c1p + c2N, where c1 and c2 are positive constants.[12]
6

Given these assumptions, it is not difficult to show that the optimal
probability of detection is:

p

(6)

(l/g')[(dE(.)/dp)(e+c2)] -

[c1+r(a-i-b)]

(l/g')(dE(.)/dp)[(dE/dp) -

where
dE(.)/dp —

(7)

rqy

+

(l-r)s

2r(a+b)]

÷ rb(l-q).

Calculations were made using plausible values for the parameters given in

equations (6) and (7). Specifically, let:

— $20,000,

y (wealth)
g' (maximum gain)

$12,000,

— $ 5,000,

e (harm)

q (probability of liability at trial) — 0.5,
c1 (marginal cost of p)[l3]

—

c2 (marginal cost of N)

— $1,200,

r (probability of trial)

— 0.3.

$1,500,

While it is likely that fewer than 30 percent of all cases go to trial, this
choice of r reflects the fact that a large number of cases are settled just
prior to trial, after substantial expenditures by both prosecutor and
defendant.

In addition, let:

a (prosecutor's costs)

— $2,500,

b (defendant's costs)

— $2,500.

As noted in the introduction, there is evidence that the combined litigation

costs of the parties may exceed the victim's damages. The implicit assumption
here is that these values are equal.
For the reasons given in section 2, the optimal fine is set such that the
fine plus the defendant's cost of litigation equals his income.
7

Thus,

— y

f* (optimal fine)

b — $17,500.

-

The settlement amount is assumed to be midway between the prosecutor's
expected winnings at trial net of his litigation costs, and the defendant's

expected loss at trial including his litigation costs. Thus,

s (settlement amount)

—

qf

—

.17.

+

.5(b-a) — $8,750.

Finally, from (6),
p* (optimal probability)

Using the assumed values of the parameters and the optimal values of p and f,
the resulting level of social welfare is $571.

Now suppose that the probability and fine are set under the mistaken

assumptions that all cases go to trial and that litigation costs are zero. In
other words, suppose one were to choose p and f to maximize social welfare

assuming r — 1 and a — b — 0.

This would lead to a fine of $20,000 (although

in fact the injurer would not be able to pay this much) and a probability of

.31, nearly double the optimal probability of .17. In addition, actual social
welfare (using the true values of r, a, and b) would fall from $571 to $517,

more than a 9 percent loss. Thus, failing to take into account the
possibility of settlement and the presence of litigation costs can have a
substantial effect on the determination of the optimal system of public
enforcement and on the achievable level of social welfare.

8

Notes

[*] Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research; and
University of California, Berkeley, respectively. Each author's research was
supported by a separate grant from the Law and Social Sciences Program of the
National Science Foundation (grants SES-8510638 and SES-8409858,

respectively). Polinsky's research also was supported by the Hoover
Institution while he was a National Fellow there in 1985-86. Helpful comments
were provided by Michael Block and Steven Shavell.
[1]

See, for example, Becker (1968).

[2] Although some analyses of the court system do consider settlements
and litigation costs, these studies are not concerned with optimal public

enforcement. See, for example, Landes (1971).
[3] See, for example, Grossman and Katz (1983) and Posner (1970).
[4] For example (although perhaps an extreme one), a study of asbestos
litigation found that $1.71 is spent by the parties in litigation costs for

every $1.00 received by the plaintiff. See Kakalik

(1983).

[5] The paper by Fenn and Veljanovski (1985) complements the analysis

presented here. Their focus is on explaining why, given prosecution costs, a
regulatory authority would accept a violator's promise to voluntarily comply
with the authority's regulations in the future.

[6] The model in this section is a generalization of the model used in
Polinsky and Shavell (1984).

[7] In models which focus on other issues, both of these assumptions

have been relaxed. See, for example, Bebchuk (1984) and the references cited
therein.

[8] This cost includes both the cost to the prosecutor's office and the

9

court costs associated with a trial. The model does not distinguish between
these two institutions.

[9] This derivation uses the fact that h(E(.))[dE(.)/dp] — dH(E(.))/dp =

-dN(.)/dp,

where H(.) is the cumulative distribution of h(.).

[10] The individuals who are deterred by the increased probability of
detection are those who were previously indifferent between engaging in the
activity or not; their gains equal the expected payment, E(.).

[11] Note that, depending on the sign of the right-hand side of (5),
the expected payment, E(.), may be greater than, equal to, or less than the

harm caused, e. Thus, an optimal system of public enforcement may be
characterized by "overdeterrence," in the sense that some individuals who are

deterred from engaging in the activity would have received gains greater than
the harm they would have caused (if e <

E(.));

or there may be

"underdeterrence," in the sense that some individuals who engage in the

activity obtain gains less than the harm they cause. These points were
recognized by Friedman (1981), although his model of public enforcement did
not include settlements and litigation costs.

[12] A linear cost function allows for a simple closed-form solution for
the optimal p. Such a cost function can be justified on the grounds that it
represents a first-order approximation to a more realistic multiplicative cost

function. Reasonable parameter values were chosen on this basis; see note 13
below.

[13] The values for the constants c1 and c2 were determined by starting
with the multiplicative version of the cost function c — kpN.

To select a

reasonable value for k it was assumed that if all individuals were violators
(N —

1),

it would take one-half of the wealth of society (1/2 of $20,000) to

10

catch all of them (p —

1).

This implies that k $10,000. Thus, for p

and N — .15, c1 — kN — $1,500 and c2 — kp — $1,200.

11

.12

References
Bebchuk, Lucian A., "Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information,"
Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, No. 3 (Autumn 1984), PP. 404-415.
Becker, Gary S., "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach," Journal
Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. 2 (March/April 1968), pp. 169-217.
Fenn, Paul, and Cento C. Veljanovski, "A Positive Economic Theory of
Regulatory Enforcement," unpublished manuscript, 1985.

Friedman, David D., "Reflections on Optimal Punishment, or: Should the Rich
Economics, Vol. 3 (1981), pp.

Pay Higher Fines?," Research j
185-205.

Grossman, Gene M., and Michael L. Katz, "Plea Bargaining and Social Welfare,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 73, No. 4 (September 1983), pp. 749-757.
Kakalik, James S., Patricia A. Ebener, William L. F. Felstiner, and Michael G.
Shanley, Costs

Asbestos Litigation (Santa Monica: The Institute for

Civil Justice, Rand Corporation, R-3042-ICJ, 1983).
Landes, William M., "An Economic Analysis of the Courts," Journal

Law

Economics, Vol. 14, No. 1 (April 1971), Pp. 61-107.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, "The Optimal Use of Fines and
Imprisonment," Journal

Public Economics, Vol. 24 (1984), Pp. 89-99.

Posner, Richard A., "A Statistical Study of Antitrust Enforcement," Journal f

Economics, Vol. 13 (1970), pp. 365-419.

12

