                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GIVING COLLEGE CREDIT WHERE IT IS DUE:
         ADVANCED PLACEMENT EXAM SCORES AND COLLEGE OUTCOMES

                                           Jonathan Smith
                                           Michael Hurwitz
                                          Christopher Avery

                                        Working Paper 21147
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21147


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2015




This research reflects the views of the authors and not their corresponding institutions or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21147.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jonathan Smith, Michael Hurwitz, and Christopher Avery. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Giving College Credit Where it is Due: Advanced Placement Exam Scores and College Outcomes
Jonathan Smith, Michael Hurwitz, and Christopher Avery
NBER Working Paper No. 21147
May 2015
JEL No. I2,I23,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We implement a regression discontinuity design using the continuous raw Advanced Placement (AP)
exam scores, which are mapped into the observed 1-5 integer scores, for over 4.5 million students.
Earning higher AP integer scores positively impacts college completion and subsequent exam taking.
Specifically, attaining credit-granting integer scores increases the probability that a student will receive
a bachelor’s degree within four years by 1 to 2 percentage points per exam. We also find that receiving
a score of 3 over a 2 on junior year AP exams causes students to take between 0.06 and 0.14 more
AP exams senior year.


Jonathan Smith                                       Christopher Avery
College Board                                        Harvard Kennedy School of Government
1919 M Street NW                                     79 JFK Street
Suite 300                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
Washington, DC 20036                                 and NBER
jsmith@collegeboard.org                              christopher_avery@hks.harvard.edu

Michael Hurwitz
College Board
1919 M Street NW
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20036
mhurwitz@collegeboard.org
1. Introduction

            Stagnant completion rates and increasing time-to-degree (Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner,

   2010; 2012) in a time of high unemployment, budgetary crises, and increasing federal grant aid

   (College Board, 2013a) have put colleges under increased public scrutiny. Inadequate

   preparation for college is one factor behind the criticisms of college completion, but it is not the

   only factor. Finishing a bachelor’s degree on time generally requires a student to complete at

   least 120 credit hours within four years. To accomplish this, a student might take five courses per

   semester, spread over eight semesters. Timely completion requires students to fulfill the course-

   specific requirements of their chosen major, as well as any general education coursework

   necessary for the awarding of a bachelor’s degree. For many students, neatly cobbling together a

   postsecondary curriculum that satisfies both graduation and major requirements within 120 credit

   hours is challenging. So difficult is this task that in 2011, 33 U.S. governors endorsed a report

   authored by the Complete College America organization that identified excessive college course

   taking as one of the five leading causes of the nation’s college completion crisis. 1

            One potential way to ameliorate this problem is to give students the opportunity to earn

   college credit while still in high school, which is typically accomplished either through dual

   enrollment or Advanced Placement (AP) programs. 2 These widely accepted courses allow

   students to earn credit and placement towards college graduation and to bypass introductory

   courses while freeing up time to fulfill both major and general education requirements. 3 In

   theory, students who take advantage of these colleges’ AP credit and placement policies may

   1
     Upon receiving bachelor’s degrees, many students will have taken nearly 15 more credits than the minimum
   required for such a degree. Time is the Enemy (2011). College Completion America. Retrieved from
   http://www.completecollege.org/docs/Time_Is_the_Enemy_Summary.pdf.
   2
     Other solutions exist, including student facing solutions (e.g. better preparation and college match) and college
   facing solutions (e.g. better professors, smaller classes, fewer requirements, and financial aid).
   3
     As of 2012, nearly four-fifths of four-year public and private not-for-profit colleges had AP credit policies in place
   (IPEDS, 2012).
have an increased likelihood of completing college within a certain number of years after high

school graduation.

         While taking an AP exam is a strong signal of academic ability, it is not a guarantee of

post-secondary academic success. About 16 percent of AP exam-takers do not attend four-year

postsecondary institutions and less than half (41 percent) complete bachelor’s degrees within

four years of high school graduation (see discussion of Table 1 below in Section 3). Thus, it is

plausible to conduct empirical analyses to study the effect of success on an AP exam on such

outcomes as completion of a bachelor’s degree within four (or five or six) years of high school

graduation. We believe that this paper is the first to identify the causal effect of receiving

college credit while in high school on such outcomes.

         To evaluate the impact of early receipt of college credit, we exploit previously

unavailable data on the underlying AP exam continuous raw scores that map into the 1-5 integer

(scaled) scores, where a 5 is the highest possible score. 4 Availability of continuous data lend

themselves to a sharp regression discontinuity design whereby we compare nearly identical

students, as demonstrated with both density tests and covariate balancing tests, just above and

just below the thresholds of each scaled score as well just above and below the scores for which

students would receive credit at their chosen postsecondary institutions. The student just above

the threshold may receive the associated benefits resulting from earning a higher AP exam score,

which may include improved college admissions outcomes, advanced placement, credit,

completion, or even the psychological benefits of positive affirmation. We focus much of the

discussion of results on Biology, Calculus AB, English Language and Composition, English

Literature and Composition, U.S. Government and Politics, and U.S. History, the six largest


4
 According to the College Board, the 1-5 scores can be interpreted as follows in terms of college credit,
respectively: no recommendation, possibly qualified, qualified, well qualified, and extremely well qualified.
volume AP exams. These six exams encompass the four major high school curricular strands of

humanities, social sciences, natural sciences and mathematics.

         The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the history of the Advanced

Placement program and results of past research on the effects of the program.                        Section 3

describes our empirical hypotheses and the data we use to test them. Section 4 outlines the

framework for our empirical methodology. Section 5 presents empirical results. Section 6

concludes.



2. Background and Literature Review

       The AP program dates back to the 1950s and was born partially to remedy “conspicuous

waste through unneeded repetition in the subjects of English (composition and literature),

history, sciences and foreign languages” (Lacy, 2010, p.28). Originally concentrated in well-to-

do high schools, the AP program underwent rapid expansion during the last quarter of the 20th

century, and by the mid 1990’s nearly half of U.S secondary schools offered AP coursework

(Lacy, 2010). By the 2009-10 academic year, 71 percent of all U.S. public high schools had

students participating in the AP program, and these schools enrolled 91 percent of public high

school students (Theokas and Saaris, 2013). AP participation rates have been steadily rising as

well, from more than 660,000 in the 2004 high school graduation cohort to approximately

940,000 for the 2009 cohort. 5 These AP participants tend to be academically stronger than the

typical college-aspiring students, with composite SAT (Math+Critical Reading) scores of

approximately 1136 on the Math and Critical Reading sections, which corresponds to 71st

percentile among the population of students from the 2004 thru 2009 cohorts who took the SAT.



5 These numbers include both private and public school students as well as international students.
         The exact number of AP exams has varied over time, as some exams were retired due to

low participation rates and new exams were introduced as a result of high student demand. In

this research study, we consider 34 distinct subject exams, while focusing on the six most

popular (See Appendix 1 for details on exams).

    2.1. Scoring

          As previously discussed, AP exams are scored on an integer scale of 1-5, where a score

of 5 indicates that a student is “extremely well qualified” to receive college credit and a score of

3 suggests that the student is qualified to receive college credit. The minimum scaled score

required for college credit varies by college and by AP exam subject. Across the students who

take the six major exams, approximately 94 percent of the students attend a college that gives

credit for the exams and conditional on giving credit, approximately 58 percent of students

attend a college that require a 3, 38 percent require a 4, and 4 percent require a 5. 6

          Underlying this scaled score is a continuous raw score which is a composite of the

student’s performance on both the multiple choice and free response sections of the AP exams.

This raw score is never observable to the student or college, and for a typical AP exam might

range from 0 to about 150, though the range of raw scores within a scale score varies across

subjects and also across years for a given subject.

    2.2. Literature Review

        A series of previous studies demonstrate a strong positive correlation between AP

participation, AP exam scores and subsequent academic performance across a range of measures

including college attendance (Chajewski, Mattern, and Shaw, 2012) and success in subject

performance (Patterson and Ewing, 2013), overall performance (Shaw, Mattern, and Marini,


6
 More details on the distribution of policies in the data can be found in Appendix Table 1 and college-specific
policies are maintained at https://apscore.collegeboard.org/creditandplacement/search-credit-policies.
2012), and college completion (Morgan and Klaric, 2007; Dougherty, Mellor, and Jian, 2008;

Hargrove, Godin, and Dodd, 2008 ; Mattern, Marini and Shaw, 2013). 7 These studies show that

AP is a useful tool in identifying students who demonstrate potential for earning college

credit/placement. Though many of these studies convincingly demonstrate the predictive power

of AP exams, even after controlling for extensive sets of covariates, they do not estimate the

causal effects of taking an AP exam or achieving certain scores.

        There have been some promising efforts to address the lingering causal research

questions.    For example, Jackson (2010) shows that students who are given cash to take and

perform well on AP exams are more likely to have higher SAT scores and matriculate in college.

While Jackson convincingly addresses the effect of AP course participation in Texas, he is

unable to disentangle the effects of achieving relatively higher AP exam scores beyond

traditional methods of controlling for observables. Similarly, other papers use a selection on

observables design but they note that any unobservable that is correlated with AP exam score

may confound the estimates (e.g. Murphy and Dodd, 2009; Long, Conger, and Iatorala, 2012). 8

Our paper is the first study to isolate the causal impacts of achieving certain benchmark AP exam

scores on student outcomes for those who have taken the exams.



3. Data, Descriptive Statistics, and Empirical Hypotheses

        This paper uses student-level data from the 2004-09 graduating high school cohorts

collected from two main sources, College Board (CB) data on AP examinees and National

Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data. CB maintains a database of all students who take at least one

AP exam. This database contains not only the students’ AP exam scores on the 1-5 integer scale,

7
  There is a similar line of research on dual enrollment. For example, see Karp et al. (2007).
8
  There are currently some randomized AP evaluations underway, which will be very informative, but they are
limited in their scope of exams and populations (Conger, Long, and McGhee, 2014).
but their underlying continuous scores on most exams taken between 2004 and 2009. From these

two pieces of information, we identify the exact continuous scores that sharply form the

boundaries of the scaled scores. 9 In addition to student performance on each AP exam, the CB

data also contain a host of student demographic information, such as a student’s gender,

race/ethnicity, and parental income. 10

         CB data are merged with the NSC data. As of 2014, over 3,600 postsecondary institutions

participate in NSC, which collects postsecondary enrollment information on more than 98

percent of students enrolled in U.S. postsecondary institutions. Data from the NSC allow us to

track a student’s postsecondary trajectory including enrollment and degree completion through

2013. Thus, we are able to track the 2009 cohort of high school graduates through up to four

years of college enrollment and to track earlier cohorts of high school graduates for at least five

years after high school graduation. As a simple measure of four-year college quality, we append

to our data the average standardized test scores (ACT and SAT) of incoming students reported to

the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 11

         Finally, we merge data on AP credit-granting policies to the colleges at which students

enroll. These data come from the College Board administered Annual Survey of Colleges (ASC),

which is administered annually to nearly 4,000 colleges. In the 2004 and 2005 surveys, the ASC

collected information on the minimum AP exam scores on 34 exams for which colleges award



9
  Data on raw scores are available only for exams taken during the 2003-04 school year or later. Therefore some AP
test takers, particularly in the 2004 and 2005 cohorts, will not have raw scores that can be mapped to their scaled
scores. Any exam without an accompanying raw score is removed from our analyses,
10
   Parental education and income are collected on the SAT registration forms, and so some AP test takers who did
not participate in the SAT will have missing demographic information. Even among SAT participants, some
students fail to respond to these questions.
11
   To estimate average composite SAT scores, we add the 25th and 75th percentiles of the Math and Critical Reading
sections, as reported by IPEDS, and divide by 2. For colleges that only report ACT scores to IPEDS, we use an SAT
conversion table found at http://research.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/publications/2012/7/researchnote-2009-
40-act-sat-concordance-tables.pdf
credit. 12 Historically, college-level AP policies change very little from one year to the next. For

example, less than one-tenth of one percent of college-by-subject minimum scores differed

between the 2004 and 2005 surveys. Therefore, we match the 2005 college-level policies to

postsecondary institutions attended by the 2006-2009 high school graduation cohorts with the

data-informed assumption that any noise such matching introduces is likely to be minimal. 13

3.1 Summary Statistics

        We present summary statistics on all students appearing in our sample in Table 1, as well

as students participating in the six most-represented AP exams in our sample. The first set of

columns show that females constitute the majority of AP examinees and that slightly less than

two-thirds of sampled students identified as white. Panel B of Table 1 shows the distribution of

AP exam scores among the sampled students. On average, the sampled students took 2.64 AP

exams for which we had the underlying raw scores and received 0.48 (18 percent) scores of 1;

0.59 (22 percent) scores of 2; 0.67 (25 percent) scores of 3; 0.53 (20 percent) scores of 4; and

0.37 (15 percent) scores of 5. Most - 84 percent - of these students ultimately attend a four-year

postsecondary institution and 41 percent obtained bachelor’s degrees within four years of high

school graduation.

        Demographically, participants in the six most popular AP exams mirror the typical AP

examinee, an exception being Calculus AB where slightly more than half of participants are

male. Some of these APs exhibit sharp differences from each other in their scoring distributions.

For example, there is unusual variation in the scaled integer scores on the Calculus AP exam –

nearly half of students receive the lowest or highest scores of 1 and 5 (25 percent and 21 percent


12
   There exists no data on minimum scores for Chinese, Italian Language and Culture, and Japanese Language and
Culture.
13
   Among subjects for which survey respondents indicated minimum scores in both 2004 and 2005, there were
absolutely no reported changes in the credit-granting minimum scores.
of Calculus AB participants receive scores of 1 and 5 respectively) whereas only about one-sixth

of exam-takers receive these extreme scores on the English Literature exam (9 percent and 7

percent of English Literature participants). Academically, participants in these “major” subject

exams appear to be stronger than all AP exam-takers, with about 90 percent of participants

enrolling at a four-year college and 70 percent receiving bachelor’s degrees within six years of

high school completion.

3.2 Empirical Hypotheses

          We use the summary statistics from Table 1 to direct our choice of empirical hypotheses

for this paper. As we describe in more detail in Section 4, our analysis is based on a regression

discontinuity approach, comparing students with raw scores just above and below the threshold

for scores in the 1 through 5 range on a given AP exam. We wish to focus on comparisons of

students with similar raw scores on a given exam, but where those just above a particular

threshold qualify for college credit and those just below that threshold do not qualify for college

credit.

          Our first hypothesis is simply that students will be attracted to colleges that offer credit

for the particular scores that they achieve. Though students who take more than one exam may

face diluted incentives with regard to their score on a particular exam, this incentive would still

apply (to some degree) for each and every AP exam that they take.

      (H1) Students will be more likely to attend colleges that provide credit for the AP

      exam scores that they receive.

          This hypothesis is also important to the econometric approach of our subsequent

analyses. If students systematically vary their choice of colleges based on the combination of

their AP exam scores and credit policies of colleges, then we would have to regard the choice of
college as endogenous. In this scenario, we might conflate effects from college quality with the

effects of receiving credit.

       However, we also note that 11th grade AP exam-takers likely have much more ability to

adjust their college plans after learning their exam scores than do 12th grade AP exam-takers.

Most students who take an AP exam as high school seniors will have graduated from high

school, selected a four-year college and paid a deposit to that college by the time that they

receive their scores in the middle of the summer. At this time, it is too late to apply to additional

four-year colleges, for colleges to change admission decisions from the past spring, or for

students to enroll at a college after previously rejecting its offer of admission.

        Since Table 1 indicates that completion of a bachelor’s degree (especially within four

years of high school graduation) is quite uncertain for this population of students, it seems

appropriate to focus on degree completion as an outcome of interest. Each AP credit that counts

towards requirements for college graduation may enable a student to reduce course load and still

graduate on time in four years. Hypothesis (H2) concerns this direct effect:

      (H2) Achieving an AP exam score that counts for college credit promotes the

      completion of post-secondary degrees.


        Hypothesis (H2) is silent on the mechanism behind credit promoting completion. For

example, students may face a reduced course load or they may have the same course load, but a

different composition of courses.

        There are several additional channels by which an increase in AP exam score could

promote postsecondary educational attainment. Each of these channels corresponds to a distinct

empirical hypothesis, which we enumerate below.
      (H3) Achieving a relatively high AP exam score provides a psychological boost to

      students and thus promotes their subsequent academic performance.


       In recent years, it has become increasingly popular for students to take AP exams prior to

the senior year of high school. Success on an AP exam prior to the senior year can affect future

performance in several additional ways.

      (H4) Achieving a relatively high AP exam score prior to the senior year of high

      school may encourage students to continue taking advanced courses and AP exams

      in subsequent years in high school.

       One factor opposing hypothesis (H4) is that students typically select high school courses

in the late winter or early spring for the following school year. Once again, since this predates

the scoring of that year’s AP exams for junior exam-takers, it may not be feasible in all cases for

a student to change enrollment in AP courses for the next year after receiving AP exam scores

for the previous school year.

      (H5) Achieving certain AP exam scores prior to the senior year of high school may

      promote future enrollment at selective colleges.


      (H5a) Achieving an AP exam score prior to the senior year of high school may

      encourage students to adopt more ambitious strategies in the college application

      process, thereby making them more likely to apply to more selective colleges than

      they would have otherwise.


      (H5b) Achieving an AP exam score prior to the senior year of high school may

      improve the chances of admission to a particular selective college, conditional on

      applying to that college.
         Several of these hypotheses, and in particular (H5a), may be especially pertinent for low-

income students. Hoxby and Avery (2013) find that high achieving low-income high school

students are quite unlikely to apply to selective colleges. Further, Pallais (2013) concludes that

the application choices of low-income students are highly sensitive to small changes in the cost

of sending ACT scores to colleges. So it is natural to hypothesize that the college application

choices of talented low-income students may also be strongly influenced by a marginal change in

scaled score on a particular AP exam.

         Hypotheses (H1) to (H5), which consider college choice, clearly overlap to some degree.

Fortunately, because we have information on (1) AP credit policies at each college; (2) AP exam

participation and scores for each student all through high school; (3) the set of colleges where

each student sends SAT scores; (4) college enrollment for each student by semester and year, we

can conduct a series of empirical tests that disentangle this overlap and enable us to evaluate

each hypothesis separately.


4. Empirical Methodology

         We consider three distinct sets of outcomes in our empirical analysis as listed below:

          •   College Completion Outcomes: 14

                   o Attains a Bachelor’s Degree in Four Years

                   o Attains a Bachelor’s Degree in Six Years

          •   College Application and Enrollment Outcomes:

                   o Number of SAT Score Sends (proxy for application)

                   o Attends a Four-Year College First (on-time 15)


14
   We include students who earn bachelor’s degrees through August four and six years beyond high school
graduation.
15
   In this paper, we refer to on-time as beginning at a four-year college within 180 days of high school graduation.
                o Mean SAT of First College Attended (four-year colleges only)

        •   Subsequent AP Exam Taking and Performance for Junior Year AP exam-takers:

                o Total AP Exams Taken Senior Year

                o Total Scores of 3 or Higher Senior Year

                o Total Scores of 4 or Higher Senior Year

       While we believe that it is mechanically (nearly) impossible for the result of an AP exam

taken by a high school senior to influence that student’s choice of college applications and

enrollment choices for the following fall, we still perform analyses of these outcome variables to

verify that conjecture. However, since students do not take AP exams after graduating from high

school, our analysis for the third set of outcome variables – AP exam taking in subsequent

academic years – is limited to students who complete an AP exam in one year and then return to

high school the following year. Technically, we could perform analyses for AP exams results in

all grades prior to the senior year of high school, but since it is relatively rare for 9th and 10th

graders to take an AP exam, we limit our attention to the results of AP exams for high school

junior and seniors.


4.1. Unidimensional Framework

       For our first set of analyses, we examine the effect of a marginal change in score on a

single AP exam on future outcomes. Each student i on AP exam j receives a continuous score

Cij. This continuous score maps into the scaled score, Tij as follows:

                                          1 if C ij < t 2j
                                     
                                     2   if t 2j ≤ C ij < t 3j
                                     
                               Tij = 3   if t 3j ≤ C ij < t 4j
                                     4   if t 4j ≤ C ij < t 5j
                                     
                                        5 if t 5j ≤ C ij
where t nj are the thresholds for each scaled score n on exam j. For each value of n ∈ {2,3,4,5},

we create two variables. The first is the forcing variable:

                                   Dist ijn = C ij − t nj

which captures how far student i’s score on exam j is from threshold n. A Dist ijn ≥ 0 implies that

the student has a scaled scores of at least an n. This leads to the second variable for each value

of n, the dichotomous threshold variable:

                                         1 if Dist ijn ≥ 0
                          Boundary ijn = 
                                         0 if Dist ijn < 0

        After generating these variables, our basic empirical framework is shown by the standard

regression discontinuity equation presented in equation (1), where Xij is a vector of fixed effects

for the student’s year of high school graduation and the high school year in which they

participated in AP exam j


     Outcomeijn = a 0n + a 1n Boundaryijn + a 2n Dist ijn + a 3n Boundaryijn × Dist ijn + X ij + e ijn
                                                                                                         (1)

We are primarily interested in the estimate of α 1n , which is the coefficient on Boundary ijn that

represents the discontinuous effect of being above the AP scaled n threshold on the outcome of

interest. In practice, we separately estimate the effects of each scaled threshold. We also define

the forcing variable to represent the distance between the student’s raw AP exam score in subject

j and the score above which the student would have been eligible to receive credit at her chosen

college.

        The dependent variable in equation (1) is an indicator variable for the following

outcomes for each threshold n. In order to capture trends in the forcing variable that exist on
either side of the boundary, we fit a local linear regression with a triangular kernel. The

triangular kernel puts more weight on the observations closest to the threshold. In all regressions,

we estimate the optimal bandwidth using the method suggested by Imbens and Kalyanaram (IK)

(2012). 16

        As with any regression discontinuity design, students just below an AP scaled threshold

are expected to have identical college and degree aspirations compared to students at or just

above the AP scaled threshold. Researchers who use test cut scores as forcing variables in

regression discontinuity designs often worry about score manipulation as a potential source of

bias (Schochet et al., 2010). Score manipulation might occur if students know exactly how many

questions they need to answer correctly in order to receive a certain score. Since students are

neither informed of how the exams are scored nor are they provided with their own raw scores,

manipulation would be impossible in this context. Nevertheless, we address and discount this

threat by showing that the density of scores is continuous in the vicinity of the thresholds through

density tests in the spirit of McCrary (2008). Second, we run covariate balancing tests with

similar specifications to equation (1), but using a covariate as the outcome. This allows us to

confirm that students just below the thresholds are observationally similar to students just above

the thresholds.

 4.2.   Multidimensional Framework

        The parameter estimate, α 1n ,, in equation (1) allows us to estimate the discontinuous

jump in the outcome measure from achieving one additional credit-granting AP exam score. For

the typical AP exam-taker, this parameter estimate likely understates the true impact of the AP

program. This is because more than 62 percent of AP exam-takers from the 2004 thru 2009 high

16
  We test the sensitivity to bandwidth and kernel choices and find no measurable differences. These robustness
tests are presented in the appendix.
school graduation cohorts took more than one examination and 36 percent received a 3 or higher

on more than one examination. The unidimensional RD analytic framework fails to reveal the

impact of receiving two or more credit-granting AP exam scores on this paper’s outcomes, the

effects of which may or may not be additive. To explore the impacts of receiving multiple AP

credit-granting scores, we first adopt the analytic framework established by Papay, Murnane, and

Willett (2011) in which equation (1) is expanded to include multiple forcing variables,

boundaries and interactions as in the two-dimensional example shown by EQ(2). The sum of

parameters α1n , α 4n and α 8n in EQ(2) below represent the impact of receiving two additional credit-

granting scores on tests J and K.

        Outcomeijn = a 0n + a 1n Boundary iJn + a 2n Dist iJn + a 3n Boundary iJn × Dist iJn +
        + a 4n Boundary iKn + a 5n Dist iKn + a 6n Boundary iKn × Dist iKn + a 7n Dist iJn × Dist iKn +
        a 8n BoundaryiJn × BoundaryiKn + a 9n BoundaryiJn × Dist iKn + a 10n BoundaryiKn × Dist iJn +
                                                                                                          (2)
        a 11n BoundaryiKn × Dist iJn × Dist iKn + a 12n BoundaryiJn × Dist iJn × Dist iKn +
        a 13n BoundaryiJn × BoundaryiKn × Dist iJn + a 14n BoundaryiJn × BoundaryiKn × Dist iKn +
        a 15n BoundaryiJn × BoundaryiKn × Dist iJn × Dist iKn + X ij + e ijn

        Using pairings of the six most commonly taken AP exams in our data set, we fit equation

(2) to examine the impact of receiving two additional credit-granting scores on four, five and six

year bachelor’s degree completion rates.


 4.3. Marginal Analyses

        We conclude our analyses by estimating the impacts of receiving an additional credit-

granting AP exam score on bachelor’s degree completion. The previously described analytic

strategies do not account for the fact that many sampled students will have taken and received

credit-granting scores on other AP exams. Equation 1 allows us to estimate the impact of

receiving a credit-granting score on AP Biology (for example), not the impact of only receiving a
credit-granting score in Biology and no other exams. Similarly, Equation 2 allows us to estimate

the impact of receiving an additional two credit-granting scores, not the impact of receiving only

two credit-granting scores.

       It is possible that the first AP credit-granting score confers students with the largest

advantages in terms of bachelor’s degree completion and each additional credit-granting score

yields smaller marginal impacts. To test this, we modify equation (1) so that the forcing variable

indicates how close the student was to receiving X+1 credit-granting AP exam scores over X

credit-granting AP exam scores. For each marginal analysis, we restrict the sample only to those

students who received either X or X+1 credit-granting AP exam scores. We then re-define the

forcing variable as the minimum distance to 0 among all negative subject-specific distances to

the credit-granting threshold for students with X credit-granting AP exam scores and the

minimum distance to 0 among all positive subject-specific distances to the credit-granting

threshold for students with X+1 credit-granting AP exam scores. We continue to control for

cohort and subject-by-high school grade fixed effects.



5. Results

5.1. Density and Covariate Balancing Tests

       To validate our regression discontinuity approach, we first verify that there are no

discontinuities in the density of student raw scores across each of the four scaled boundaries for

the AP subject exams that we study. In these density tests, we collapse observations into one raw

score point bins, by cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. Counts are then

regressed on distance from threshold, an indicator variable for whether the raw score is above the
specified threshold, an interaction of these two terms, and dummy variables for high school

graduation cohort and examination year.

       In most RD settings, this type of density test might be performed to detect the presence of

score manipulation. However, since the AP scoring rubric is unpublicized, no students would

realistically be able to game the system in this manner.        An alternative source of density

discontinuity might originate from the placement of score boundaries, by the scorers, at points

along the raw score distribution that represent particularly sharp breaks in student ability. The

parameter estimates in Table 2 confirm that density is smooth across each of the four scaled

thresholds. None are statistically at the 0.05 level.

                               <<Insert Table 2>>

       To test hypothesis (H1), about whether students choose colleges with AP credit policies

that favor them (given the AP exam scores they have achieved), we look for a discontinuity in

enrollment choices at each threshold in AP exam raw score. Figure 1 presents a histogram of the

differences between students’ raw AP exam scores and the colleges’ qualifying AP exam scores,

across all exams taken by on-time four-year college-going students for all AP exams (top panel)

and for exams taken during a student’s junior year (bottom panel), before which a college

decision has been formalized. Visually, no discontinuities exist, suggesting that students are not

sorting into colleges based on those colleges’ credit/placement policies.

       Table 3 presents the results of tests for discontinuities in density of observations and

covariate imbalance at the college-policy thresholds for the six most popular AP exams. There

exists no clear evidence of discontinuity in the density of observations (Column 1) and the set of

covariates presented in this paper are generally well balanced across the thresholds (remaining

columns). This provides evidence against hypothesis (H1). That is, students are not choosing
their colleges based on the favorability of their credit-granting policies in relation to their AP

exam scores.

                               <<Insert Figure 1, Table 3>>

5.2 AP Exam Scores and Time to Bachelor’s Degree

       As a precursor to our analysis of the individual hypotheses (H2) to (H5), we assess the

overall effect of an increase in AP exam score, in particular from just below to just above the

threshold for college credit. This formulation combines all of the different channels by which an

increase in AP exam scores influences the time to completing a BA degree.

       Figure 2 presents the parameter estimates and t-statistics for regression discontinuity tests

for each of the 34 different AP exams for all students (high school juniors and seniors) and

completion of a BA degree within four, five and six years of high school graduation as

dependent variables. For each student, we compute the distance in raw score to the threshold

required for credit at the college where this student first enrolled after high school graduation. In

most cases, we use the distance to the 2/3 scaled score cutoff as the distance to the threshold, but

since the credit policies for each exam vary to some degree across colleges, we use different

scaled score cutoffs for some students. Here, we rely on the results of our earlier analysis of

(H1) to justify the use of this “distance to credit threshold” value as an independent variable in a

regression discontinuity specification, since that analysis indicates that students do not appear to

change colleges in response to a score just above or below a score threshold (i.e. near a value of

0 for the “Distance to Threshold” measure).

       The top left panel of Figure 2 presents t-statistics and the top right panel of Figure 2

presents coefficient estimates for exams with completion of BA degree within four years of high

school graduation as the dependent variable.             The effect of meeting the college’s
credit/placement guidelines is estimated to be positive in 26 of 34 cases, typically with a

magnitude of an increase between one-half and one percentage point in probability of graduation

in four years. Since the sample sizes for most exams are quite large, we find that more than half

(14 of 26) of the positive coefficients, but none of the negative coefficients on achieving the

credit threshold are significant at the 0.05 level. When we restrict analysis to the 19 subjects

with more than 100,000 observations, we find that an even larger proportion of exams - 12 out of

19 – yield positive and statistically significant coefficient estimates.

           The middle and bottom panels of Figure 2 show the results with BA degree completion

within five and six years, respectively, as the dependent variable.        These results provide

suggestive evidence that both the magnitudes and statistical significance of the parameter

estimates fade over time. That is, meeting the threshold for college credit on an AP exam

appears to reduce the expected time to completion of a BA degree, but also does not appear to

increase the long-run probability of completing a BA degree. This may reflect the difference in

baseline four-year and six-year graduation rates. Among students with AP exam scores just

below credit-granting thresholds, approximately 60 percent complete BA degrees within four

years of high school graduation, whereas more than 80 percent complete BA degrees within six

years of high school graduation. Since such a large percentage of these students complete BA

degrees within six years of high school graduation, the benefit of an additional AP exam credit

may have little influence on the long-run outcomes of those who would not otherwise complete a

BA degree within six years.

           Tables 4 and 5 present the formal estimates for four- and six-year bachelor’s degree

completion rates corresponding to the most common exams in Figure 2. 17 As shown in the right

most column of Table 4, the effect of exceeding the credit threshold on four-year graduation is
17
     Five-year graduation rates are presented in Appendix Table 3.
statistically significant at the .05 level for five of these six AP exams. By contrast, as shown in

the right most column of Table 5, the effect of exceeding the credit threshold on six-year

graduation is only statistically significant at the .05 level for two of these six exams. Further, on

an exam-by-exam basis, the magnitudes of the coefficient estimates are smaller for six-year

graduation than for four-year graduation.

        Columns 1 and 4 of Tables 4 and 5 repeat these analyses for all students with raw scores

near the cutoff for scaled scores of 2 versus 3 and separately near the cutoff for scaled scores of 3

versus 4. 18 These coefficient estimates, especially those in Column 1 (for the 2/3 scaled score

cutoff) are broadly similar to the estimates for the “Distance to Cutoff” specification in Column

7 of Tables 4 and 5, suggesting that receiving higher AP exam scores improves time-to-degree.

                                                     <<Insert Tables 4,5>>

        To distinguish hypotheses (H2) and (H3), which consider the direct effect of credit

receipt versus the psychological boost of a higher AP exam score, we compute separate analyses

at each scaled score threshold for (A) students attending colleges that use this threshold as the

minimum for college credit and (B) students attending colleges that do not use this threshold as

the minimum for college credit. As shown in Columns 2-3 and 5-6 of Table 4, we estimate that

receiving an AP exam score of a 3 over a 2 results in a statistically significant increase in the

probability of four-year bachelor’s degree completion of 1 to 2 percentage points, but only when

that score of 3 is high enough for the student to earn credit. Similarly, we find that achieving a

score of 4 over a 3 enhances the student’s probability of completing a bachelor’s degree in four

years only when 4 is the minimum credit-granting score. 19


18
  Only students who enroll in four-year colleges as first-time on-time students are included in these analyses.
19
  The obvious exception to this pattern is AP Biology, for which exceeding a certain AP threshold contributes to an
improved bachelor’s degree completion probability only when the threshold does not translate into a difference in
whether the student is eligible for college credit. It is not possible to explain this bewildering finding with the
         To refine this assessment, we restrict the sample to high school seniors taking AP exams

and repeat these same specifications for four of the six popular exams studied in Table 4,

excluding English Composition and U.S. History, which are relatively rarely taken by high

school seniors. We note that high school seniors have already selected a college by the time that

they receive their scores, so should not be subject to the effects described in hypotheses (H1),

(H4) and (H5), which consider college choice.

         Table 6 shows that we find positive and statistically significant effects (at the .10 level)

for three of the four subjects at the 2/3 scaled score cutoff and also at the 3/4 scaled score cutoff

for students attending colleges that use these separate cutoffs at the thresholds for college credit.

By contrast, we only find one statistically significant coefficient among the eight exams (four

exams at the 2/3 scaled score cutoff and four more exams at the 3/4 scaled score cutoff) for gains

in exam scores that do not correspond to a course credit threshold at the colleges where the

students enrolled. Taken together, these results weigh in favor of the direct effect of college

credit receipt in hypothesis (H2) over the psychological boosts associated with relatively higher

AP exam score in hypothesis (H3).

                                                      <<Insert Table 6>>

 5.3 Impacts on Subsequent AP Exam Taking for High School Juniors

         To test whether early success on AP exams encourages more advanced course work and

success, hypothesis (H4), we perform regression discontinuity tests for junior year exam-takers

using dependent variables based on senior year AP exam taking and scores. Since most AP

exam-takers will not have selected a college in their junior year, we use the same threshold –

either the 2/3 or 3/4 scaled score cutoff – regardless of the credit policies at the first college


existing data. However, in 2012, the College Board substantially re-designed the AP Biology exam, so it is possible
that the results presented in this paper will not be applicable to the more recent cohorts of AP Biology test takers.
where each student enrolled after high school graduation. Figure 3 graphs the average number of

senior year AP exams taken and the average number of scores of 3 or higher in senior year

exams by distance from the 2/3 threshold on each junior year exam. 20 We find discontinuities on

the order of about 0.10 senior year exams taken and 0.05 exams passed are present for all

subjects except for Calculus AB. But students who take the Calculus AB exam as juniors are

probably unusually accelerated, even within the population of those taking at least one AP exam

as a high school junior, and may have received sufficient academic affirmation in prior courses

that an additional signal of academic aptitude (in the form of an AP exam score) has little effect

on them.

           Table 7 presents numerical estimates of the marginal effect of an increase scaled junior

year AP exam score on each of the six most popular AP exams on senior year AP exam taking

and performance. Consistent with the results of Figure 3, we find that an increase in scaled score

from 2 to 3 increases the number of AP exams taken in the senior year; these predicted increases

are statistically significant at the 5% level for five of the six exams and at the 10% level for the

remaining exam, Calculus AB.                Across the other boundaries, there exist some positive,

statistically significant increases in senior year AP exam taking. These provide suggestive

evidence that even receiving a signal that a student is “possibly qualified” (AP exam score=2)

rather than “no recommendation” (AP exam score=1) induces an increase in senior year AP

exam taking.

                                             <<Figure 3, Insert Table 7>>

           These results provide support for hypothesis (H4).          Yet, a back of the envelope

calculation suggests that while success on an AP exam as a high school junior is predicted to

induce additional AP exam participation as a high school senior, this additional exam taking as a
20
     We cannot observe AP course taking, only exam taking.
senior is likely to have only a second-order effect on post-secondary success. For example,

Table 7 suggests that an increase in scaled score from 2 to 3 increases the number of scores of 3

or higher on senior year exams by at most 0.09. But since the estimates from Tables 4 and 6

suggest that each additional score of 3 or higher as a high school senior increases the probability

of on-time completion of a BA degree by about 1 to 2 percentage points, an increase of 0.09 AP

credit-granting scores would translate into an extremely small effect on time to completion of a

BA degree.

5.4 Score-Sending and College Choice

       To test hypotheses (H5a) and (H5b), which consider college application and admission,

we first assess the effects of achieving certain AP exam scores on the student’s college search

process and whether or not the student enrolls at a four-year college on-time. We rely on the

number of SAT Score Sends as a proxy for number of applications. A discontinuity in this metric

would strongly suggest that achieving certain AP exam scores alters the number of college

applications submitted. Since high school seniors send SAT scores to colleges before they take

AP exams, estimates for exams taken senior year serve as placebo tests for junior year estimates.

       The first six columns of Table 8 show that achieving a score of 3 over 2 or a score of 4

over 3 on AP exams taken during a student’s junior year of high school tend not to impact SAT

score sending. Among the 12 parameter estimates presented for junior year SAT test takers, only

one (English Language and Composition at the 2/3 boundary) is statistically significant. The

magnitude of this parameter estimate indicates that receiving a score of 3 on AP English

Language and Composition causes the student to send 0.10 (2.5 percent) more scores to colleges.

As expected, almost all (11 out of 12) placebo tests using SAT score sends of high school senior

AP exam-takers are statistically indistinguishable from zero. In Appendix Table 8, we show little
heterogeneity along the lines of parental income in shifting college application behavior as a

result of achieving scores of 3 or 4.

       In the last six columns of Table 8, we present regression discontinuity parameter estimate

of the average SAT scores of colleges selected by first-time on-time four-year college enrollees.

Restricting analyses to AP exam scores on the six most popular AP exams for high school

juniors, we find only one statistically significant (positive) effect at the 2/3 scaled score cutoff

and one statistically significant (positive) effect at the 3/4 scaled score cutoff. Similarly, in

unreported analysis, we find essentially no effect of AP exam scores on enrollment in four-year

colleges. This is most likely because the baseline four-year college-going rates among students

participating in AP exams is already quite high.

       Overall, these results do not support hypotheses (H5a) or (H5b) in that there are no

measurable changes in students’ Score Sends or attending college after achieving a relatively

high AP exam score.

                                        <<Insert Table 8>>

5.5 Multidimensional RD Impacts

       In Figure 4, we show the distribution of point estimates associated with achieving credit-

granting scores on the 15 pairings of the six commonly taken AP exams. These pairings include

all possible two-exam combinations of the six AP exams in Tables 4 and 5. The pattern is clear.

When the outcome of interest is bachelor’s degree completion in four years (Panels A and B), the

parameter estimates are mostly positive. In fact, at a bandwidth of 20, only one of the 15

multidimensional parameter estimates in Panel B is negative, and the magnitude of this one

parameter estimate is only -0.4 pp. Expanding the time to bachelor’s degree completion from
four years to six years results in a more equally distributed number of positive and negative

parameter estimates (Panels E and F).

       On average, the magnitudes of the four-year bachelor’s completion parameter estimates

in Panels A and B are about twice as large as the unidimensional point estimates presented in

Table 4. When observations are restricted only to those within 10 raw points of the credit-

granting boundary, the average impact of receiving an additional two credit-granting scores

across all 15 pairings is 3.2 percentage points. When the bandwidth is expanded to +/- 20 raw

points, the average impact on four-year bachelor’s completion is 2.7 percentage points.

                              <<Insert Figure 4>>

      Despite the fact that, in the unidimensional RD framework, we were unable to detect a

boost in four-year bachelor’s degree completion from receiving a credit-granting score in AP

Biology, our analysis in the multidimensional RD framework suggests that when paired with

other AP examinations, success on AP Biology substantially increases four-year bachelor’s

completion rates. In fact, some of the largest estimates shown in the histogram Figure 4 (panels

A and B) are for AP Biology pairings. When the bandwidth is +/-10 raw points, receiving/ a

credit-granting score on AP Biology and AP US Government, AP Biology and AP English

Language and Composition and AP Biology and AP US History increases the probability of

receiving a bachelor’s degree in four years by 9.4 pp, 8.0 pp and 5.0 pp respectively. The

corresponding percentages when the bandwidth is expanded to +/- 20 raw points are 2.5 pp, 5.1

pp and 4.0 pp. Also notable is the pairing of Calculus AB and English Language and

Composition, credit eligibility on both of which leads to the largest point estimates on four-year

bachelor’s degree completion for both bandwidths among all 15 pairings (10.1 pp at a bandwidth

of +/- 10 raw points and 5.4 pp at a bandwidth of +/-20 raw points).
5.6 Marginal Impacts

      In this section of results, we address whether the impact of receiving an additional credit-

granting AP exam score on bachelor’s degree completion and time to completion depends on the

number of credit-granting scores that the student had already amassed. These analyses differ

from all previous analyses in that we do not discern between the 34 AP subjects for which we

have college-specific AP credit-granting score minima. Table 9 shows the impact of bachelor’s

degree completion probability driven by each incremental increase in the number of credit-

granting AP exam scores earned. Students who have met the credit-granting threshold on just

one AP exam are 1.2 percentage points more likely to have earned a bachelor’s degree within

four years than students who just missed earning a credit-granting AP exam score. Transitioning

from one credit-granting AP exam score to two results in an additional 0.8 percentage point

boost in four-year bachelor’s degree completion. Progression from four to five credit-granting

AP exam scores yields increases in four-year and six-year bachelor’s degree completion

probabilities of 1.2 and 0.9 percentage points, respectively.


                                      <<Insert Table 9>>


       Parameter estimates in Table 9 can be used to draw inferences about the cumulative

impacts of achieving credit-granting scores on AP exams. For example, the parameter estimates

in Column 1 suggest that students who earn credit-granting scores on two AP exams could

experience a 2.0 percentage point bump in four-year bachelor’s degree completion probability

attributable to those credit-granting scores. This 2.0 percentage point bump is calculated as the

sum of the first two parameter estimates (1.2 and 0.8 percentage points) in Column 1 and is

roughly equal to the multidimensional estimates on the passing of two AP exams presented in

Section 5.5. The consistently positive, though imprecisely estimated, parameter estimates in
Column 1 reveal that the marginal benefits of earning additional credit-granting AP exam scores

continues to increase four-year bachelor’s degree completion rates beyond the first two passing

scores. Addition of the first five parameter estimates in Column 1 suggests that one college

semester’s worth of AP credits may increase four-year bachelor’s degree completion rates by

nearly 4 percentage points.


5.7 Heterogeneous Effects

       We hypothesized that the effects of AP exam scores on college choices and college

completion might be unusually pronounced for students from low-income families. To test this

hypothesis, we repeat the analysis from Tables 4 and 5 for subgroups of students based on self-

reported family income. The results, as shown in Table 10, are consistent with the earlier

findings, which suggest that AP credit-granting policies have an effect on four-year bachelor’s

degree completion rates, but much less, if any effect, upon six-year bachelor degree completion

rates. However, we see no obvious patterns across family income in RD estimates for four-year

and six-year completion of bachelor’s degrees. Since our measure of family income is based on

student self-report, which is likely to be fairly noisy, we do not regard the coefficients in Table

10 as precise estimates of heterogeneous effects as a function of family income. Nevertheless, if

the effects of AP credit policies are concentrated in students from families with relatively low

incomes, we would still expect to see conspicuous patterns by income in Table 10. Since this is

not the case, we tentatively rule out the hypothesis that AP credit is unusually important for

students from low-income families.

                               <<Insert Table 10>>

       We also test for heterogeneous effects by race and parental income and also find no

obvious differences. Results are reported in Appendix 7.
6. Discussion and Conclusion

       In this study, we find evidence that attaining a relatively high AP exam score yields a

significant increase in the probability of completing a bachelor’s degree within four years of high

school graduation. For high school seniors, we attribute most of this effect to the direct effect of

an AP credit towards college graduation requirements (empirical hypothesis (H2)), since we find

little to no effect on bachelor's degree completion from an increase in AP exam scores for high

school seniors when those increases in scores are not at the credit/no-credit boundary at the

college attended by that student. Thus we rule out empirical hypothesis (H3), which suggests

that a marginal increase in AP exam score improves post-secondary outcomes by providing a

psychological boost to students.

       We also find evidence that earning scores of 3 or higher on AP exams for high school

juniors induces increased participation and success on AP exams (empirical hypothesis (H4)) in

the senior year of high school. However, this increase is still of relatively small magnitude – e.g.

an improvement in AP exam score from 2 to 3 or 3 to 4 predicts an increase of approximately 0.1

additional AP exams taken as a high school senior – and is only predicted to produce second-

order effects on time to bachelor’s degree completion. While students with higher AP exam

scores tend to enroll in more selective four-year colleges, we find little causal evidence that the

AP exam scores themselves radically shift whether or not a student enrolls at a four-year college

or the type of college chosen, as measured by average college-level SAT scores (empirical

hypothesis (H1) and (H5)). In particular, it does not appear that an increase in AP exam score

for a high school junior alters the colleges to which she sends SAT scores. Given this pattern of

results, we also attribute the significant increase in the probability of completing a bachelor’s

degree within four years of high school graduation that we observe for high school juniors to the
direct effect of an AP credit towards college graduation requirements (empirical hypothesis

(H2)).

         One unique result that we did not previously highlight is that our estimates on the effect

of credit on four-year graduation rates are similar on the 2/3 boundary and the 3/4 boundary.

Typically in a regression discontinuity design, researchers have one discontinuity to exploit and

the estimated treatment effect is localized. In this analysis, there is evidence that the treatment

effect is constant, at least on the 3 to 4 range.

         We believe that these findings have positive implications for colleges and students. From

the perspective of postsecondary institutions, awarding AP credit and/or placement may serve as

a useful tool for increasing the percentage of students who complete bachelor’s degrees in four

years. By awarding college credit and advanced placement to successful AP examinees,

postsecondary institutions can free students from unnecessary curricular repetition while

simultaneously responding to the issues of overcrowding of introductory courses in the nation’s

larger university systems (Moltz, 2009; Murphy, 2013). 21

         For students, AP exams can reduce the total costs associated with a postsecondary

education. During the 2013-2014 academic year, the typical student attending a four-year public

college faced tuition and fees of $8,893 (Baum and Ma, 2013). Assuming that a typical student

completes 30 credits per year, savings from earning credit on one AP exam has the potential to

save that student an estimated $889 in costs for colleges that charge tuition per credit. 22 Further,

our finding that each AP course credit increases the probability of completing a bachelor’s

degree on-time in four years from high school graduation translates into additional expected


21
  Evans (2013) explores this question using a selection on observables identification strategy.
22
  We assume that the student is awarded 3 credits for a passing score and pricing is linear with respect to credits.
Depending on the AP exam and the institution, the student might actually receive more than 3 credits for a passing
score, meaning that the $889 figure probably represents an underestimate.
financial benefits due to (1) reduced tuition costs at colleges that charge by semester rather than

by credit and (2) increased wages and career benefits due to potential earlier entry into the labor

market.

       A final and important note is that the estimates in this paper represent a lower-bound on

the total effects of the AP program. Some students with the potential to benefit from sharing AP

exam results with their chosen colleges may have instead withheld these scores or colleges may

have additional restrictions on the credit policies (e.g. maximum number of AP credits). This

behavior would understate our estimated effects on bachelor’s degree completion. Similarly, we

are unable to offer any commentary on the cumulative effects of taking an AP course and earning

credit on the associated AP exam. Because our estimation strategy relies on the comparison of

two sets of students- those who barely achieved a credit-granting score and those who barely

missed a credit-granting score-, we are unable to determine how the content of the AP course

influences bachelor’s degree completion, which is necessary to fully determine the costs and

benefits of the AP program.




References

Baum, S. and J. Ma (2013). “Trends in College Pricing,” The College Board.

Bound, J., M. Lovenheim and S. Turner (2010). “Why Have College Completion Rates
Declined? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate Resources,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2(3): 129–157.

Bound, J., M. Lovenheim and S. Turner (2012). "Increasing Time to Baccalaureate Degree in the
United States," Education Finance and Policy. 7(4): 375-424.

Chajewski, M., Mattern, K., and Shaw, E. J. (2011). “AP participation and college enrollment”
Education Measurement: Issues and Practice, 30, 16–27.

College Board (2013a). “Trends in Student Aid 2013,” Trends in Higher Education Series.
College Board (2013b). “Program Summary Report,” available online:
http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/pdf/research/2013/Program-Summary-Report-
2013.pdf

Conger, D., M. Long, and R. McGhee (2014). “Evaluation of the Sustainability and
Effectiveness of Inquiry-Based Advanced Placement Science Courses: Evidence from an In-
Depth Formative Evaluation & Randomized Controlled Study." IES Grant.

Dougherty, C., Mellor, L., and Jian, S. (2008). “The Relationship between Advanced Placement
and College Graduation,” Education, 501(February 2006), 1–35.

Evans B. (2013). “How do College Students use Advanced Placement Credit?” Working paper.

Hargrove, L., Godin, D., and Dodd, B. (2008). “College Outcomes Comparisons by AP and
Non-AP High School Experiences.” Higher Education. (Research Rep. No. 2008-3). New York,
NY: The College Board.

Hoxby, C. and C. Avery, (2013). The Missing “One-Offs”: The Hidden Supply of High-
Achieving, Low-Income Students,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2013.

Imbens, G.W and K. Kalyanaram (2012). “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression
Discontinuity Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies. 142 (2): 615-635.

Jackson, K. (2010). “A Little Now for A lot Later: An Evaluation of a Texas Advanced
Placement Incentive Program.” Journal of Human Resources. 45(3):591-639.

Johnson, N., Reidy, L., Droll, M. and LeMon, R.E. (2012). “Program Requirements for
Associate’s and Bachelor’s Degrees: A National Survey.” Retrieved from
http://completecollege.org/docs/Program%20Requirements%20-
%20A%20National%20Survey.pdf

Karp, M. M., Calcagno, J. C., Hughes, K. L., Jeong, D. W., and Bailey, T. (2007). “The
postsecondary achievement of participants in dual enrollment: An analysis of student outcomes
in two states.” St. Paul: University of Minnesota, National Research Center for Career and
Technical Education.

Lacy, T. (2010). “Examining AP: Access, Rigor and Revenue in the History of the Advanced
Placement Program,” in AP: A Critical Examination of the Advanced Placement Program, ed.
Sadler, P.M., G. Sonnert, R.H. Tai and K. Klopfenstein (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).

Long, M. C., Conger, D., and Iatarola, P. (2012). “Effects of high school course-taking on
secondary and postsecondary success.” American Educational Research Journal. 49(2), 285-
322.
Mattern, K.D., Marini, J.P., Shaw, E.J. (2013). “Are AP Students More Likely to Graduate from
College on Time,” (College Board Research Report 2013-5). New York: The College Board.

McCrary, J.(2008). “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test,” Journal of Econometrics. 142(2): 698-714.
Moltz, D. (2009). “No Vacancy,” Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2009/07/21/california

Morgan, R., and Klaric, J. (2007). “AP Students in College : An Analysis of Five-Year
Academic Careers,” (College Board Research Report 2007-4). New York: The College Board.

Murphy, D. and Dodd, B. G. (2009). “A Comparison of College Performance of Matched AP
and Non-AP Student Groups,” (College Board Research Report No. 2009-6). New York: The
College Board.

Murphy, K. (2013). “California State University Unveils 'Radical' New Plan for Online
Courses,” Oakland Tribune.

Pallais, A. (2013). “Small Differences that Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College .
Forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics. 2013.

Patterson, B. F., and Ewing, M. (2013). “Validating the Use of AP Exam Scores for College
Course Placement,” (Research Rep. No. 2013-2). New York, NY: The College Board.

Papay, J.P., Willett, J.B. and Murnane, R.J. (2011). “Extending the Regression Discontinuity
Approach to Multiple Assignment Variables,” Journal of Econometrics. 161: 203-207.

Schochet, P., Cook, T., Deke, J., Imbens, G., Lockwood, J.R., Porter, J., Smith, J. (2010).
Standards for Regression Discontinuity Designs. Retrieved from What Works Clearinghouse
website: http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/pdf/wwc_rd.pdf.

Shaw, E. J., Mattern, K. D., and Marini, J. P. (2012). “Exploring the Utility of Advanced
Placement Participation and Performance in College Admission Decisions,” Educational and
Psychological Measurement.

Theokas, C. and R. Saaris. (2013). “Finding America’s Missing AP and IB Students,” Ed Trust,
Retrieved from http://www.edtrust.org/sites/edtrust.org/files/Missing_Students.pdf
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                    All AP Exam Takers     Biology        Calculus AB     English Lang & Comp English Literature  US Government     US History
                                      N           Std. N           Std. N            Std.   N             Std. N             Std. N          Std. N            Std.
                                   (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev (1000s) Mean Dev
(A) Demographics
  Male                                   4,528 0.44 0.50      691 0.41 0.49 1,120 0.51 0.50 1,229 0.37 0.48 1,641 0.36 0.48                          847 0.47 0.50 1,438 0.45 0.50
  White                                  4,528 0.64 0.48      691 0.63 0.48 1,120 0.67 0.47 1,229 0.64 0.48 1,641 0.67 0.47                          847 0.64 0.48 1,438 0.67 0.47
  Black                                  4,528 0.07 0.26      691 0.06 0.24 1,120 0.05 0.21 1,229 0.07 0.26 1,641 0.07 0.26                          847 0.06 0.24 1,438 0.06 0.24
  Hispanic                               4,528 0.13 0.34      691 0.08 0.28 1,120 0.09 0.28 1,229 0.13 0.33 1,641 0.11 0.31                          847 0.12 0.33 1,438 0.11 0.31
  Asian                                  4,528 0.11 0.31      691 0.18 0.39 1,120 0.16 0.36 1,229 0.11 0.32 1,641 0.10 0.31                          847 0.13 0.33 1,438 0.12 0.32
  Parental education - HS dropout        4,528 0.08 0.28      691 0.07 0.26 1,120 0.08 0.27 1,229 0.08 0.28 1,641 0.08 0.27                          847 0.08 0.28 1,438 0.08 0.27
  Parental education - HS graduate 4,528 0.14 0.34            691 0.13 0.34 1,120 0.13 0.33 1,229 0.14 0.35 1,641 0.14 0.34                          847 0.14 0.35 1,438 0.14 0.35
  Parental education - BA or higher 4,528 0.43 0.50           691 0.50 0.50 1,120 0.49 0.50 1,229 0.49 0.50 1,641 0.48 0.50                          847 0.52 0.50 1,438 0.51 0.50
  Low income (< $50,000)                 4,528 0.14 0.35      691 0.13 0.34 1,120 0.13 0.34 1,229 0.15 0.35 1,641 0.14 0.35                          847 0.15 0.35 1,438 0.14 0.34
  Middle income ($50,000-$100,000) 4,528 0.17 0.38            691 0.18 0.39 1,120 0.19 0.39 1,229 0.19 0.40 1,641 0.19 0.39                          847 0.19 0.40 1,438 0.19 0.39
  High income (> $100,000)               4,528 0.15 0.36      691 0.18 0.38 1,120 0.17 0.38 1,229 0.18 0.38 1,641 0.17 0.37                          847 0.19 0.39 1,438 0.18 0.39
(B) Test scores
  Received AP Score = 1                  4,528 0.48 0.82      691 0.21 0.41 1,120 0.25 0.43 1,229 0.11 0.31 1,641 0.09 0.28                          847 0.18 0.38 1,438 0.22 0.41
  Received AP Score = 2                  4,528 0.59 0.83      691 0.21 0.41 1,120 0.16 0.37 1,229 0.32 0.47 1,641 0.30 0.46                          847 0.29 0.46 1,438 0.26 0.44
  Received AP Score = 3                  4,528 0.67 0.95      691 0.20 0.40 1,120 0.19 0.39 1,229 0.32 0.47 1,641 0.33 0.47                          847 0.27 0.44 1,438 0.22 0.42
  Received AP Score = 4                  4,528 0.53 0.96      691 0.19 0.39 1,120 0.20 0.40 1,229 0.18 0.38 1,641 0.21 0.41                          847 0.17 0.38 1,438 0.20 0.40
  Received AP Score = 5                  4,528 0.37 1.02      691 0.18 0.39 1,120 0.21 0.41 1,229 0.08 0.28 1,641 0.07 0.26                          847 0.09 0.28 1,438 0.10 0.30
(C) College outcomes
  Attends Four-Year                      4,528 0.84 0.37      691 0.90 0.30 1,120 0.91 0.29 1,229 0.88 0.33 1,641 0.89 0.31                          847 0.90 0.30 1,438 0.89 0.31
  Attends Four-Year First                4,528 0.77 0.42      691 0.85 0.36 1,120 0.86 0.34 1,229 0.81 0.39 1,641 0.84 0.37                          847 0.84 0.37 1,438 0.83 0.38
  Mean SAT of First College              3,328 1,157 126      572 1194 133             940 1192 124         966 1173 130 1,330 1177 130              695 1181 125 1,155 1181 131
  Bachelors in Four Years                4,528 0.41 0.49      691 0.52 0.50 1,120 0.50 0.50 1,229 0.47 0.50 1,641 0.49 0.50                          847 0.50 0.50 1,438 0.49 0.50
  Bachelors in Five Years                3,604 0.57 0.49      545 0.68 0.47            907 0.68 0.47        938 0.63 0.48 1,327 0.65 0.48            671 0.66 0.47 1,112 0.65 0.48
  Bachelors in Six Years                 2,721 0.63 0.48      404 0.72 0.45            698 0.73 0.45        671 0.68 0.47 1,021 0.70 0.46            502 0.71 0.45         802 0.70 0.46
Notes: The unit of observation is a student. Means and standard deviations are calculated using the raw AP scores. Because raw AP score data were unavailable before 2004, some sampled
students, particularly for earlier high school graduation cohorts, will have participated in more AP exams than their raw scores would suggest.
Table 2: Density Tests at the Integer Thresholds
                                           1/2         2/3         3/4         4/5
(A) Biology (BW=32.164)
Above threshold                          11.035      1.594       -10.560      -0.959
                                        (11.452)    (7.014)      (7.717)     (6.448)
Mean below threshold                    357.000     451.167      444.333     328.833
N                                         946         693          644         905
(B) Calculcus AB (BW=15.844)
Above threshold                          19.102      -4.048      -0.115      -3.387
                                        (27.473)    (27.408)    (18.193)    (14.364)
Mean below threshold                    871.600     928.000     945.063     720.722
N                                         453         439         492         548
(C) English Language and
Composition (BW=26.038)
Above threshold                          31.841      15.184   -54.706 -65.623
                                        (32.598)    (55.520) (65.032) (62.940)
Mean below threshold                    497.438     1144.667 1122.250 599.933
N                                         831         760       592     657
(D) English Literature (BW=17.631)
Above threshold                         -14.147 103.702 -61.633        0.758
                                        (44.152) (109.695) (118.552) (113.241)
Mean below threshold                    546.063 1457.500 1786.733 817.067
N                                         544       555       545       508
(E) US Government (BW=26.225)
Above threshold                          12.333      -1.138      -12.610    -61.168*
                                        (16.785)    (14.563)    (23.024)    (34.259)
Mean below threshold                    425.056     694.333     699.444      588.545
N                                         889         769          596         697
(F) US History (BW=33.363)
Above threshold                          28.753      -6.949      -6.435      -31.386
                                        (30.066)    (25.684)    (24.619)    (23.976)
Mean below threshold                    747.000     1045.000    896.444     551.647
N                                         956         723         713          929
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, ***
p<.01). All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high
school year in which exam was taken. In these density tests, observations are
collapsed into 1 raw score point bins, by cohort and high school year in which exam
was taken. These counts are then regressed on distance from threshold, an indicator
variable for whether the raw score is above the specified threshold, an interaction of
these two terms, and dummy variables for high school graduation cohort and
examination year. The means below the thresholds represent the mean number of
observations within the high school cohort by exam year categories within 1 raw
score point below the specified threshold . Optimal bandwidths are selected using the
outcome, bachelor's degree within four years.
Table 3: Density and Covariate Balance Tests at the College Credit Policy Boundaries
                                    (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)                             (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)        (11)
                                        Number of                                                    Parent HS Parent HS Parent BA Low Middle                     High
                                       observations      Male        Black     Hispanic     Asian     dropout graduate or more income income                    income
(A) Biology (BW=32.164)
Above threshold                             6.363        -0.003     0.003**      0.001      -0.001      0.001       -0.000      -0.004     0.001 -0.005*         -0.003
                                           (5.165)      (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.002) (0.003)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                         382         0.408       0.040       0.060      0.166       0.058        0.131      0.553      0.118   0.190          0.206
N                                           1,152       388,247     388,247     388,247    388,247     388,247     388,247     388,247    388,247 388,247       388,247
(B) Calculcus AB (BW=15.844)
Above threshold                            2.140         -0.001      0.002*      -0.001     -0.001      -0.002      0.001      -0.007*     -0.000 -0.004         -0.002
                                          (18.695)      (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)    (0.002) (0.003)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                        762          0.499       0.034        0.067     0.137       0.067       0.125       0.529       0.119  0.199          0.192
N                                           523         375,973     375,973     375,973    375,973     375,973     375,973     375,973    375,973 375,973       375,973
(C) English Language and
Composition (BW=26.038)
Above threshold                            23.846        0.004*      -0.001      0.002      0.003*      -0.000      0.002       -0.001     0.001 -0.002          0.002
                                          (41.214)      (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002) (0.002)       (0.002)
Mean below threshold                       1,079         0.360       0.048       0.090      0.110       0.062       0.140       0.565      0.121   0.209         0.209
N                                           818         659,539     659,539     659,539    659,539     659,539     659,539     659,539    659,539 659,539       659,539
(D) English Literature (BW=17.631)
Above threshold                            37.952      -0.006*** -0.001         0.002*      0.003*     0.003**      0.002       -0.003     0.002 -0.001          0.001
                                          (72.872)      (0.002)  (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002) (0.002)       (0.002)
Mean below threshold                       1,429         0.365    0.042          0.073      0.107       0.056       0.130       0.550      0.118   0.206         0.189
N                                           551         719,422 719,422         719,422    719,422     719,422     719,422     719,422    719,422 719,422       719,422
(E) US Government (BW=26.225)
Above threshold                            13.775        -0.003      0.000       0.001      0.003       0.000       0.001       -0.001     -0.002 -0.003         -0.000
                                          (12.557)      (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.002) (0.002)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                        589          0.487       0.038       0.080      0.122       0.057       0.121       0.587       0.113  0.207          0.223
N                                           934         451,325     451,325     451,325    451,325     451,325     451,325     451,325    451,325 451,325       451,325
(F) US History (BW=33.363)
Above threshold                            -2.176        0.000       0.001       0.001      0.002       0.000       -0.002      -0.001     0.002 -0.003          -0.000
                                          (19.152)      (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.001) (0.002)       (0.002)
Mean below threshold                        836          0.460       0.041       0.068      0.120       0.056        0.127      0.579      0.112   0.205          0.217
N                                          1,162        812,279     812,279     812,279    812,279     812,279     812,279     812,279    812,279 812,279       812,279
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Only includes students who enrolled in four-year colleges on-time (within
180 days of HS graduation). All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. In the density tests
peformed in Column 1, observations are collapsed into 1 raw score point bins, by cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. These counts are then regressed
on distance from threshold, an indicator variable for whether the raw score is above the specified threshold, an interaction of these two terms, and dummy variables for
high school graduation cohort and examination year. The means below the thresholds represent the mean covariate values within 1 point of the boundary. Optimal
bandwidths are selected using the outcome, bachelor's degree within four years.
Table 4: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment within 4 Years
                                                                                                                Distance from
                                     All HS Years (2/3 Boundary)      All HS Years (3/4 Boundary)                 Threshold
                                  Credit and Min credit Min credit Credit and Min credit Min credit
                                   no credit score=3 score≠3        no credit score=4 score≠4                     All HS years
(A) Biology
Above threshold                     0.008*        0.005       0.015*        0.007       -0.003       0.012**         0.002
                                    (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.58         0.53         0.65         0.65         0.72          0.60           0.62
Bandwidth                           15.880       19.047       12.301       13.074       13.489        16.189         32.164
N                                   197,284      123,736      71,204       175,659      72,979       123,634        389,484
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                    0.013***     0.021***      0.001        0.008**     0.022***       0.004        0.016***
                                    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006)       (0.003)      (0.007)      (0.004)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.56         0.51        0.65           0.61        0.68          0.58           0.57
Bandwidth                           11.644       10.461      21.561        15.669       10.624        16.199        15.844
N                                   276,434      160,635     113,595       352,152      80,512       247,295       372,552
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                    0.009***     0.014***      0.005         0.002        -0.001       0.002        0.010***
                                    (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.002)
Mean below threshold                 0.54         0.49        0.63          0.67          0.75         0.63           0.59
Bandwidth                           19.766       18.993      29.980        18.899       19.753        21.104        26.038
N                                   530,131      314,791     226,399       485,720      178,872      322,524       660,439
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                    0.007***     0.012***      0.003        0.007**      0.009**       0.006        0.007***
                                    (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.002)
Mean below threshold                 0.55         0.49        0.63           0.67         0.73         0.63           0.62
Bandwidth                           16.616       17.210      19.570        12.194       12.293        13.219        17.631
N                                   644,142      368,086     329,290       513,656      210,844      324,774       709,015
(E) US Government
Above threshold                     0.008**      0.010**      0.003        0.010**      0.014**       0.005        0.015***
                                    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                  0.57         0.51       0.66           0.67         0.74         0.62           0.61
Bandwidth                           18.058       19.310      19.787        14.605       15.580        15.451        26.225
N                                   343,277      208,531     147,686       280,203      110,921      180,636       453,449
(F) US History
Above threshold                     0.007**      0.011**      0.001        0.009***    0.013***       0.006        0.011***
                                    (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.002)
Mean below threshold                  0.57         0.50       0.65           0.67        0.73          0.61           0.61
Bandwidth                           14.588       15.417      17.347         18.200      18.560        19.743        33.363
N                                   415,961      236,589     224,620        476,594     222,091      265,366       818,015
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the
2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was
taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. All students in sample first
attended a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation. Bachelor's outcomes include students who received bachelor's
degrees from four-year colleges within four years of graduating from high school. Only students with raw scores indicating
scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4 included in the 3/4
threshold analyses.
Table 5: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment within 6 Years
                                                                                                               Distance from
                                     All HS Years (2/3 Boundary)      All HS Years (3/4 Boundary)                Threshold
                                  Credit and Min credit Min credit Credit and Min credit Min credit
                                   no credit score=3 score≠3        no credit score=4      score≠4 All HS years
(A) Biology
Above threshold                     -0.002      -0.006        0.002        -0.001     -0.018**       0.008        -0.007*
                                   (0.004)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.81        0.79         0.84          0.84         0.87         0.82          0.83
Bandwidth                          26.737       15.996       20.661       17.036       12.836       19.970         29.360
N                                  148,879      69,107       61,186       133,544      41,329       85,382        213,785
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                     -0.000       -0.003       0.003        0.005      0.017***      -0.000         0.003
                                   (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.003)      (0.006)     (0.004)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.81         0.79        0.84         0.84          0.86        0.83           0.82
Bandwidth                          21.052       12.363       11.339       13.837       12.073       17.611         24.993
N                                  201,745      116,463      60,553       208,303      56,252      155,877        350,108
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                     0.002        0.006       -0.000        -0.005       -0.005      -0.005         0.002
                                   (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.005)     (0.004)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                0.80         0.77         0.84          0.86         0.89        0.84           0.82
Bandwidth                          18.473       17.389      22.872        18.301       16.336       22.641         26.839
N                                  281,050      161,127     124,372       256,339      88,795      172,886        368,177
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                     -0.001       0.001       -0.003      0.008***     0.010***      0.006         0.007***
                                   (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.80        0.78         0.82         0.85          0.87        0.83            0.82
Bandwidth                          25.727       29.295      20.834        10.928       12.444       11.686         15.359
N                                  498,435      282,766     213,426       293,939     135,454      183,062        398,347
(E) US Government
Above threshold                     0.007       0.010*        0.002        0.004        0.004        0.005        0.007**
                                   (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                0.81         0.78         0.85         0.86          0.89         0.84          0.82
Bandwidth                          13.191       13.344       16.517       12.146       15.783       12.676         20.148
N                                  159,069      94,682       81,920       146,580      69,825       93,294        224,719
(F) US History
Above threshold                     -0.003       -0.005      -0.001        0.004        0.006       0.002          -0.002
                                   (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.002)
Mean below threshold                 0.80         0.77        0.85         0.86          0.89        0.83           0.83
Bandwidth                          18.040       23.234      19.429        20.691        14.704      26.076         52.565
N                                  280,877      167,812     135,872       286,535      105,242     154,531        565,346
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the
2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was
taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. All students in sample first
attended a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation. Bachelor's outcomes include students who received bachelor's
degrees from four-year colleges within six years of graduating from high school. Only students with raw scores indicating
scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4 included in the
3/4 threshold analyses.
Table 6: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment with 4 Years (Senior Exams Only)
                                                                                                         Distance from
                                          (2/3 Boundary)                      (3/4 Boundary)               Threshold
                                                Min       Min           Credit     Min       Min
                                  Credit and credit      credit         and no credit      credit
                                   no credit score=3 score≠3            credit score=4 score≠4            Senior Year
(A) Biology
Above threshold                      0.005       0.003      0.013       0.012**    -0.003 0.022***           -0.001
                                    (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.009)      (0.006)    (0.008) (0.008)          (0.004)
Mean below threshold                  0.58       0.54       0.64          0.65      0.72    0.60              0.63
Bandwidth                            17.571     20.088     13.059        17.122    25.306 16.989             30.985
N                                   125,206     71,667     47,455       123,209    54,646 70,768            222,466
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                    0.014*** 0.024*** -0.001             0.008** 0.022*** 0.004              0.019***
                                    (0.004)  (0.006) (0.006)            (0.004) (0.008) (0.005)              (0.004)
Mean below threshold                  0.56    0.51    0.65                0.61    0.68   0.58                  0.57
Bandwidth                           12.187   10.972 26.802               15.682 10.647 16.589                15.514
N                                  250,113 146,075 99,209               296,564 68,857 208,098              314,260
(C) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                    0.009*** 0.014*** 0.003              0.007** 0.008*         0.006        0.008***
                                    (0.003)  (0.003) (0.004)            (0.003) (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.002)
Mean below threshold                  0.55    0.49    0.63                0.67   0.73          0.63            0.62
Bandwidth                           18.489   18.935 24.163               12.508 12.711        13.392         18.347
N                                  663,652 377,014 326,167              499,643 205,358       309,462       690,134
(D) US Government
Above threshold                     0.008**     0.009*   0.005          0.008** 0.012**        0.004        0.013***
                                    (0.004)     (0.005) (0.006)         (0.004) (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.003)
Mean below threshold                  0.57       0.51    0.66             0.66    0.74         0.61            0.61
Bandwidth                            19.920     20.534 20.585            15.621 15.662        16.007         25.959
N                                   314,330     189,821 127,919         256,456 95,171        164,835       394,874
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by
the 2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which
exam was taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. All students in
sample first attended a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation. Bachelor's outcomes include students who
received bachelor's degrees from four-year colleges within four years of graduating from high school. Only students with
raw scores indicating scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores
Table 7: RD Impacts of Achieving Higher Junior Year AP Scores on Senior AP Test-Taking
                                   Junior Year (1/2 Boundary)       Junior Year (2/3 Boundary)                  Junior Year (3/4 Boundary)       Junior Year (4/5 Boundary)
                               # Exams # 3 + Scores # 4 + Scores # Exams       #3+        #4+               # Exams # 3 + Scores # 4 + Scores # Exams # 3 + Scores # 4 + Scores
                              Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year Scores            Scores             Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year Sen. Year
(A) Biology
Above threshold                  0.024        0.013      -0.003   0.084*** 0.052**       0.016                0.034        0.024         0.007        0.010       0.018         0.015
                                (0.024)     (0.016)     (0.009)    (0.023)    (0.021) (0.015)                (0.022)      (0.021)       (0.017)      (0.023)     (0.021)       (0.021)
Mean below threshold              1.39        0.52        0.18       1.68       0.98      0.45                2.12          1.56          0.88        2.65         2.30         1.59
Bandwidth                       16.697      14.100       13.884    14.532     11.162     9.360               17.624       14.069        13.261       22.501      24.687        19.901
N                               63,586      55,359       54,722    77,557     62,245     52,345              93,632       78,834        74,963       87,001      89,184        83,834
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                0.090*** 0.048**          0.023     0.058*      0.013     0.005                0.005        0.002         0.014      0.057**      0.056**      0.070***
                                (0.031)     (0.022)     (0.016)    (0.034)    (0.025) (0.018)                (0.029)      (0.028)       (0.021)     (0.025)      (0.024)       (0.026)
Mean below threshold              1.64        0.79        0.34       1.93       1.20      0.57                2.27          1.71          0.95        2.60         2.25         1.58
Bandwidth                       19.004      19.844       14.085    11.253     14.116     15.001              14.614       12.481        14.578      23.387        21.016       12.203
N                               43,759      44,514       38,333    41,466     48,904     49,460              62,198       54,976        62,051      81,324        78,435       55,687
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                  0.004        0.004      -0.000   0.143*** 0.089*** 0.025***                0.054***     0.039***       -0.004       0.020        0.027        0.037**
                                (0.011)     (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.011)    (0.009) (0.006)                (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.018)      (0.017)       (0.018)
Mean below threshold              1.18        0.16        0.06       1.72       0.88      0.34                2.47          1.95         1.16        2.96          2.64          2.03
Bandwidth                       19.795        8.556      8.872     13.145     10.596     8.968               13.981       11.723        7.554       11.877        12.796       11.295
N                              289,134      120,295     125,330   387,821 315,541 269,975                    364,538     309,813       202,829      172,086      185,352       163,214
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                0.071**        0.008      0.013    0.106*** 0.082*** 0.025**                   0.043        0.014         0.002        0.038       0.026         0.021
                                (0.028)     (0.013)     (0.010)    (0.025)    (0.020) (0.012)                (0.032)      (0.031)       (0.028)      (0.042)     (0.042)       (0.039)
Mean below threshold              0.79        0.11        0.03       1.13       0.66      0.31                1.65          1.35          0.91        2.02         1.85         1.46
Bandwidth                       26.334      18.011       11.417    18.008     17.549     27.220              15.333       13.518        11.884       23.141      20.279        19.347
N                               34,356      21,942       13,447    50,616     49,611     60,144              41,860       37,219        32,957       27,152      26,912        26,793
(E) US Government
Above threshold                  0.013        0.012      -0.015   0.075**      0.036     -0.001              -0.020        -0.004        -0.011      -0.015       -0.016       -0.008
                                (0.032)     (0.023)     (0.011)    (0.030)    (0.025) (0.019)                (0.042)      (0.038)       (0.032)      (0.047)     (0.052)       (0.054)
Mean below threshold              1.00        0.35        0.11       1.53       1.03      0.52                2.18          1.84          1.20        2.81         2.61         2.15
Bandwidth                       23.714      15.898       22.161    19.989     21.958     21.042              12.167       13.598        15.059       20.918      14.172        12.105
N                               28,085      19,216       26,547    38,340     39,612     39,178              24,750       27,176        29,270       19,824      17,577        15,626
(F) US History
Above threshold                0.021***      -0.001     -0.005*   0.083*** 0.035*** 0.003                   0.055***     0.055***      0.029***     0.031**      0.034**       0.033**
                                (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.010)    (0.009) (0.006)                (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.008)     (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.016)
Mean below threshold              1.38        0.45        0.15       1.81       1.09      0.48                2.36          1.81          1.04        2.96         2.66          2.01
Bandwidth                       27.585      14.285       15.558    13.946     10.723     11.596              15.017       12.806        14.560      15.349        15.188       11.403
N                              551,785      343,508     372,520   432,254 336,000 362,049                    412,516     353,936       400,503      242,366      239,834       179,247
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-2009 cohorts. Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-
2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within
1 raw point of the cut score. Only students with raw scores indicating scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4
included in the 3/4 threshold analyses, and so on.
Table 8: Regression Discontinuity Impacts on SAT Score Sending and SAT Scores of First College Attended
                                                 RD Impacts on SAT Score Sending                          RD Average SAT Scores of Colleges (First-Time On-Time Students)
                                      All HS Years         Junior Takers       Senior Takers                  All HS Years         Junior Takers          Senior Takers
Boundary                             2/3        3/4        2/3       3/4      2/3       3/4                  2/3        3/4        2/3        3/4        2/3        3/4
(A) Biology
Above threshold                     0.006       0.019        0.085     0.114*      -0.032      -0.018        0.747       0.064       3.641** -0.170           -0.470      0.467
                                   (0.031)     (0.042)      (0.060)    (0.068)    (0.041)     (0.055)       (1.179)     (1.308)       (1.839) (2.107)        (1.485)     (1.678)
Mean below threshold                4.543       5.192        4.701      5.529       4.434       4.929      1,168.84    1,204.20      1,166.22 1,209.34      1,168.71    1,199.85
Bandwidth                           35.194      13.541      19.309     15.047     22.025      13.604        13.066      10.872        15.839   11.564        13.899      11.581
N                                  285,186     214,072      93,212     83,295     164,712     123,805      168,237     143,947        65,194   54,470       105,901      88,278
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                     -0.020      -0.014       -0.073     0.007      -0.022      -0.018        -1.072     -0.480         -2.249  -0.884         -1.219     -0.326
                                   (0.035)     (0.026)      (0.095)    (0.071)    (0.037)     (0.029)       (1.217)     (0.797)       (3.063) (2.373)        (1.288)     (0.855)
Mean below threshold                4.436       4.833        4.987      5.488       4.351       4.714      1,177.47    1,199.79      1,191.79 1,219.22      1,175.39    1,195.99
Bandwidth                           8.860       36.998      10.452     27.031       9.506     19.336         6.973      17.730         9.344   12.622         7.074      19.108
N                                  259,120     429,387      38,575     65,505     242,559     360,771      162,568     350,195        27,200   45,266       143,898     294,461
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                   0.086*** 0.023           0.105*** 0.019          0.034       0.038         0.736     1.810**         0.853 2.494***         -1.096     -0.183
                                   (0.022) (0.025)          (0.026) (0.029)       (0.045)     (0.049)       (0.627)     (0.793)       (0.690) (0.858)        (1.671)     (1.887)
Mean below threshold                3.892   5.135            4.000   5.389         3.366       4.219       1,146.19    1,204.38      1,147.35 1,208.38      1,139.68    1,187.74
Bandwidth                          15.231  17.107           13.454 16.253         20.505      22.747        20.062      14.116        20.515   15.547        15.196      11.618
N                                 547,895 548,476          396,035 415,435        129,791     124,835      522,900     387,741       427,644 332,128         74,036      65,990
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                     0.004 0.058***           0.026      0.056      -0.001 0.059***           0.937      -0.435         3.069   -1.333         0.726      -0.426
                                   (0.016)  (0.020)         (0.082)    (0.100)    (0.018) (0.020)           (0.619)     (0.563)       (2.299) (3.207)        (0.623)     (0.564)
Mean below threshold                4.088     4.99           3.843      5.273       4.102   4.973          1,152.11    1,203.33      1,165.61 1,238.43      1,151.24    1,201.22
Bandwidth                          24.727    17.673         16.311     15.386     20.245 18.275             15.346      21.295        22.263   12.718        15.983      25.313
N                                 1,000,818 830,268         46,555     41,964     887,753 796,391          581,905     729,872        42,693   28,716       569,373     688,392
(E) US Government
Above threshold                     0.031       0.033        0.018      -0.037     0.032       0.018        1.254*       0.494         -1.047  -0.390       1.640**       0.485
                                   (0.025)     (0.037)      (0.082)    (0.119)    (0.026)     (0.036)       (0.738)     (1.159)       (2.369) (3.383)        (0.798)     (1.146)
Mean below threshold                4.655       5.316        3.232      4.188      4.798       5.419       1,166.78    1,210.21      1,172.00 1,219.26      1,164.93    1,207.66
Bandwidth                           23.200      10.724      23.001     12.565     28.196      13.073        22.581       9.003        29.968   12.928        21.729      10.537
N                                  458,928     253,654      40,161     25,424     416,966     263,416      362,886     183,143        32,928   21,802       315,299     186,085
(F) US History
Above threshold                     0.026       0.035        0.034   0.041         -0.084     -0.026         0.318       0.706         0.476   0.579          -4.103      2.841
                                   (0.025)     (0.025)      (0.027) (0.029)        (0.077)    (0.103)       (0.724)     (0.744)       (0.681) (0.832)        (3.140)     (3.049)
Mean below threshold                4.281       5.172        4.414   5.301          3.573      4.372       1,163.06    1,204.42      1,162.65 1,205.04      1,152.29    1,184.05
Bandwidth                           13.524      18.564       13.423 15.242         20.144     15.402        15.114      17.163        20.239   15.672        11.899      15.906
N                                  484,016     570,072      416,703 418,452        48,213     35,172       418,976     446,124       448,537 355,465         23,565      28,680
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular
kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. Only
students with raw scores indicating scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4 included in the 3/4 threshold
analyses.
Table 9: Marginal Impacts of Passing an Additional AP Exam, Based on College Policy
                                        (1)         (2)                                (3)         (4)
                                   Bachelors in Bachelors in                     Bachelors in Bachelors in
                                      4 Years     6 Years                           4 Years     6 Years
(A) 0 to 1 passes                                                  (F) 5 to 6 passes
Above threshold                          0.012***        0.003     Above threshold             0.008         0.002
                                          (0.002)       (0.002)                               (0.005)       (0.005)
Mean below threshold                       0.508         0.772     Mean below threshold        0.717         0.896
Bandwidth                                 21.650        22.291     Bandwidth                  21.562        29.820
N                                        1,138,045      679,406    N                          78,702        40,387
(B) 1 to 2 passes                                                  (G) 6 to7 passes
Above threshold                          0.008***        -0.001    Above threshold             0.009        -0.002
                                          (0.002)       (0.002)                               (0.006)       (0.009)
Mean below threshold                       0.583          0.826    Mean below threshold        0.738         0.899
Bandwidth                                  19.672        22.914    Bandwidth                  35.190        10.928
N                                         551,024       328,313    N                          48,202        16,361
(C) 2 to 3 passes                                                  (H) 7 to 8 passes
Above threshold                            0.005        0.006**    Above threshold             0.005        0.021*
                                          (0.003)       (0.003)                               (0.010)       (0.012)
Mean below threshold                       0.642          0.850    Mean below threshold        0.746         0.886
Bandwidth                                  16.309        22.123    Bandwidth                  17.310        11.187
N                                         305,496       183,690    N                          22,988         8,675
(D) 3 to 4 passes                                                  (I) 8 to 9 passes
Above threshold                            0.002         -0.001    Above threshold             0.002         0.004
                                          (0.004)       (0.003)                               (0.015)       (0.015)
Mean below threshold                       0.682          0.873    Mean below threshold        0.765         0.925
Bandwidth                                  15.020        26.231    Bandwidth                  13.339        14.272
N                                         187,431       115,079    N                          10,695         4,730
(E) 4 to 5 passes                                                  (J) 9 to 10 passes
Above threshold                          0.012***       0.009**    Above threshold              0.007        -0.018
                                          (0.004)        (0.004)                               (0.028)       (0.029)
Mean below threshold                       0.705          0.880     Mean below threshold        0.726         0.905
Bandwidth                                  20.153        31.472     Bandwidth                   7.753         8.160
N                                         129,495        70,672     N                           3,803         1,601
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken
by the 2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year by
subject. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. Sample only includes
students who began at four-year institutions with AP credit policies within 180 days of HS graduation, and students for
whom all integer AP exam scores were matched to raw AP scores.
Table 10: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment by Parental Income
                                      Within 4 Years             Within 6 Years
                                  (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)
                                           <       $50K-         >            <        $50K-         >
                                         $50K      $100K       $100K        $50K       $100K       $100K
(A) Biology
Above threshold                          0.004      0.006     -0.014*      -0.003      -0.007     -0.011*
                                        (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.007)      (0.010)     (0.007)    (0.007)
Mean below threshold                     0.518      0.601      0.714        0.766       0.831      0.884
Bandwidth                               38.587     37.667     27.198       35.938      36.918     32.430
N                                       53,341     84,613     68,103       32,734      51,891     42,651
(B) Calculcus AB
Above threshold                         -0.000 0.020*** -0.000             -0.005      -0.001      -0.001
                                        (0.009) (0.007) (0.007)            (0.009)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Mean below threshold                     0.504   0.574   0.645              0.772       0.828       0.86
Bandwidth                               22.639 20.571 19.142               21.440      22.823      27.374
N                                       61,666 93,685 85,461               39,066      66,891      67,377
(C) English Language and
Composition
Above threshold                          0.009 0.016*** 0.012**            -0.002      0.013**      0.000
                                        (0.007) (0.005) (0.005)            (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Mean below threshold                     0.489   0.582   0.654              0.76        0.809       0.864
Bandwidth                               31.712 33.996 32.701               36.805      29.214      31.742
N                                       93,462 157,462 152,554             59,428      85,477      77,379
(D) English Literature
Above threshold                          -0.002    0.008*      0.006       -0.003       0.001      0.003
                                        (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.004)
Mean below threshold                      0.516     0.608      0.700        0.753       0.827      0.881
Bandwidth                               30.894     26.533     25.234       31.893      27.399     29.175
N                                       126,758    190,632    175,664      86,216      127,443    111,075
(E) US Government
Above threshold                         0.020** 0.008          0.009        0.001       0.006      -0.003
                                        (0.008) (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Mean below threshold                     0.511   0.594         0.676        0.791       0.819       0.867
Bandwidth                               30.845 30.652         25.893       29.062      39.872      47.860
N                                       59,465 101,483        99,817       36,856      71,648      70,972
(F) US History
Above threshold                         0.017** -0.004 0.013***             0.002       0.002      0.004
                                        (0.007) (0.005) (0.004)            (0.007)     (0.004)    (0.004)
Mean below threshold                     0.511   0.603   0.666              0.765       0.818      0.873
Bandwidth                               32.713 26.460 35.832               32.045      44.742     44.637
N                                       93,149 143,161 178,539             56,648      116,740    104,771
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Only includes
students who enrolled in four-year colleges on-time (within 180 days of HS graduation). All regressions use
triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. The forcing
variable in these regressions is the distance from the credit-granting threshold. The means below the
thresholds represent the mean covariate values within 1 point of the boundary.
Figure 1: Distribution of Distances from College-Specific Credit-Granting Thresholds
Figure 2: Parameter estimates and t-statistics associated receiving a credit-granting AP exam score
Figure 3: Number of Senior Year AP Exams Taken and Scores of 3 or Higher on These Exams, by Distance from the 2/3 threshold on Junior Exams
Figure 4: Multidimensional RD Parameter Estimates
Appendix Figure A1: On-time bachelor’s degree attainment rates, by distance from credit-granting thresholds
App. Table 1: Distribution of Credit Granting Scores and Test Timing Among On-time Four-Year College-Enrollees
                                                                  Pct
                                                               enrolling
                                                    Pct.      at colleges
                                               attending 4- with credit- Percent distribution of           Percent distribution of high
                                                yr colleges granting         minimum credit-             school years during which exam
AP subject                        Total obs.     on-time       policies     granting AP scores                     was taken
                                                                           2     3      4      5         Fresh. Soph.        Jun.    Sen.
Studio Art 3-D                       10,622              61.8         34.4 0.0 61.2 31.1 7.7                 0.0       0.9     10.5    88.5
Art History                          94,143              75.2         90.2 0.0 55.9 35.7 8.4                 0.1       6.3     27.6    66.0
Studio Art 2-D                       62,215              61.7         38.3 0.0 59.3 33.0 7.7                 0.0       0.9     11.8    87.2
Studio Art Drawing                   61,579              61.6         72.8 0.0 60.3 34.0 5.7                 0.0       1.1     14.2    84.7
Biology                             690,772              80.2         95.8 0.1 55.1 39.4 5.3                 0.4       6.4     34.4    58.8
Calculus AB                       1,120,442              81.2         95.8 1.5 65.1 30.7 2.8                 0.0       0.8     14.8    84.4
Calculus BC                         330,823              86.0         95.5 6.3 60.7 28.5 4.6                 0.1       1.2     18.0    80.7
Chemistry                           444,396              81.4         95.2 0.0 56.2 38.1 5.7                 0.0       4.1     48.5    47.3
Chinese                               7,382              60.0                                                0.0       4.2     35.5    60.3
Computer Science A                   72,446              75.2         83.7 0.0 50.6 40.9 8.5                 0.6      11.6     35.9    51.9
Computer Science AB                  25,564              81.4         90.0 1.4 44.0 49.5 5.2                 0.3       8.8     36.0    54.8
Macroeconomics                      313,155              80.2         91.9 0.0 49.8 42.6 7.6                 0.0       0.7      7.8    91.5
Microeconomics                      192,262              80.9         91.0 0.0 52.5 41.3 6.1                 0.1       1.3     10.2    88.4
English Language & Comp.          1,228,818              76.0         93.3 0.0 60.3 34.9 4.8                 0.0       1.0     79.5    19.5
English Literature & Comp.        1,641,172              78.7         94.9 0.0 53.3 39.2 7.5                 0.0       0.1      5.9    94.0
Environmental Science               257,417              77.5         71.6 0.0 56.6 41.5 1.8                 0.4       2.3     28.4    68.9
European History                    406,442              79.4         94.5 0.0 49.3 47.0 3.7                 0.3      42.3     16.7    40.8
French Literature                    10,142              75.6         86.2 1.2 34.8 53.3 10.7                0.2       3.3     20.5    76.0
French Language and Culture         106,032              75.1         92.1 1.7 50.9 43.0 4.4                 0.5       3.3     23.8    72.4
German Language and Culture          24,368              73.2         94.4 2.8 61.1 32.9 3.2                 0.8       4.3     20.9    74.0
Comparative Gov.and Politics         74,051              80.5         84.6 0.0 52.2 43.9 3.9                 0.1       5.1     14.1    80.7
US Gov and Politics                 847,245              79.5         91.6 0.0 61.6 36.4 2.0                 0.2       3.2      8.5    88.2
Human Geography                      80,677              74.9         50.7 0.0 76.6 21.5 1.9                17.9      17.9     18.9    45.3
Italian Language and Culture          6,467              78.9                                                0.1       0.9     11.1    87.9
Japanese Lang. and Culture            3,949              64.7                                                0.0       2.1     20.1    77.9
Latin Literature                     18,154              86.3         77.3 1.9 38.5 51.6 8.1                 0.1       3.5     37.6    58.7
Latin Vergil                         24,040              86.7         82.8 1.5 41.1 51.2 6.3                 0.2       5.2     37.4    57.3
Music Theory                         52,425              75.8         78.6 0.5 66.6 29.0 3.8                 0.3       5.4     28.1    66.2
Physics B                           276,199              80.9         89.7 0.0 56.3 34.7 9.0                 0.1       1.4     31.4    67.1
Physics C: E&M                       63,715              84.5         90.4 0.0 30.7 48.4 21.0                0.0       0.6      8.8    90.5
Physics C: Mechanics                142,707              83.8         93.8 0.0 38.3 48.3 13.4                0.0       0.5     10.8    88.7
Psychology                          510,673              75.9         92.6 0.0 58.2 40.1 1.7                 0.0       1.7     26.5    71.8
Spanish Language                    472,437              61.4         93.8 1.3 63.9 29.3 5.5                 1.3       8.8     33.8    56.1
Spanish Literature                   76,242              50.1         86.5 0.1 62.3 32.0 5.6                 0.4       4.8     26.5    68.2
Statistics                          436,090              81.7         76.6 0.0 62.6 34.9 2.5                 0.1       2.3     15.6    82.0
US History                        1,438,063              77.9         94.8 0.0 52.7 44.3 3.0                 0.0       5.9     86.8     7.3
World History                       305,650              74.8         47.0 0.0 50.7 46.9 2.4                 2.7      73.5     13.3    10.5
Notes: Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-2009 cohorts. On-time students are those who began at a four-year college within 180 days of HS
graduation. In very rare instances, colleges indicated awarding credit for scores of 1. These cases are eliminated from our analyses.
Appendix Table 2: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment within 3 Years
                                                                                                    Distance from
                                     All HS Years (2/3 Boundary)      All HS Years (3/4 Boundary)     Threshold
                                  Credit and Min credit Min credit Credit and Min credit Min credit
                                   no credit score=3       score≠3  no credit score=4 score≠4 All HS years
(A) Biology
Above threshold                    0.005***     0.007***       0.001       0.007***     0.010***     0.005**       0.006***
                                    (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.017        0.020        0.012         0.025        0.017       0.031          0.019
Bandwidth                           16.831       14.433       17.192        15.249       14.237       15.515        38.344
N                                   205,171     104,556       90,366        199,058      76,400      119,966       436,677
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                    0.005***     0.006***      0.003*        0.002**      0.004**      0.001        0.005***
                                    (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.001)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.014        0.015        0.010         0.019        0.012       0.023          0.015
Bandwidth                           11.568       11.413       10.596        15.187       11.128       14.445        34.676
N                                   274,656     174,820       89,983        348,642      84,151      238,481       732,044
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                    0.003***     0.004***       0.001       0.005***     0.004***    0.006***       0.004***
                                    (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.019        0.021        0.014         0.029        0.023       0.034          0.021
Bandwidth                           19.857       20.875       26.151        14.493       16.829      13.644         37.786
N                                   532,039     333,490       224,072       404,544      166,366    242,420        792,988
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                    0.002***     0.005***       -0.001      0.004***     0.004***    0.003***       0.004***
                                    (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.016        0.018         0.014        0.026        0.02         0.03          0.018
Bandwidth                           18.087       20.422       20.120        16.199       15.066      15.907         30.523
N                                   692,998     414,777       334,638       656,090      249,596    384,693        1,019,516
(E) US Government
Above threshold                    0.004***      0.004**      0.003**      0.007***     0.008***     0.005**       0.006***
                                    (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.020        0.023        0.015         0.031        0.023       0.035          0.023
Bandwidth                           11.365        10.873      20.384         9.693       11.624       10.732        25.459
N                                   227,307      128,701      148,822       199,000      89,766      135,064       444,095
(F) US History
Above threshold                    0.004***     0.006***       0.001       0.004***     0.007***      0.001        0.006***
                                    (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.002)        (0.001)
Mean below threshold                 0.018        0.021        0.014         0.030        0.022       0.037          0.021
Bandwidth                           16.355       17.841       16.759        15.724       16.229       16.584        23.717
N                                   462,927     268,360       218,369       421,714      200,749     238,251       640,026
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the
2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was
taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. All students in sample first
attended a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation. Bachelor's outcomes include students who received bachelor's
degrees from four-year colleges within three years of graduating from high school. Only students with raw scores indicating
scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4 included in the 3/4
threshold analyses.
Appendix Table 3: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment with 5 Years
                                                                                                              Distance from
                                     All HS Years (2/3 Boundary)     All HS Years (3/4 Boundary)                Threshold
                                  Credit and Min credit Min credit Min credit Min credit No
                                   no credit score=3      score≠3   score=4 score≠4 Credit                     All HS years
(A) Biology
Above threshold                      0.002        0.000        0.004         0.002        -0.010     0.010*        -0.003
                                    (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.007)    (0.005)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.76          0.73        0.80           0.81         0.84       0.78          0.79
Bandwidth                           20.582        24.334      15.499         15.149      11.644      18.308        33.343
N                                   184,442      109,675      67,765        159,275      50,821     109,749       315,983
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                     0.006*        0.007        0.005         0.005      0.018*** -0.000          0.007***
                                    (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.003)      (0.006) (0.004)          (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.76          0.73        0.81           0.80         0.83    0.79             0.77
Bandwidth                           15.841        13.215      10.939         15.475      11.548 43.151            25.925
N                                   258,812      158,557      75,371        285,000      70,182 203,218          469,088
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                      0.004        0.006*       0.001         -0.002       -0.004     -0.001        0.004
                                    (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                 0.75          0.72        0.80           0.83         0.87       0.80          0.78
Bandwidth                           21.755        22.895      19.689         19.345       20.358     17.546        19.852
N                                   427,792      264,390      160,884       372,787      137,572    223,412       418,748
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold                      0.000        0.004        -0.004       0.005**      0.007**     0.004        0.005**
                                    (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.003)       (0.002)
Mean below threshold                 0.75          0.72         0.79          0.82         0.86       0.80          0.79
Bandwidth                           19.021        22.983      19.651         11.962       12.688     13.195        14.503
N                                   588,285      350,912      270,215       405,555      177,822    263,723       492,789
(E) US Government
Above threshold                     0.008**      0.011**       0.003         0.001        0.005      -0.002       0.008**
                                    (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.005)       (0.003)
Mean below threshold                  0.76         0.73        0.81           0.83         0.86       0.81          0.79
Bandwidth                           14.358        13.900      19.311         12.293      18.388      11.759        21.668
N                                   226,680      128,528      118,716       193,750      96,035     114,974       312,942
(F) US History
Above threshold                      -0.002       -0.001       -0.004        0.005*       0.006      0.003         0.001
                                    (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.002)
Mean below threshold                  0.76         0.71         0.81          0.83         0.87       0.79          0.79
Bandwidth                           18.193        25.763      17.428         19.752       14.293     22.614        32.632
N                                   390,852      234,690      174,991       387,766      140,282    214,630       627,767
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the
2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam
was taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw point of the cut score. All students in sample first
attended a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation. Bachelor's outcomes include students who received
bachelor's degrees from four-year colleges within five years of graduating from high school. Only students with raw scores
indicating scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 3 and 4
included in the 3/4 threshold analyses.
Appendix Table 4: RD Estimates of College-Going, College-Choice and Bachelor's Attainment at the
1/2 and 4/5 Boundaries
                                                            Bachelor's            Bachelor's
                             Average SAT Scores of Attainment within 4 Attainment within 6
                                   First Colleges              Years                 Years
                                 (1/2)         (4/5)     (1/2)        (4/5)    (1/2)        (4/5)
                              Boundary Boundary Boundary Boundary Boundary Boundary
                             Credit and Credit and Credit and Credit and Credit and Credit
                              no credit no credit no credit no credit no credit and no
(A) Biology
Above threshold                 -0.325         0.906   -0.010*       0.000    -0.009        0.003
                                (1.268)      (1.095)   (0.006)      (0.004)  (0.007)      (0.005)
Mean below threshold          1129.766 1248.000          0.493       0.725     0.741        0.886
Bandwidth                       15.124        23.365   15.178       23.364   17.238       13.921
N                              135,627       197,672  140,266 201,051        84,179       86,535
(B) Calculus AB
Above threshold                  0.077         0.558    -0.002       0.002   -0.008*       -0.000
                                (1.202)      (0.880)   (0.005)      (0.004)  (0.004)      (0.003)
Mean below threshold           1,156.88 1,225.59         0.516       0.662     0.788        0.864
Bandwidth                        8.112        16.189   10.891       15.450   13.703       21.099
N                              166,507       315,754  228,541 313,577       173,018       215,460
(C) Eng. Language and Comp.
Above threshold                  0.310         1.295    -0.006       0.004    -0.001        0.002
                                (1.378)      (1.316)   (0.006)      (0.004)  (0.007)      (0.004)
Mean below threshold          1080.171 1257.172          0.330       0.748     0.646        0.893
Bandwidth                       12.666        10.176   11.704       14.843   16.120       16.293
N                              127,379       166,026  122,832 246,362        98,469       135,110
(D) Eng. Literature
Above threshold               3.334***        1.562*     0.000       0.001     0.001      0.006**
                                (1.170)      (0.848)   (0.005)      (0.003)  (0.007)      (0.003)
Mean below threshold           1,079.37 1,259.10         0.312         0.77    0.642        0.885
Bandwidth                       16.754        22.527   12.379       14.176   13.686       19.104
N                              206,672       388,802  152,294 315,296       103,862       248,215
(E) US Government
Above threshold                  1.297         1.994     0.004       -0.005   -0.002     0.014***
                                (1.111)      (1.579)   (0.005)      (0.006)  (0.005)      (0.004)
Mean below threshold           1,120.65 1251.585         0.428       0.750     0.706        0.888
Bandwidth                       17.026         8.047   18.423        8.285   35.505       16.146
N                              183,396       106,236  204,833 110,958       172,641       106,014
(F) US History
Above threshold                 -0.661        2.090*    -0.002       0.004    -0.002       -0.004
                                (0.817)      (1.174)   (0.003)      (0.003)  (0.004)      (0.003)
Mean below threshold          1120.396 1261.303          0.450       0.755     0.721        0.904
Bandwidth                       16.805        13.106   24.433       27.016   21.317       21.049
N                              319,261       205,587  443,264 362,216       227,993       192,674
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP
exams taken by the 2004-2009 cohorts. All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and
high school year in which exam was taken. Means represent the average value of the outcome within 1 raw
point of the cut score. Only students with raw scores indicating scores of 1 and 2 included in 1/2 threshold
analyses, and only students with raw scores indicating a 4 and 5 included in the 4/5 threshold analyses. We
condition on first attending a four-year college within 180 days of HS graduation in analyses where college-
level SAT and bachelor's completion are the outcomes of interest.
Appendix Table 5 - Robustness Tests, Treatment-on-the-Treated, (All estimates are of the coefficient on Above Threshold)
                           Rectangular Kernel     Triangular Kernel                           Rectangular Kernel   Triangular Kernel
                               (1)       (3)         (3)      (4)                                 (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)
                             BA in      BA in      BA in     BA in                              BA in     BA in     BA in     BA in
                            4 Years 6 Years       4 Years 6 Years                              4 Years 6 Years     4 Years 6 Years
(A) Biology                                                        (D) English Literature
Bandwidth = IK               0.002    -0.008***     0.002 -0.007* Bandwidth = IK              0.008***    0.005** 0.007*** 0.007***
                            (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003) (0.003)                             (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.002) (0.003)
Bandwidth = IK/2             0.002      -0.007      0.002 -0.010** Bandwidth = IK/2             0.005    0.009***   0.003 0.007**
                            (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.005) (0.005)                             (0.003)    (0.003)  (0.003) (0.004)
Bandwidth = IK/4             0.002     -0.013**     0.002 -0.013* Bandwidth = IK/4              -0.004     -0.001   0.001    0.001
                            (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006) (0.007)                             (0.004)    (0.005)  (0.005) (0.005)
Bandwidth = IK, controls     0.003     -0.007**     0.003 -0.006* Bandwidth = IK, controls    0.008***    0.004* 0.007*** 0.007***
                            (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003) (0.003)                             (0.002)    (0.002)  (0.002) (0.003)
(B) Calculus AB                                                    (E) US Government
Bandwidth = IK             0.012***     0.001     0.016*** 0.003 Bandwidth = IK               0.015***   0.005*    0.015***   0.007**
                            (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003) (0.003)                             (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)
Bandwidth = IK/2           0.016***     0.002     0.021*** 0.003 Bandwidth = IK/2             0.014***   0.011**   0.016***   0.011**
                            (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.005) (0.004)                             (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)
Bandwidth = IK/4           0.026***     0.002     0.029*** 0.007 Bandwidth = IK/4             0.018***   0.012**   0.020***   0.015**
                            (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.007) (0.005)                             (0.005)   (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.007)
Bandwidth = IK, controls   0.013***     0.001     0.017*** 0.003 Bandwidth = IK, controls     0.015***    0.005    0.014***   0.006*
                            (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.003) (0.003)                             (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)
(C) English Language and
Composition                                                          (F) US History
Bandwidth = IK              0.009*** 0.002       0.010*** 0.002 Bandwidth = IK                    0.009*** -0.003* 0.011*** -0.002
                             (0.002)  (0.002)     (0.002) (0.003)                                  (0.002) (0.002)   (0.002) (0.002)
Bandwidth = IK/2            0.009*** 0.001       0.011*** 0.004 Bandwidth = IK/2                  0.012*** -0.000 0.011*** -0.000
                             (0.003)  (0.003)     (0.003) (0.004)                                  (0.003) (0.002)   (0.003) (0.003)
Bandwidth = IK/4            0.013*** 0.008*      0.017*** 0.010** Bandwidth = IK/4                0.011*** 0.001    0.012*** 0.002
                             (0.004)  (0.005)     (0.005) (0.005)                                  (0.004) (0.003)   (0.004) (0.003)
Bandwidth = IK, controls 0.010*** 0.002          0.011*** 0.003 Bandwidth = IK, controls          0.010*** -0.002 0.011*** -0.001
                             (0.002)  (0.002)     (0.002) (0.003)                                  (0.002) (0.002)   (0.002) (0.002)
Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-2009
cohorts. Only includes students who begin at a four-year institution within 180 days of HS graduation are included.
Appendix Table 6: RD Impacts on Bachelor's Degree
Completion Within 4 and 6 Years
                                               4-yr
AP subject                          4-Yr       (SE)      6-Yr 6-Yr (SE)
Studio Art 3-D                    -0.007     (0.044)   -0.024 (0.042)
Art History                       0.028***   (0.011)   0.010 (0.011)
Studio Art 2-D                    -0.022     (0.017)   0.016 (0.019)
Studio Art Drawing                0.042***   (0.014)   0.017 (0.014)
Biology                           0.002      (0.003)   -0.007* (0.003)
Calculus AB                       0.016***   (0.003)   0.003 (0.003)
Calculus BC                       0.009      (0.006)   0.010** (0.005)
Chemistry                         0.013***   (0.004)   0.008* (0.004)
Computer Science A                0.001      (0.014)   -0.000 (0.013)
Computer Science AB               -0.016     (0.019)   -0.006 (0.016)
Macroeconomics                    0.004      (0.005)   -0.008* (0.004)
Microeconomics                    0.013**    (0.006)   -0.000 (0.006)
English Language & Comp.          0.010***   (0.002)   0.002 (0.003)
English Literature & Comp.        0.007***   (0.002)   0.007***(0.003)
Environmental Science             -0.008     (0.005)   -0.015***(0.005)
European History                  0.016***   (0.004)   0.008* (0.004)
French Literature                 0.005      (0.022)   0.017 (0.022)
French Language and Culture       -0.003     (0.010)   -0.005 (0.007)
German Language and Culture       -0.004     (0.021)   -0.016 (0.016)
Comparative Gov.and Politics      0.015      (0.010)   -0.007 (0.009)
US Gov and Politics               0.015***   (0.003)   0.007** (0.003)
Human Geography                   0.004      (0.014)   0.007 (0.013)
Latin Literature                  -0.023     (0.019)   -0.007 (0.020)
Latin Vergil                      0.017      (0.015)   -0.004 (0.014)
Music Theory                      0.015      (0.014)   0.020 (0.017)
Physics B                         0.017***   (0.006)   0.003 (0.006)
Physics C: E&M                    0.019*     (0.011)   0.016* (0.009)
Physics C: Mechanics              0.004      (0.008)   -0.004 (0.007)
Psychology                        0.012***   (0.005)   0.008** (0.004)
Spanish Language                  -0.004     (0.005)   0.005 (0.005)
Spanish Literature                0.011      (0.015)   -0.030 (0.019)
Statistics                        0.009**    (0.004)   0.008* (0.004)
US History                        0.011***   (0.002)   -0.002 (0.002)
World History                     0.014**    (0.006)   -0.002 (0.008)
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10,
**p<.05, *** p<.01). Includes AP exams taken by the 2004-2009 cohorts.
Sample includes only students who began at a four-year college within 180
days of HS graduation. Forcing variable is distance from the college-
specific credit-granting threshold, and a triangular kernel is used in all
regressions.
Appendix Table 7: Heterogeneous RD Impacts on Bachelor's Attainment within 4 Years
                                 (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)                                 (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                                                                           Parent HS Parent HS Parent BA
                                         Female        Male        Asian       Black    Hispanic     White dropout graduate or more
(A) Biology
Above threshold                           -0.000      0.006        -0.004      -0.001     -0.018      0.007*    0.025*       0.006       -0.005
                                         (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.016)     (0.014)    (0.004)    (0.013)     (0.009)     (0.005)
Mean below threshold                       0.676      0.541         0.61       0.522       0.564      0.637      0.511       0.557       0.675
Bandwidth                                31.331       26.903      24.321      34.439      28.467      25.616    35.832      36.441       24.598
N                                        229,025     136,685      52,930      18,418      22,949     223,318    26,372      53,489      174,086
(B) Calculcus AB
Above threshold                         0.016***     0.013***      0.009       -0.017      0.007    0.017*** 0.003         0.024***     0.011**
                                         (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.015)     (0.011)    (0.003) (0.012)        (0.009)     (0.004)
Mean below threshold                      0.658        0.486       0.527       0.481       0.484      0.594   0.504          0.516       0.625
Bandwidth                                17.511       20.116      20.228      27.091      22.645     24.128  23.578         22.035       17.657
N                                        208,913     228,590      64,903      23,860      36,557    392,611 35,737          63,647      217,717
(C) English Language and
Composition
Above threshold                         0.012***      0.006       0.013*      0.021*     0.019** 0.008*** 0.003              0.007      0.013***
                                         (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.007)     (0.010)    (0.008) (0.003) (0.009)            (0.006)      (0.003)
Mean below threshold                      0.626       0.533        0.621       0.464      0.433    0.618  0.464              0.509        0.642
Bandwidth                                28.066       25.390      31.637      36.215     32.757   33.478  36.719            34.003       27.655
N                                        436,483     238,358      84,518      43,348     72,528 523,912 53,487              104,721     383,090
(D) English Literature
Above threshold                         0.010***      0.001        0.006       0.006       0.008     0.007**     0.010       -0.002     0.010***
                                         (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.007)    (0.003)    (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.003)
Mean below threshold                      0.646       0.576        0.619       0.503       0.502      0.643      0.534        0.544       0.673
Bandwidth                                17.932       20.274      24.975      33.090      31.190      18.482    33.988      35.448       17.212
N                                        460,949     282,878      96,192      55,554      83,739     539,133    67,690      142,512     379,468
(E) US Government
Above threshold                         0.015***     0.014*** 0.029***        0.026*       0.006    0.015*** 0.008          0.017**     0.013***
                                         (0.004)      (0.005)  (0.009)        (0.013)     (0.011)    (0.004) (0.012)        (0.008)      (0.004)
Mean below threshold                      0.668        0.548    0.589          0.446       0.507      0.632   0.466          0.526        0.661
Bandwidth                                26.454       24.754   24.654         40.630      27.629     23.138  28.386         33.852       25.628
N                                        237,921     209,244   54,265         26,208      39,122    295,868 29,174          67,829      260,587
(F) US History
Above threshold                         0.013***     0.009***      0.008     0.028**      -0.001    0.012*** -0.000         0.013**     0.007**
                                         (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.006)    (0.011)      (0.009)    (0.003) (0.010)        (0.006)     (0.003)
Mean below threshold                      0.669        0.538       0.634      0.482        0.533      0.623   0.523          0.526        0.66
Bandwidth                                31.604       28.013      33.489      37.412      28.362     25.315  32.975         39.988       27.044
N                                        429,330     332,803      97,342      40,370      52,247    491,548 48,268          117,521     405,733
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). Only includes students who enrolled in four-year
colleges on-time (within 180 days of HS graduation). All regressions use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in
which exam was taken. The forcing variable in these regressions is the distance from the credit-granting threshold. The means below the thresholds
represent the mean covariate values within 1 point of the boundary.
Appendix Table 8: RD Impacts on SAT Score Sending among Junior Test Takers
                                     2/3 Boundary              3/4 Boundary
                                 (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)        (5)    (6)
                                            <       $50K-        >             <        $50K-         >
                                          $50K      $100K      $100K         $50K       $100K       $100K
(A) Biology
Above threshold                          -0.153     0.200       0.068        0.040      -0.077      0.045
                                         (0.149)   (0.138)     (0.138)      (0.155)     (0.138)    (0.162)
Mean below threshold                      5.507     5.12        6.376        6.365       5.946      6.748
Bandwidth                                18.804    12.342      19.055       40.894      13.276     12.159
N                                        11,746    13,570      17,114       10,269      14,462     14,893
(B) Calculcus AB
Above threshold                          -0.277    -0.233       0.216        0.149       0.103     -0.006
                                         (0.193)   (0.181)     (0.180)      (0.188)     (0.139)    (0.169)
Mean below threshold                      6.015     5.664       6.188        6.066       5.729      6.838
Bandwidth                                15.827    10.488      17.146       17.105      18.511     12.824
N                                         7,099     7,645       9,439        7,839      12,452     11,792
(C) English Language and
Composition
Above threshold                         0.145** 0.034          0.030         0.068       0.065      0.002
                                        (0.061) (0.039)       (0.047)       (0.080)     (0.054)    (0.051)
Mean below threshold                     4.909   4.673         5.315         5.748       5.631      6.444
Bandwidth                               14.573 22.957         26.880        17.152      16.441     24.038
N                                       61,990 125,119        109,080       45,318      86,710     106,593
(D) English Literature
Above threshold                          -0.119     0.177      -0.282        0.189       0.035      0.251
                                         (0.168)   (0.164)     (0.187)      (0.245)     (0.176)    (0.214)
Mean below threshold                      4.959     4.526       5.972        5.853       5.196      6.498
Bandwidth                                28.110    16.233      22.658       23.649      20.960     14.083
N                                         7,566     8,515       9,318        4,578       8,815      8,422
(E) US Government
Above threshold                          -0.028    -0.167       0.278       -0.156      -0.062    -0.461**
                                         (0.256)   (0.190)     (0.242)      (0.318)     (0.232)    (0.216)
Mean below threshold                      4.617     4.862       5.269        5.351       5.318      6.134
Bandwidth                                36.613    18.143      16.309       21.428      13.831     17.801
N                                         3,377     5,950       5,548        2,323       4,629      6,545
(F) US History
Above threshold                           0.002    -0.024      0.076         0.009     0.123**      0.026
                                         (0.053)   (0.057)    (0.054)       (0.081)    (0.053)     (0.065)
Mean below threshold                      5.29      4.974      5.66          5.716      5.509       6.473
Bandwidth                                23.805    11.020     17.124        14.955     16.309      12.750
N                                        82,526    72,983     100,407       44,013     91,835      78,468
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses (*p<.10, **p<.05, *** p<.01). All regressions
use triangular kernels with fixed effects for cohort and high school year in which exam was taken. The
forcing variable in these regressions is the distance from the credit-granting threshold. The means below the
thresholds represent the mean covariate values within 1 point of the boundary. Only students with raw
scores indicating scores of 2 and 3 included in 2/3 threshold analyses, and only students with raw scores
indicating a 3 and 4 included in the 3/4 threshold analyses.
