                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE IMPACT OF TRADE ON LABOR MARKET DYNAMICS

                                       Lorenzo Caliendo
                                      Maximiliano Dvorkin
                                        Fernando Parro

                                       Working Paper 21149
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21149


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2015




First draft: March 2015. Previously circulated under “The Impact of Trade on Labor Reallocation
and Unemployment.” We thank Alex Bick, Ariel Burstein, Carlos Carrillo-Tudela, Arnaud Costinot,
Jonathan Eaton, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Penny Goldberg, Sam Kortum, Eduardo Morales, Giuseppe
Moscarini, Alexander Monge-Naranjo, Juan Sanchez, Joe Shapiro, Derek Stacey, Peter Schott,
Guillaume Vandenbroucke, Jon Vogel, and seminar participants for useful conversations and
comments. Hannah Shell provided excellent research assistance. All views and opinions expressed
here are the authors' and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Lorenzo Caliendo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Trade on Labor Market Dynamics
Lorenzo Caliendo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro
NBER Working Paper No. 21149
May 2015
JEL No. E24,F16,J62,R13,R23

                                               ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic labor search model where production and consumption take place in spatially
distinct labor markets with varying exposure to domestic and international trade. The model recognizes
the role of labor mobility frictions, goods mobility frictions, geographic factors, and input-output linkages
in determining equilibrium allocations. We show how to solve the equilibrium of the model without
estimating productivities, reallocation frictions, or trade frictions, which are usually difficult to identify.
We use the model to study the dynamic labor market outcomes of aggregate trade shocks. We calibrate
the model to 38 countries, 50 U.S. states and 22 sectors and use the rise in China's import competition
to quantify the aggregate and disaggregate employment and welfare effects on the U.S. economy. We
find that China's import competition growth resulted in 0.6 percentage point reduction in the share
of manufacturing employment, approximately 1 million jobs lost, or about 60% of the change in the
manufacturing employment share not explained by a secular trend. Overall, China's shock increases
U.S. welfare by 6.7% in the long-run and by 0.2% in the short-run with very heterogeneous effects
across labor markets.


Lorenzo Caliendo                                       Fernando Parro
Yale University                                        Federal Reserve Board
School of Management                                   20th street and Constitution Avenue NW
135 Prospect Street                                    Washington D.C., 20551
New Haven, CT 06520                                    fernando.j.parro@frb.gov
and NBER
lorenzo.caliendo@yale.edu

Maximiliano Dvorkin
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
maximiliano.a.dvorkin@stls.frb.org
                                            1. INTRODUCTION


  Aggregate trade shocks can have heterogeneous effects across different labor markets. One source
of variation is the exposure to foreign trade, measured by the degree of import competition across
labor markets. Another source of variation is the extent to which trade shocks impact the exchange
of goods and the reallocation of labor across and within locations. Moreover, since labor movement
across markets takes time, and mobility frictions depend on local characteristics, labor market
outcomes adjust differently across industries, space, and over time to the same aggregate shock. In
this paper we develop a dynamic and spatial labor search model to understand and quantify the
disaggregate labor market effects resulting from changes in the economic environment. The model
explicitly recognizes the role of labor mobility frictions, goods mobility frictions, geographic factors,
input-output linkages and international trade in shaping the effects of shocks across different labor
markets.
  In our economy, production takes place in spatially distinct markets. A market is a sector located
in a particular region in a given country.1 In each market there is a continuum of heterogeneous firms
producing intermediate goods. Firms are competitive, have a constant returns to scale technology,
demand labor, local factors, and materials from all other markets in the economy. In each market
there is also a final good producer that demands intermediate goods from the lowest-cost supplier
in the world. Final goods are then used as materials and consumed by households. Hence, our
model has intersectoral, interregional, and international trade.2
  Time is discrete and agents are infinitely lived. There is a constant measure of households in
the world which at the beginning of the period is distributed across markets in a given manner.
Households can be either employed or unemployed. Employed households supply a unit of labor and
receive the local competitive market wage. Given their income, households allocate consumption
across their region’s final goods. Unemployed households obtain consumption in terms of home
production, or what we call unemployment “benefit.” We model the decision on where to supply
labor across markets as a dynamic discrete choice problem. In particular, we assume that households
are forward looking and that at each moment in time, conditional on their location, the state of
the economy, and an i.i.d. taste shock, they decide whether to be employed in the next period and
   1
     Our setup can accommodate an arbitrary number of sectors located over an arbitrary number of regions across
countries.
   2
     The production structure of the model builds on multi-country international trade models a la Eaton and Kortum
(2002). We introduce dynamics, international trade, and labor mobility frictions to the rich spatial model of Caliendo,
Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte (2014).




                                                          2
in which labor market to supply labor. Moving across labor markets is costly, and we allow for
an arbitrary distribution of mobility costs. As a result, we present a novel dynamic labor search
model with international, interregional, and intersectoral trade.
  Solving a dynamic labor search model is typically a difficult task since it requires characterizing
the evolution of employment across labor markets together with the distribution of wages governing
workers’ decision problem. Moreover, it also requires estimating a large set of structural parameters
that are usually difficult to identify.3 We show that by expressing the equilibrium conditions of
the model in relative time differences we are able to solve the model’s transition path with no need
to estimate productivity levels, mobility costs across labor markets, or international and domestic
trade costs. Aside from data for the initial period that directly maps into the model’s conditions,
the only parameters needed to solve the full transition of the dynamic model are the intertemporal
discount factor, the trade elasticity, and the variance of idiosyncratic taste shocks. The method
holds irrespective of the number of markets and relies on conditioning on the observed initial period
allocation. The intuition is that the observed production data combined with the cross-sectional
variation in trade flows across markets and the cross-sectional variation in mobility flows across
labor markets are sufficient statistics for the implied levels of productivity and the distribution of
trade and mobility costs. Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008, hereafter DEK), have shown this result
in the context of a static trade model.4 We are the first to show this result in the context of a
dynamic discrete choice model.5
  Our study is complementary to a large body of empirical research aimed at identifying the
disaggregate effects of changes in the economic environment. We contribute by introducing a
framework that can be used to perform large-scale quantitative analysis and yet not lose track
of the main economic insights that deliver the results. Equally important, our model can speak
about effects that are usually difficult to quantify or identify in reduced form empirical research.
For instance, we can study how the levels of aggregate employment for different countries and for
specific labor markets respond to a change in policy.6 Furthermore, we contribute to this strand of
   3
      For more details see Rust (1987, 1994).
   4
      Caliendo and Parro (2015) also show that DEK’s technique holds with multiple sectors and input-output linkages.
DEK’s methodology is also referred as the “exact hat algebra,” following Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014).
    5
      Our solution method applies to a large class of dynamic discrete choice models. It relies on obtaining a closed form
analytical expression for the transition of the state variable of the economy, which is typically the case in dynamic
discrete choice models with extreme value distribution assumptions.
    6
      More broadly, through the lens of our model, we can study the effects of changes in many economic conditions.
For instance, how changes in trade costs, labor migration costs, local structures, productivity, unemployment benefits,
and local policies, affect the rest of the economy. In addition, we can analyze how aggregate changes in economic
circumstances can have heterogeneous disaggregate effects.




                                                            3
the literature by explaining how additional channels account for the change in welfare and many
other economic outcomes at the aggregate and disaggregate levels and over time.
  Recent studies have analyzed the impact of trade shocks on labor market dynamics (see, e.g.
Artuç and McLaren, 2010, Artuç Chaudhuri and McLaren, 2010 [hereafter ACM], Dix-Carneiro,
2014, and Dix-Carneiro and Novak, 2015)7 . We build on this fast growing strand of the litera-
ture and apply our model and solution method to study the effects of the rise in China’s import
competition on U.S. labor markets.
  U.S. imports from China almost doubled from 2000 to 2007. During the same period manufac-
turing employment fell considerably while employment in other sectors, such as construction and
services, grew. Several studies (e.g. Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013 [hereafter ADH], Acemoglu
et al., 2014, Pierce and Schott, 2012) document that an important part of the employment loss in
manufactures was a consequence of China’s trade expansion, either as a consequence of technolog-
ical improvements in the Chinese economy or due to reductions in trade costs.8 In most of these
studies the main reason why U.S. labor markets are differentially exposed to Chinese goods is their
different degree of import competition. We use our model to quantify how additional channels can
also explain the employment loss in the manufacturing sector and how other sectors of the economy,
such as construction and services, were also exposed to the Chinese shock. More importantly, we
use our model to compute the welfare effects across labor markets over time.
  We calibrate our model to 38 countries, 50 U.S. states, and 22 sectors.9 We take the initial
distribution of labor across markets in the U.S. economy and match the initial conditions of our
model to those in the year 2000. We rely on the identification restriction suggested by ADH to
identify China’s shock; namely, we use the predicted changes in U.S. imports from China using as
instrument the change in imports from China by other high-income countries for the period 2000
to 2007. Using our model, we compute the change in sectoral productivities in China between 2000
and 2007 that exactly matches the predicted changes in imports in the model. These changes in
productivity is what we call the China shock and refer to it as such in the rest of the paper.
  We find that increased Chinese competition reduced the share of manufacturing employment by
   7
     Other papers that study the effect of trade on labor market dynamics are Cosar (2013), Cosar, Guner, and
Tybout (2014), Kondo (2013), and Menezes-Filho, and Muendler (2011).
   8
     ADH argue that structural reforms in the Chinese economy resulted in large technological improvements in
export-led sectors. As a result, China’s import penetration to the Unites States increased. Handley and Limao
(2014) and Pierce and Schott (2012) argue that the U.S.’ elimination of uncertainty about tariff increases on Chinese
goods was another important reason why U.S. imports from China grew.
   9
     It is worth noting that for an application of this dimension not using our solution method will require estimating:
N × R × J productivity levels, N 2 × R2 × J asymmetric bilateral trade costs, N 2 × R2 × J 2 labor mobility costs,
N × R × J stocks of local factors. Where N , R and J are countries, regions and sectors, respectively.



                                                           4
0.6 percentage point in the long run, which is equivalent to a loss of about 1 million manufacturing
jobs, or about 60% of the change in the share of manufacturing employment that is not explained
by a secular trend. We also find that workers reallocate to the services sector as it benefits from
the access to cheaper intermediate inputs from China.
  Our quantitative framework also allows us to quantify the relative contribution of different sectors,
regions and labor markets to the decline in manufacturing employment. We find that sectors with
a higher exposure to import competition from China lost more manufacturing jobs. The computer
and electronics, and furniture industries contributed to about half of the decline in manufacturing
employment, followed by metal and textiles industries that together contributed to about one-
fourth of the total decline. Some sectors, such as food, beverage and tobacco, gained employment,
as they were less exposed to China and benefited from cheaper intermediate goods. The fact that
U.S. economic activity is not equally distributed across space plus the differential sectoral exposure
to China, imply that the impact of China’s import competition varies across regions. We find
that U.S. states that have a larger concentration of sectors that were more exposed to China lose
more manufacturing jobs. California, which by far accounts for the largest share of employment in
computer and electronics (the sector most exposed to China’s import competition), contributed to
about 12% of the decline.
  Our framework also allows us to quantify the welfare effects of the increased competition from
China on the U.S. economy. Our results indicate that the China shock increases U.S. welfare by 6.7%
in the long run and by 0.2% in the short run. Therefore, even when U.S. exposure to China decreases
employment in the manufacturing sector, the U.S. economy is better off. Moreover, the welfare
effect is larger in the long run than in the short run as workers reallocate from depressed industries.
We find that the non manufacturing sectors gain the most, since they are not directly exposed to
competition from China and at the same time benefit from cheaper intermediate manufacturing
inputs used in their production and from increased inflow of workers from other sectors. We also
find that welfare gains are more uniform in the long run due to workers’ reallocation.
  In addition, we quantify the welfare effects across regions and find that all U.S. states fare better
in the short run and in the long run. Regions benefit directly from the access to cheaper intermediate
goods from China and indirectly from the effect of cheaper Chinese goods on the cost of inputs
purchased from other U.S. regions. We find that the regional welfare distribution is more uniform
in the long run than in the short run as, over time, workers reallocate from regions with lower
real income. Across individual labor markets, we find that some labor markets, such as wood and


                                                  5
paper manufacturing in Nevada, transport equipment manufacturing in Louisiana, and wholesale
and retail Trade in Alaska, are worse off with the increased competition from China.
  In summary, we are able to account for the short- and long-run distribution of winners and losers
across sectors and regions of the U.S. economy caused by the increase in Chinese competition.
  The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present our dynamic model of costly labor
reallocation and trade. Operating over the set of equilibrium conditions, we are able to write the
model in a more tractable way. In Section 3 we show how this transformation reduces the burden
of the quantitative application. In Section 4 we use our model to quantify the effects of increased
Chinese competition on different U.S. labor markets. Finally, we conclude in Section 5. All proofs
are relegated to Appendix 2.



                   2. A SPATIAL DYNAMIC LABOR SEARCH MODEL


  Time is discrete, and we denote it by t = 0, 1, 2, ... We consider a world with N countries, R
regions, and J sectors. We use the indexes n or i as unique identifiers of a particular region
irrespective of the country and index sectors by j or k. In each region-sector combination there
is a competitive labor market. In each market there is a continuum of perfectly competitive firms
producing intermediate goods using a technology with time-invariant heterogeneous idiosyncratic
productivity.
  We follow Eaton and Kortum (2002, hereafter EK) and assume that productivities are distributed
Fréchet with a sector-specific productivity dispersion parameter θj . Firms have a Cobb-Douglas
constant returns to scale technology, demand labor, a composite local factor that we refer to as
structures, and materials from all sectors.
  At the beginning of the period there is an initial distribution of labor across markets. We abstract
from labor force participation decisions; thus, workers can be either employed or unemployed in
a region. Workers face costs to move across markets and experience an idiosyncratic shock that
affects their moving decision. The households’ problem is closely related to the sectoral reallocation
problem in ACM and to the competitive labor search model of Lucas and Prescott (1974).10 Agents
are forward looking and optimally decide where to move. We first characterize the dynamic problem
of a household deciding where to move conditional on a path of real wages across time and labor
  10
     A related model of reallocation and unemployment is developed in Dvorkin (2014). See also, Coen-Pirani (2010).
Preference shocks are widely used in the literature on worker reallocation. See, for example, Kennan and Walker
(2011), ACM, Dix-Carneiro (2014), and Monte (2015).




                                                        6
markets. We then characterize the static subproblem to solve for prices and wages conditional on
the supply of labor in a given market.



2.1 Problem of the households


  At t = 0 there is a mass Ln,j
                            0   of households in each location n and sector j. Households can
be either employed or unemployed. An employed household in location n and sector j supplies
a unit of labor inelastically and receives a competitive market wage wtn,j . Given her income she
decides how to allocate consumption over local final goods from all sectors with a Cobb-Douglas
aggregator. We assume that preferences are over the basket of final local goods, in particular

                                                               YJ                   αk
                                   U (Ctn,j ), where Ctn,j =                 cn,k
                                                                              t            ,                       (1)
                                                                   k=1

where cn,k
       t   is the consumption of sector goods k in region n at time t, and αk is the final con-
                     P                                                     Q              α k
sumption share, with Jk=1 αk = 1. We denote the ideal price index by Ptn = Jk=1 Ptn,k /αk       .
Unemployed households in region n obtain consumption in terms of home production, or an un-
employed “benefit,” bn > 0. To simplify the notation, we represent sector zero in each region as
unemployment; hence, Ctn,0 = bn .11

  Assumption 1 Agents have logarithmic preferences, that is, U (Ctn,j ) ≡ log(Ctn,j ).

  Assumption 1 specifies the preference structure of the agents in the economy. In Section 3 we show
how the equilibrium conditions of the model change if we relax this assumption. The household’s
problem is dynamic, and agents are forward looking and discount the future at rate ρ ≥ 0.

  Assumption 2 Labor reallocation costs τ n,j;i,k ≥ 0 depend on the origin (n, j) and destination
(i, k) , and are (i) time invariant, (ii) additive, and (iii) in terms of utility. We further assume that
there is no international migration by imposing that (iv) τ n,j;i,k = ∞ for all j, k such that regions
n and i belong to different countries.

  Assumption 2 describes the mobility costs in the model. As we can see, condition (iv) in the
assumption states explicitly that there is no international migration in the model.12 In addition,
  11
     To simplify the notation, we abstract from local amenities, which can vary both by sectors and regions. As it will
become clear later, our exercise and results are unaltered to the existence of these amenities under the assumption
that they enter the period utility additively and are constant over time.
  12
     This assumption is convenient for our quantitative application in Section 4, but the model can accommodate
international migration.


                                                          7
agents have additive idiosyncratic preference (or cost) shocks for each choice and we denote them
by ǫi,k
    t .

  The timing for the workers’ problem and decisions is as follows. Workers observe the economic
conditions in all labor markets and the realizations of their own idiosyncratic shocks. If they begin
the period in a labor market, they work and earn the market wage. If they are unemployed in a
region, they get home production. Then, both employed and unemployed workers have the option
to reallocate. Formally,
                                                             n h      i                    o
                        vtn,j = u(Ctn,j ) +      max              i,k
                                                              ρE vt+1   − τ nj,ik + σ ǫi,k
                                                                                       t     ,
                                              {i,k}N,J
                                                   i=1,k=0
                                             
                                              log(bn )        if j = 0,
                                       n,j
                               s.t. u(Ct ) ≡
                                              log(wn,j /P n ) otherwise;
                                                     t    t

where vtn,j is the lifetime utility of a worker in region n and sector j at time t and the expectation
is taken over future realizations of the preference shock. Note that workers choose to reallocate to
the labor market that delivers the highest utility net of costs.

  Assumption 3 The idiosyncratic preference shock (or reallocation cost shock) ǫ has the following
properties: It (i) is i.i.d. over time, (ii) follows a Type-I Extreme Value distribution, (iii) has zero
mean.

  Assumption 3 is a standard assumption made in dynamic discrete choice models.13 It allows for
a simple aggregation of the idiosyncratic decisions made by households as we now show.
                        h i
  Denote by Vtn,j ≡ E vti,k the expected lifetime utility of a worker, where the expectation is
taken over the preference shocks. Vtn,j can be interpreted as the expected lifetime utility of a
worker before the realization of her preference shocks or, alternatively, as the average utility of
workers in that market under a pure utilitarian welfare. Then, by Assumption 2,
                                      X X                                  1/σ 
                   n,j     n,j              N     J           i,k    n,j;i,k
                 Vt = u(Ct ) + σ log                   exp ρVt+1 − τ                .                        (2)
                                                      i=1        k=0

  Equation (2) reflects that the value of being in a particular labor market depends on the current-
period utility and the option value to move into any other market in the next period.14
  Assumption 3 also implies that the share of labor that transitions across markets has a closed-
form analytical expression. In particular, denote by µn,j;i,k
                                                      t       the fraction of workers that reallocate
  13
    For a survey on this literature, see Aguirregabiria and Mira (2010).
  14
    For an example of a model that delivers a similar expression refer to Artuç and McLaren (2010), ACM, and
Dix-Carneiro (2014). ACM also provides an economic interpretation of the different components of the option value
to migrate across sectors.


                                                             8
from market n, j to i, k (with µn,j;n,j
                                t       the fraction who choose to remain in their original location),
then,
                                                                      1/σ
                                                       i,k
                                               exp ρVt+1   − τ n,j;i,k
                             µn,j;i,k
                              t         =                                      1/σ .                             (3)
                                          PN PJ              m,h        n,j;m,h
                                           m=1   h=0 exp ρVt+1 − τ

  Equation (3) has a very intuitive interpretation. Other things equal, it reflects that markets
with a higher lifetime utility (net of mobility costs) are the ones that attract more labor. From
this expression we can also see that 1/σ has the interpretation of a labor mobility cost elasticity.15
Equation (3) is a key equilibrium condition in this model because it conveys all information needed
to determine how the distribution of labor evolves over time. In particular, the dynamics of the
distribution of labor over markets are described by,
                                                  XN XJ
                                         Ln,j
                                          t+1 =                       µi,k;n,j
                                                                       t       Li,k
                                                                                t .                                (4)
                                                     i=1        k=0


  We now proceed to outline the production structure of the economy.



2.2 Production


  Technology follows closely EK, particularly the multisector version in Caliendo and Parro (2015)
and the spatial model of Caliendo, et al. (2014). Goods are of two types: intermediate, denoted by
q, and final, denoted by Q. Firms in each sector and region are able to produce many varieties of
intermediate goods and a final good. The technology to produce these intermediate goods requires
labor and structures, which are the primary factors of production, and materials, which consists of
final goods from all sectors. Total factor productivity (TFP) of an intermediate good is composed
of two terms, a sectoral-regional component (An,j ), which is common to all varieties in a region and
sector, and a variety-specific component (z n,j ). We assume that Ai,j is exogenous and deterministic.
Since one intermediate variety is identified by z n,j , we use it to index a variety.
  15
     Note that if we were to assume that mobility costs are multiplicative and that idiosyncratic taste shocks are
distributed Fréchet, then similar analytical expressions are obtained. In this case, the expected value in equation (2)
and the fraction of workers who move in equation (3) will be given by
                                                  X                            1/σ σ
                                                      N XJ
                               Vtn,j = u (Ctn ) +                    i,k n,j;i,k
                                                                  ρVt+1 τ                ,
                                                      i=1       k=0

and,
                                                                     1/σ
                                                          i,k n,j;i,k
                                                       ρVt+1 τ
                                    µn,j;i,k   =                           .
                                     t           PN PJ  m,h n,j;m,h 1/σ
                                                  m=1   h=0  ρVt+1   τ




                                                            9
  Intermediate Goods Producers.–
  The technology for intermediate goods is described by,
                                             h          iβ n h          i1−β n γ n,j Y
                                                                                       J
                                                                                                           n,jk
           qtn,j (z n,j )   =z   n,j
                                        A n,j    n,j n,j
                                                lt (z )          n,j n,j
                                                                ht (z )                  [Mtn,jk (z n,j )]γ ,
                                                                                                              k=1

where ltn,j (z n,j ), hn,j
                       t (z
                            n,j ) are the demands for labor and structures by firms in sector j and region


n, and Mtn,jk (z n,j ) is the demand for material inputs from sector k by firms in sector j and region
n. Material inputs are final goods from sector k produced in the same region n. The parameter
γ n,j ≥ 0 is the share of value added in the production of sector j and region n, and γ n,jk ≥ 0 is
the share of materials from sector k in the production of sector j and region n. We assume that
                                                                     P
the production function exhibits constant returns to scale such that Jk=1 γ n,jk = 1 − γ n,j . The
parameter β n is the share of structures in value added. Structures are in fixed supply in each labor
market.
  We denote by Ptn,j the price of materials, and by rtn,j the rental price of structures in region n
and sector j. We define the unit price of an input bundle as
                                                             β n            1−β n γ n,j Y
                                                                                              J
                                                                                                                       n,jk
                             xn,j
                              t        =B   n,j
                                                       rtn,j            wtn,j                              [Ptn,k ]γ          ,   (5)
                                                                                                   k=1

where B n,j is a constant. Then, the unit cost of an intermediate good z n,j at time t is

                                                                       xn,j
                                                                        t
                                                                                   .
                                                                z n,j [An,j ]γ n,j

  Trade costs are represented by parameter κni,j and are of the “iceberg” type. One unit of any
variety of intermediate good j shipped from region i to n requires producing κni,j ≥ 1 units in
region i. If a good is nontradable, then κni,j = ∞. Competition implies that the price paid for a
particular variety of good j in region n is given by the minimum unit costs across regions, taking
into account trade costs. That is,
                                                                          (                        )
                                                                                 κni,j xi,j
                                               pn,j j
                                                t (z )         = min                      t
                                                                                                       .
                                                                    i         z i,j [Ai,j ]γ i,j



  Final Goods Producers.–
  Final goods in region n and sector j are produced by combining intermediate goods from sector j
across all other regions. Let Qn,j                                                             n,j j
                               t be the quantity of final goods in region n and sector j and q̃t (z )

the quantity demanded of an intermediate good of a given variety such that, for that variety, the

                                                                         10
vector of productivity draws received by the different regions is z j = (z 1,j , z 2,j , . . . , z N,j ). The
production of final goods is given by
                                             Z                                        ηn,j /(ηn,j −1)
                                                                      n,j
                                Qn,j
                                 t       =        [q̃tn,j (z j )]1−1/η φj (z j )dz j                      ,

                     n P                    o
where φj (z j ) = exp − N          n,j )−θj   is the joint density function over the vector z j , with mar-
                           n=1 (z
                                              n           j
                                                            o
ginal densities given by φn,j (z n,j ) = exp −(z n,j )−θ and the integral is over RN  + . For nontradable

sectors the only relevant density is φn,j (z n,j ) since final good producers use only locally produced
goods. There are no fixed costs or barriers to entry and exit in the production of intermediate and
final goods. Competitive behavior implies zero profits at all times. Because of constant returns to
scale in production, the number of firms in the economy is undetermined, but this is inconsequential
for equilibrium allocations.
  Given the properties of the Fréchet distribution, the price of the final good j in region n at time
t is                                                           X                                        −1/θj
                                                       n,j )      N                    j         j i,j
                         Ptn,j = Γ(ξ n,j )1/(1−η                        [xi,j
                                                                          t κ
                                                                              ni,j −θ
                                                                                  ] [Ai,j ]θ      γ
                                                                                                                     ,               (6)
                                                                  i=1
                                                                                                               16
where Γ(ξ n,j ) is the Gamma function evaluated at ξ n,j = 1 + 1 − η n,j /θj                                         . Following similar
steps as earlier, from the problem of the final good producer we can solve for the share of total
expenditure in market (n, j) on goods j from market i. In particular,
                                                                           j         j i,j
                                                           [xi,j
                                                             t κ
                                                                 ni,j ]−θ [Ai,j ]θ    γ
                                       π ni,j
                                         t    = PN           m,j nm,j −θ       j             j m,j
                                                                                                     .                               (7)
                                                       m=1 [xt κ     ] [Am,j ]θ               γ


  This equilibrium condition reflects that the more productive market i, j is, the cheaper is the
costs of production in market i, j, and therefore, the more region n purchases sector j goods from
region i. In addition, the easier is to ship sector j goods from region i to n (lower κni,j ), the more
region n purchases sector j goods from region i. This equilibrium condition is sometimes referred
to as the gravity equation.



  Market Clearing.–
  In order to accommodate observed trade imbalances, we assume there is a mass 1 of rentiers in
each market. Rentiers cannot reallocate to other regions. They own the local structures and rent
them to local firms. The rentiers of a particular region n remit all the proceeds to a world pool of
rents, of which they own a share ιn . The difference between the remittances and the income rentiers
  16
       We assume that 1 + θj > η n,j .



                                                                   11
receive will generate trade imbalances, which change in magnitude as the rental prices change. The
rentier uses her income to buy goods produced in her own region using equation (1).
  Let Xtn,j the total expenditure on final good j in region n. Then, regional market clearing in
final goods implies
                         XJ               XN                          X                               
                                                                         J
               Xtn,j =           γ n,kj          π in,k
                                                   t    Xti,k + αj                   wtn,k Ln,k
                                                                                            t   + ιn
                                                                                                     χt ,    (8)
                           k=1             i=1                               k=1

where π in,k
        t    denotes the share of region n’s total expenditures on sector j’s intermediate goods
                                PJ      n,k n,k
purchased from region i, and      k=1 (wt Lt    + ιn χt ) is the total income in region n, where
      PN PJ         i,k i,k
χt =     i=1   k=1 rt H . We refer to equilibrium condition (8) as the goods market equilib-

rium condition. Given prices and wages, workers and rentiers exhaust their income in final goods
(the last term in the equation), and producers supply exactly these final goods for consumption
plus the materials needed for intermediate goods production.
  Labor market clearing in region n and sector j is
                                           γ n,j (1 − β n ) XN
                                  Ln,j
                                   t =                                 π in,j
                                                                         t    Xti,j ,                        (9)
                                                 wtn,j          i=1

while the market clearing for structures in region n and sector j must satisfy
                                               γ n,j β n XN
                                     H n,j =                        π in,j
                                                                      t    Xti,j .                          (10)
                                                 rtn,j        i=1

  We now proceed to formally define an equilibrium of the economy.


2.3 Equilibrium


  The state of the economy at any given moment in time is determined by the distribution
of labor across all markets st = {Ln,j N,J
                                   t }n=1,j=0 . The sectoral-regional productivities are A =

{An,j }N,J
       n=1,j=1 , iceberg transportation costs are described by K = {κ
                                                                      ni,j }N,N,J
                                                                            n=1,i=1,j=1 , the labor

mobility costs by Υ = {τ n,j;i,k }N,J,J,N
                                  n=1,j=0,i=1,k=0 , the distribution of structures across markets by
      n,j N,J
H = H       n=1,j=1
                    , the distribution of regional unemployment benefits by b = {bn }N   n=1 , and we

define Θ ≡ (A, K, Υ, H, b) . We seek to find equilibrium prices Pt = {Ptn,j }N,J
                                                                             n=1,j=1 , wages wt =

{wtn,j }N,J                                n,j N,J
        n=1,j=1 , and rental prices rt = {rt }n=1,j=1 given (st , Θ) . We refer to this equilibrium as a

temporary equilibrium. Formally,


Definition 1 Given (st , Θ) , a temporary equilibrium is a vector of w, r, and P that satisfies
equilibrium conditions (5) to (10) . We denote by ω (st , Θ) the temporary equilibrium of the
economy given (st , Θ) .

                                                         12
  Suppose it can be shown that for any (st , Θ) there is a unique temporary equilibrium. Then
the wage rate can be expressed as wt = w (st , Θ), rental prices as rt = r (st , Θ), and prices as
Pt = P (st , Θ) .17 After defining the temporary equilibrium, we can now define the sequential
competitive equilibrium of the model. Let µt = {µn,j;i,k
                                                 t       }N,J,J,N                       n,j N,J
                                                          n=1,j=0,i=1,k=0 , and Vt = {Vt }n=1,j=0 .

The definition of a sequential competitive equilibrium is given below.


Definition 2 Given (s0 , Θ) , a sequential competitive equilibrium of the model is a sequence of
{st , µt , Vt , ω (st , Θ)}∞
                           t=0 that solves equilibrium conditions (2) to (4) , and the temporary equilibrium

at each t.


  Finally, we define a stationary equilibrium of the model.


Definition 3 A stationary equilibrium of the model is a sequential competitive equilibrium such
that {st , µt , Vt , ω (st , Θ)}∞
                                t=0 are constant for all t.



  A stationary equilibrium in this economy is a situation in which all aggregate variables do not
change over time. In a stationary equilibrium, workers flow from one market to another, but on
net inflows and outflows cancel exactly.



                                   3. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


  The main challenge in solving for all the transitional dynamics in a dynamic discrete choice
model with a rich spatial structure is that it requires a large number of unknown parameters. Note
from definitions (1) to (3) that to solve for an equilibrium of the model it is necessary to condition
on Θ; namely, almost the entire set of parameters of the model (productivity, endowments of
local structures, labor mobility costs, unemployment benefits, and trade costs). As we increase
the dimension of the problem –adding countries, regions, or sectors– the number of parameters
grows exponentially. We now show that one can solve this problem and compute the equilibrium
dynamics of the model without knowing Θ.

  17
    Note that given (st , Θ) , a temporary equilibrium is the solution to a multi-country interregional trade model
as in Caliendo, et al. (2014). The existence and uniqueness of that model has not been proven so far; however,
numerical simulations indicate that there is one. Yet, we know from Alvarez and Lucas (2007) that there exists a
unique equilibrium of a one-sector version of the model. More recently, Allen and Arkolakis (2014) provide a sharp
characterization of the equilibrium conditions of a more general model than that of Alvarez and Lucas (2007).


                                                        13
3.1 Solution Method


  Our solution method exploits the multiplicative properties of the equilibrium conditions. We
start by first showing that one can characterize how the temporary equilibrium changes from one
state to another without knowing Θ. This result is presented in the following proposition.

  Proposition 1 Consider the temporary equilibrium at state s and a temporary equilibrium at
state s′ . Denote the change in the temporary equilibrium from one state to the other by ω̂ (ŝ, Θ)
where ŝ = s′ /s. The solution to the change in the temporary equilibrium from state s to s′ is
independent of Θ; namely, ω̂ (ŝ, Θ) = ω̂ (ŝ).

  Proposition 1 is very important since it shows that given a sequence of states st , one can solve for
the sequence of temporary equilibria without requiring information on productivities, transporta-
tion costs, labor mobility costs, unemployment benefits and structures. In a different context, this
“trick” is used in international trade models to evaluate the change in the equilibrium conditions
to a change in policy.18 The solution method in trade was first introduced by DEK. Proposition 1
is also important because it shows that one can solve for the change of a temporary equilibrium to
a given arbitrary change in technologies, trade costs, migration costs, or any other element of Θ,
which hereafter we refer to as a change in policy. We state this last observation without proof with
Corollary 1.

  Corollary 1 Consider the temporary equilibrium at state s and given policy ⊤. Solving for a
                                                              ˆ = ⊤′ /⊤ does not require Θ.
change in the temporary equilibrium given a change in policy, ⊤

  We now characterize the solution of the dynamic model. We want to understand how the sequen-
tial equilibrium of the model changes after a change in policy. We assume that agents at t = −1 are
not expecting the change in policy and that at t = 0 agents learn about the change in the economic
environment. This timing assumption allows us to use information about agents’ actions at t = −1
to solve for the sequential equilibrium, under a new policy, in relative time differences. Let the new
policy sequence be given by ⊤ = {⊤t }∞                   ˆ    ˆ ∞
                                     t=0 , and denote by ⊤ = {⊤t }t=1 the relative time difference
                   ˆ t = ⊤t /⊤t−1 . The next proposition shows that one can compute the sequential
of policy ⊤, where ⊤
equilibrium in relative time differences, without knowing Θ.
   18
      It is important to emphasize that the temporal equilibrium described in Definition 1 is not specific to a multisector
EK model, but it can also be the equilibrium of other trade models such as Melitz (2003). In other words, our solution
method requires that the temporary equilibrium solves for equilibrium prices given the distribution of employment
irrespective of the model’s structure or microfoundations that determine those prices.


                                                            14
                                       
                                                  ˆ = {⊤
  Proposition 2 Conditional on s0 , µ−1 and given ⊤    ˆ t }∞ , the solution to the sequen-
                                                            t=1

tial equilibrium in relative time differences does not require Θ, and solves the following system of
equations                                                    h       iρ
                                                    µn,j;i,k
                                                     t
                                                                 i,k
                                                               Yt+2
                                    µn,j;i,k
                                     t+1     =P     PJ                h        iρ ,                                 (11)
                                                N            n,j;m,h       m,h
                                                m=1   h=0 tµ            Y t+2
                                               XN XJ                 h       iρ
                                        n,j
                                     Yt+1    =             λn,j;i,k
                                                             t+1       Y i,k
                                                                        t+2     ,                                   (12)
                                                   i=1     k=0
                                                 XN XJ
                                        Ln,j
                                         t+1 =                         µi,k;n,j
                                                                        t       Li,k
                                                                                 t ,
                                                     i=1        k=0
                                      1/σ                          1/σ                                    
          i,k              i,k
 where Yt+1     ≡ exp Vt+1     − Vti,k      , λn,j;i,k
                                               t+1
                                                           n,j
                                                       = ŵt+1    n
                                                               /P̂t+1      µn,j;i,k
                                                                            t
                                                                                            n,j
                                                                                    , and ŵt+1           ˆ t+1 ,
                                                                                                  ŝt+1 , ⊤
                        
      n
and P̂t+1           ˆ t+1 are the solution to the temporary equilibrium at state ŝt+1 and policy ⊤
            ŝt+1 , ⊤                                                                                       ˆ t+1 .


  Proposition 2 is one of the key results of this paper. This transformation reduces the burden of
calibration and allows solving for the transitional dynamics of the model using only a few parameters
and data for the initial period i.e., the initial value of the labor transition matrix and the initial
distribution of workers across labor markets.19 Moreover, one can apply this solution method to
evaluate any sequence of policy changes. For instance, quantify the effects of an arbitrary change in
TFP, An,j , trade costs κni,j , labor mobility costs τ n,j;i,k , structures H, and unemployment benefits
bn across markets and over time. In the quantitative exercise in Section 4, we consider how a change
in sectoral TFP in China affects U.S. labor market outcomes.



3.2 Taking the model to the data


  Our initial period is the year 2000. Our solution method requires the initial values of the bilateral
trade shares π ni,j             n,j n,j n,j n,j                                n,j
               0 , value added w0 L0 + r0 H0 , the distribution of employment L0 , and the

initial matrix of mobility across regions and sectors, µ−1 . We also need to compute the share of
value added in gross output γ n,j , the share of structures in value added β n , and the material shares
γ n,jk . Finally, we need to input the dispersion of productivities θj , the variance of the preference
shock σ, and the discount factor ρ. This section provides a summary of the data sources and
measurement to calibrate the model, with further data details provided in Appendix 1.
  19
     It is worth noting that given Assumption 2, we do not require information on the level of wages and local prices
across markets in the initial period to solve the model. If instead we had linear utility, then the equation for λn,j;i,k
                                                                                                                  1
will given by
                                                                     wn,j
                                         λn,j;i,k
                                          1       = ŵ1n,j /P̂1n − 1    0
                                                                            µn,j;i,k ,
                                                                       P0n 0
                                                                 n,j
                                                                w0
which, as we can see, will require conditioning on observed      P0n
                                                                       .


                                                           15
  Regions, sectors, and labor markets. We calibrate the model to the 50 U.S. states, 37 other
countries, including China and a constructed rest of the world, and 22 sectors. The 22 sectors are
classified according the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS), 12 of which are
manufacturing sectors, 8 are service sectors, and we also include construction and wholesale and
trade.20 Our definition of a labor market in the U.S. economy is thus a state-sector pair, including
unemployment, leading to 1150 markets. In the other countries, there is a single labor market
despite having many productive sectors.


  Discount factor We take the time period to be a quarter and calibrate the discount factor ρ
to 0.99, implying a yearly interest rate of roughly 4%.


  Trade across labor markets                 We construct the bilateral trade shares π ni,j
                                                                                       0 for the year 2000

for the 38 countries in our sample, including the aggregate United States, from the World Input
Output Database (WIOD). The WIOD database presents national input-output tables of major
countries in the world and a constructed rest of the world that are linked through international
trade statistics for 35 sectors, which we are able to map to our 22 NAICS sectors.
  The sectoral bilateral trade flows across the 50 U.S. states were constructed by combining infor-
mation from the WIOD database and the 2002 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS), which is the closest
available year to 2000. From the WIOD database we compute the total U.S. domestic sales for
the year 2000 for our 22 sectors. From the 2002 CFS we compute the bilateral expenditure shares
across regions and sectors. These two pieces of information allow us to construct the bilateral trade
flows matrix for the 50 U.S. states across sectors, where the total U.S. domestic sales match the
WIOD data for the year 2000.
  Bilateral trade flows between the 50 U.S. states and the rest of the countries in the world were
constructed by combining information from the WIOD database and regional employment data
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). In our paper, local labor markets have different
exposures to international trade shocks because there is substantial geographic variation in industry
specialization. Regions that have a high concentration of production in a given industry should
react more to international trade shocks to that industry. Therefore, our measure for the exposure
of local labor markets to international trade combines trade data with local industry employment.
Specifically, we split the bilateral trade flows at the country level computed from WIOD into
bilateral trade flows between the U.S. states and other countries by assuming that the share of each
 20
      Agriculture, mining, utilities, and the public sector are excluded from the analysis.


                                                           16
state in total U.S. trade with any country in the world in each sector is determined by the regional
share of total employment in that industry as in ADH.


  Input shares We obtain data on gross output, value added, and intermediate consumption
across sectors and countries from the WIOD and across U.S. states from the BEA. We use these
data to calibrate the share of value added in gross output (γ n,j ) and the share of materials in gross
output (γ n,jk ).
  To calibrate (1 − β n ), the share of labor in value added for the 50 U.S. states, we use the share
of labor compensation in value added (less taxes and subsidies) using data from the BEA. For the
rest of the countries in the world, we use labor compensation and value added data from the OECD
Input-Output database.
                                                                     PN      PJ         P       PN
                                                                                  γ n,kj N        i=1 π
                                                                                                        in,k X i,k
  The share of final good expenditure is calculated as αj =            n=1    k=1
                                                                               PN          n=1
                                                                                        n,k Ln,k +ιn χ
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                 n=1  w


  Trade elasticities The dispersion of productivities θj is obtained from Caliendo and Parro
(2015).


  The initial labor mobility matrix and the initial distribution of labor To determine
the initial distribution of workers in the year 2000 by U.S. states and sectors (and unemployment),
we use the 5 percent Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) of the decennial U.S. Census for the
year 2000. Information on industry is classified according to the NAICS which we aggregate to our
22 sectors and unemployment.21 We restrict the sample to people between 25 and 65 years of age
who are either unemployed or employed in one of the sectors included in the analysis. Our sample
contains over 5 million observations.
  We combine information from the PUMS of the American Community Survey (ACS) and the
Current Population Survey (CPS) to construct the initial matrix of quarterly mobility across our
regions and sectors (µ−1 ).22 Our goal is to construct a transition matrix describing how individuals
move between state-sector pairs from one quarter to the next (from t to t + 1). The ACS has partial
information on this; in particular, the ACS asks people about their current state and industry (or
unemployment) and the state in which they lived during the previous year. We use the year
  21
     While unemployment in the Census is defined similarly to the Current Population Survey (CPS), design and
methodological differences in the Census tend to overestimate the number of unemployed workers relative to the
CPS.
  22
     The ACS interviews provide a representative sample of the U.S. population for every year since 2000. For the
year 2001, the sample consists of 0.5 percent of the U.S. population. The survey is mandatory and is a complement
to the decennial Census.




                                                       17
2001 since this is the first year for which data on interstate mobility at a yearly frequency are
available.23 We find that around 2% of the U.S. population moves across states in a year in this
time period. We assume that people face equal probabilities of moving in any given quarter. Under
this assumption we can recover a quarterly interstate mobility rate. Unfortunately, the ACS does
not have information on workers’ past employment status or the industry in which people worked
during the previous period.
  We use the PUMS from the monthly CPS to obtain information on past industry of employment
(or unemployment) at the quarterly frequency. The main advantages of the CPS is that it is
the source of official labor market statistics and has a relatively large sample size at a monthly
frequency. In the CPS, individuals living at the same address can be followed month to month
for a small number of periods.24 We match individuals surveyed three months apart and compute
their employment or unemployment status and work industry, accounting for any change between
interviews as a transition.25 The main limitation with the CPS is that individuals who move to
a different residence, which of course includes interstate moves, cannot be matched. Our 3-month
match rate is close to 90%.26 As the monthly CPS does not have information on interstate moves,
we use this information to compute the industry and unemployment transitions within each state
–that is, a set of 50 transition matrices, each with 23 × 23 elements.27 Table 2 in Appendix 1 helps
visualize the information provided by these two datasets in terms of transition probabilities.
  The information missing from the above discussion is the past industry history of interstate
movers. To have a full transition matrix, we assume that workers who move across states and are
in the second period in state i and sector j have a past industry history similar to workers who did
not switch states and are in the second period in state i and sector j.28
  Table 1 shows some moments of worker mobility across labor markets computed from our es-
timated transition matrix for the year 2000. Our numbers are consistent with the estimates by
Molloy et al. (2011) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2012) for interstate moves and Kambourov
  23
     The 2000 Census asked people about the state in which they lived 5 years before but not the previous year; thus,
we do not use the Census data despite the much larger sample.
  24
     In particular, the CPS collects information on all individuals at the same address for four consecutive months,
stops for eight months, and then surveys them again for another four months.
  25
     We observe individuals three months apart using, on the one hand, their first and fourth interviews, and on the
other, their fifth and eighth interviews.
  26
     Mortality, residence change, and nonresponse rates are the main drivers of the 10% mismatch rate.
  27
     After restricting the sample as discussed earlier, in any given month we have around 12,000 observations for the
entire United States. To more precisely estimate the transitions, we use all months from October 1998 to September
2001, leading to a sample of over 400,000 matched records.
  28
     Mechanically, we distribute the interstate movers according to the intersectoral mobility matrix for the state in
which they currently live.



                                                         18
and Manovskii (2008) for intersectoral mobility.29

                         Table 1. U.S. interstate and intersectoral labor mobility
                           Probability                        p25      p50         p75
                           Changing j in same n            3.74%     5.77%       8.19%
                           Changing n but not j            0.04%     0.42%       0.73%
                           Changing j and n                0.03%     0.04%       0.06%
                           Staying in same j and n         91.1%     93.6%       95.2%

                           Note: Quarterly transitions. Data sources: ACS and CPS


  One important observation from Table 1 is that there is a large amount of heterogeneity in
transition probabilities across labor markets, which indicates that workers in some industries and
states are more likely to switch to a different labor market than other workers. In particular, the
25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution of sectoral mobility probabilities by labor market are
40% lower and higher than the median, respectively. This dispersion is even larger for interstate
moves. We interpret the observed low transition probabilities and their heterogeneity as evidence of
substantial and heterogeneous costs of moving across labor markets, both spatially and sectorally.


  Variance of preference shocks Finally, we calibrate σ, the scale parameter for the variance
of reallocation preference shocks, to be 1.8, which is the baseline estimate in ACM. Dix-Carneiro
(2014) estimates a value of 2.15. In our model, we assume logarithmic utility for workers while
ACM and Dix-Carneiro (2014) assume linear utility. We have re-estimated parameter σ in ACM
using their data but under logarithmic utility, and the values are largely unaffected. Therefore,
we chose to use their baseline estimates. Still, we conduct robustness checks on our results to
alternative values of this parameter.



3.3 Identifying the Trade Shocks


  In previous work, ADH and Acemoglu et al. (2014) argue that the increase in U.S. imports from
China had asymmetric impacts across regions and sectors. In particular, labor markets with greater
exposure to the increase in import competition from China saw a larger decrease in manufacturing
  29
     Since our period is a quarter, our rates are not directly comparable with the yearly mobility rates for state and
industry switches in these works. Moreover, our sample selects workers from ages 25 to 65, who tend to have lower
mobility rates than younger workers.



                                                         19
employment.
  We calibrate a series of TFP changes to our 12 manufacturing sectors of the Chinese economy
n          o12
 ÂChina,j     to match exactly, within our model, the change in U.S. manufacturing imports from
                                                                   j=1
China from 2000 to 2007. Since not all of the observed changes in U.S. imports from China are
necessarily the result of a change in Chinese TFP, we replicate the procedure of ADH and compute
the predicted changes in U.S. imports from China using the change in imports of other advanced
economies from China as an instrument. In other words, this is similar to the first-stage regression
of the two-stage least squares estimation in ADH.

  Fig. 1. Predicted change (2000-2007) change in imports vs. model-based Chinese TFP change
  PredictedchangeinU.S.imports(millions,logscale)




                                                              100000                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EstimatedChinachangeinTFP(Quarterly)
                                                               10000                                                                                                                                                                                            1.15


                                                               1000                                                                                                                                                                                             1.1


                                                                100                                                                                                                                                                                             1.05


                                                                 10                                                                                                                                                                                             1


                                                                  1                                                                                                                                                                                             0.95
                                                                                                                                                    Plastics,Rubber




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Computer,Elect
                                                                         Food,Brev,Tob




                                                                                                                      Petroleum,Coal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TransportMfg


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FurnitureMfg
                                                                                                                                                                            Nonmetallic
                                                                                                       Wood,Paper




                                                                                                                                        Chemicals




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Machinery
                                                                                            Textiles




                                                                                                                                                                                          Metal




                                                                                           PredictedchangeinU.S.importsfromChina                                                             ChangeinTFPinChina




  Concretely, we estimate the following regression

                                                                                                                     ∆MU SA,j = a1 + a2 ∆Mother,j + uj ,

where j is one of our manufacturing sectors. ∆MU SA,j and ∆Mother,j are the changes in U.S. imports
from China and imports of other advanced economies from China between 2000 and 2007.30 We
then use the predicted changes in U.S. imports according to this regression to calibrate the size of
  30
    In particular, the coutries are Australia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzer-
land.



                                                                                                                                                                       20
the TFP changes for each of the manufacturing sectors in China that will deliver the same change
in imports in the model as in the data. As the changes in imports of other advanced economies from
China are an extremely good predictor of the change in U.S. imports from China, the results of the
exercise presented here remain largely unaltered if instead we use the actual change in U.S. imports
from China rather than the predicted change. Finally, since the change in U.S. imports from China
is quite evenly distributed over this period, we smoothed the estimated TFP over 2000-2007 across
all quarters.
  Figure 1 shows the predicted change in U.S. manufacturing imports from China computed as
in ADH and the implied sectoral productivity changes in China. Computer and electronics is the
sector most exposed to import competition from China, accounting for about 40% of the predicted
total change in U.S. imports from China, followed by the textiles and furniture industries with
about 12% each, and metal and machinery with 10% of the total import penetration growth each.
On the other hand, the food, beverage and tobacco, and the petroleum industries are the ones least
exposed, accounting for less than 1.5% of the predicted total change in U.S. imports from China.
  Our model estimates that TFP increased in all manufacturing industries in China. While our
estimated changes in Chinese TFP are correlated with the changes in U.S. imports from China by
sector, this correlation is not perfect.



  4. THE EFFECTS OF INCREASED IMPORT COMPETITION FROM CHINA


  In this section, we quantify the dynamic effects of China’s import penetration growth on the U.S.
economy. We first compute the dynamic model, holding productivities in China constant. After
doing so, we input the estimated quarterly change in productivities across the Chinese manufac-
turing sectors over the period 2000-2007; then compute the changes in equilibrium allocations due
to the China shock. We first discuss the effects on aggregate, sectoral, and regional employment
and then analyze the effects on welfare.



Employment Effects


  Starting with sectoral employment, the upper-left panel in Figure 2 presents the dynamic response
of the manufacturing share of employment with and without the China shock. As the figure shows,
there are transitional dynamics toward a steady state equilibrium even in the absence of any change
in Chinese productivity. These dynamics occur since the economy is not in a steady state in the year

                                                21
2000. In other words, the observed employment in manufacturing in 2000 is the equilibrium result
of a series of shocks and structural changes that hit the economy before that year, and the economy
is transitioning to a new steady state as a result. For instance, U.S. manufacturing employment
has experienced a secular decline over the past several decades, and in 2000 the economy was
still adjusting to this structural change. Thus we observe a decline in manufacturing employment
even in the absence of productivity changes in China.31 The implication of this observation is
that calibrating the model by assuming that the economy is in steady state would overestimate
the impact of the increased import competition from China since part of the observed decline in
manufacturing employment is not related to Chinese competition.
  Therefore, the upper-left panel in Figure 2 shows the transitional dynamics of manufacturing
employment with and without the China shock. The difference between the two is our account
of the effect of China’s import penetration growth on U.S. manufacturing employment. The fig-
ure shows that import competition from China contributed to a substantial decline in the share
of manufacturing employment, a result that is in line with ADH. Our results indicate that in-
creased competition from China reduced the share of manufacturing employment by 0.6 percentage
point after 10 years, which is equivalent to about 1 million jobs, or about 60% of the change in
manufacturing employment that is not explained by a secular trend.32
  As shown in the other three panels of Figure 2, increased import competition from China makes
workers reallocate to other sectors; thus, the share of employment in services, wholesale and re-
tail, and construction increases. Moreover, as Figure 3 shows, Chinese competition reduced the
U.S. unemployment rate slightly. The role of intermediate inputs and sectoral linkages is crucial
to understanding these reallocation effects. Import competition from China leads to decreased
production among U.S. manufacturing sectors that compete with China, but it also affords the
U.S. economy access to cheaper intermediate goods from China that are used as inputs in the non-
manufacturing sectors. Therefore, production and employment increase in the non-manufacturing
sectors as a result. Moreover, the increase in employment in these sectors slightly more than offsets
the decline in manufacturing employment so that the unemployment rate declines. Finally, the
  31
     If we were to include long-run trends or structural changes in our model, our economy could fully account for the
continuous fall in manufacturing employment.
  32
     The difference between the observed share of manufacturing employment in the U.S. economy in 2007 and its
predicted value using a simple linear trend on this share between 1965 and 2000 is 1%. In other words, the change
in the U.S. manufacturing share that is unexplained by a linear trend is 1%. To compute the implied levels of
manufacturing employment loss in 2007, we take data on total employment from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
for the year 2007 (Table SA25N: Total Full-Time and Part-Time Employment by NAICS Industries) and in order
to match the sectors in our model we substract employment in farming, mining, utilities and the public sector.
That yields a level of employment of 151.4 million. We multiply by our model’s implied change in manufacturing
employment share and get 0.91 million jobs.


                                                         22
                                                                        Fig. 2. The Evolution of Employment Shares
                                17.0                                                                                                    63




                                                                                                                 Employment share (%)
         Employment share (%)
                                                                        Manuf. - No China Shock
                                16.5                                    Manuf. - China Shock
                                                                                                                                        62
                                16.0
                                                                                                                                        61
                                15.5                                                                                                                             Services - No China Shock
                                                                                                                                                                 Services - China Shock
                                15.0                                                                                                    60
                                       0    10             20             30     40     50        60                                         0    10        20      30       40    50        60
                                                                         Time                                                                                      Time
                                15.05                                                                                               7.70




                                                                                                       Employment share (%)
   Employment share (%)




                                                                      W&Retail - No China Shock                                                        Construction - No China Shock
                                15.00                                 W&Retail - China Shock                                        7.65               Construction - China Shock

                                14.95                                                                                               7.60

                                14.90                                                                                               7.55

                                14.85                                                                                               7.50
                                        0   10                  20        30     40     50        60                                         0    10        20         30    40    50        60
                                                                         Time                                                                                         Time



employment in construction overshoots a bit in the short run, which is explained, as mentioned
earlier, by the fact that the economy was transitioning to a steady state when the change in Chinese
productivity hit the U.S. economy. As a result, in the initial year the relative benefits of working
in the construction sector are too low and people move more quickly to other sectors than in the
long run.

                                                                     Fig. 3. The Evolution of the Unemployment Rate
                                                                     0.065



                                                                      0.06
                                                 Unemployment rate




                                                                     0.055



                                                                      0.05

                                                                                              Unemployment - No China Shock
                                                                                              Unemployment- China Shock
                                                                     0.045
                                                                             0   10      20         30                                       40        50        60
                                                                                                   Time




  Our quantitative framework also allows us to further explore the decline in manufacturing em-
ployment caused by the China shock by explaining the sources of this decline. To do so, we quantify


                                                                                                   23
the relative contribution of different sectors, regions, and local labor markets to the decline in the
manufacturing share of employment.
  Figure 4 shows the contribution of each manufacturing sector to the total decline in manufac-
turing employment. The figure shows that employment in some industries was affected more than
in others. Specifically, sectors with higher exposure to import competition from China lost more
manufacturing employment. The computer and electronics, and furniture industries contributed
to about half of the decline in manufacturing employment, followed by the metal and textiles in-
dustries, which together contributed to about one-fourth of the total decline. Sectors less exposed
to import competition from China explain a smaller portion of the decline in manufacturing em-
ployment. In fact, these sectors also benefit from the access to cheaper intermediate goods from
sectors that experienced a substantial productivity increase in China. In some cases, such as food
beverage and tobacco, the increased production from the access to cheaper intermediate goods more
than offsets the negative effects from increased import competition, and employment increased as
a result.

                      Fig. 4. Sectoral contribution to the change in manuf. employment due to China shock
                      30

                      25

                      20
   Contribution (%)




                      15

                      10

                       5

                       0

                      -5
                                                                                                                                             Machinery
                           Food, Brev, Tob



                                             Textiles



                                                        Wood, Paper




                                                                                                                                     Metal




                                                                                                                                                                           Transport Mfg
                                                                      Petroleum, Coal




                                                                                                                                                         Computer, Elect




                                                                                                                                                                                           Furniture Mfg
                                                                                        Chemicals




                                                                                                                       Nonmetallic
                                                                                                    Plastics, Rubber




  The fact that U.S. economic activity is not equally distributed across space combined with the
differential sectoral exposure to China, also imply that the impact of import competition from
China on manufacturing employment varies across regions.
  Figure 5 presents the regional contribution to the total decline in manufacturing employment.
States with a comparative advantage in sectors more exposed to import competition from China


                                                                                                            24
lose more employment in manufacturing. For instance, California alone accounted for 20%, or
essentially one-fifth of all employment in the computer and electronics industry in the year 2000.
For comparison, the state with the next-largest share of employment in this sector is Texas with 8%,
while all other states had shares of employment in computer and electronics of less than 2%. As a
result, California is the state that contributed the most to the decline in manufacturing employment
(about 12%) followed by Texas. States with a comparative advantage in goods less affected by
import competition from China and that benefited from the access to cheaper intermediate goods
had a smaller impact on employment.

                     Fig. 5. Regional contribution to the change in manuf. employment due to China shock
                     15

                    12.5
 Contribution (%)




                     10

                     7.5

                      5

                     2.5

                      0
                                 Kentucky

                                 Maryland




                              New Jersey




                                 Wyoming
                                 Colorado

                                    Florida
                                   Georgia




                                Minnesota




                             Pennsylvania



                                     Texas
                                 Nebraska
                                   Nevada


                                New York




                                  Vermont
                                  Alabama
                                    Alaska




                                       Iowa

                                 Louisiana




                               Mississippi
                            Massachusetts




                                       Ohio
                                Oklahoma

                             Rhode Island
                                   Arizona
                                 Arkansas

                              Connecticut
                                 Delaware

                                    Hawaii
                                     Idaho
                                    Illinois




                                 Michigan
                                   Kansas

                                     Maine




                                  Montana




                             North Dakota

                                   Oregon




                                       Utah

                              Washington
                                 California




                                   Indiana




                                  Missouri




                            North Carolina
                           New Hampshire




                            South Carolina
                             South Dakota
                               Tennessee
                              New Mexico




                                   Virginia

                             West Virginia
                                Wisconsin
        The contribution of each labor market to the total decline in manufacturing employment varies
considerably across regions and sectors. We find that most manufacturing labor markets lost jobs,
although employment increased in some of them. Computer and electronics in California was the
labor market that contributed the most to the decline in manufacturing employment, accounting
for 4.6% of the total decline. Employment increased in labor markets such as food, beverage,
and tobacco in Wisconsin, California, and Arkansas; and transportation equipment in New Hamp-
shire, among others. Notice that even when California experienced a decline in manufacturing
employment due to import competition from China, some labor markets in California such as food,
beverage and tobacco gained in employment, highlighting the importance of taking into account
the spatial and sectoral distribution of economic activity.33

  33
     ADH show evidence that higher exposure to Chinese imports in a labor market causes a larger increase in
unemployment in that market. In our model, unemployment falls due to the China shock, but we constructed a


                                                             25
Welfare effects


  We now turn to the aggregate and disaggregate welfare effects of increased import competition
from China on the U.S. economy. Similar to the quantification of employment effects, we compute
the change in welfare with and without the China shock. For each welfare computation we normalize
the lifetime utility in the fourth quarter of 2000 to one.34 We present two set of results, one denoted
“short-run welfare effects” and the other “long-run welfare effects.” The short-run welfare effect
refers to the percent change in lifetime utility of a representative worker in each labor market in the
first period after the shock starts hitting the economy. Given that agents are forward looking in our
economy, in the short run, their decisions interiorize the future path of Chinese productivity changes.
Therefore, the short-run welfare effects are economically meaningful. The long-run welfare effect
refers to the percent change in lifetime utility once the economy has reached the new stationary
equilibrium.35
  We first estimate the aggregate welfare effect on the U.S. economy. Our results indicate that
China’s import penetration growth increases U.S. welfare by 6.7% in the long run and by 0.2%
in the short run.36 Even when increased import competition from China reduces employment in
the manufacturing sector, the U.S. economy is better off due to the access to cheaper intermediate
goods used as inputs across sectors. Moreover, the welfare effect is larger in the long run than in
the short run as workers reallocate from industries and regions that are more depressed due to the
increased competition with China.
  We also use our quantitative framework to compute the winners and losers across regions, sectors,
and local labor markets. We use a utilitarian approach to aggregate utility across heterogeneous
workers. Figure 6 presents the percentage change in welfare across sectors in the long run and short
run. The bigger winners from the increased competition from China are the non-manufacturing
sectors. These sectors are not directly exposed to competition from China and at the same time
measure of import changes per worker in a each U.S. state over the period 2000-2007 and find that states with a lower
import penetration experience a larger fall in unemployment. Similarly, in states with higher import penetration
unemployment does not fall as much. Therefore, our model also accounts for the positive relation between import
penetration and unemployment in a labor market.
                                                                     P
  34
     For instance, when we calculate sectoral welfare effects, we set N    n,j n,j
                                                                      n=1 L0 V0    = 1, and when we compute regional
                       PJ      n,j n,j
welfare effects, we set j=0 L0 V0 = 1.
  35                                                                              n,j(ch in a sh o ck )   n,j(no ch in a sh o ck )
     We calculate the welfare effect of the China shock in a given market n, j as Vt          − Vt               ,
where t = 1 for the short run and t = 200 for the long run calculations. To compute regional welfare effects and
sectoral welfare effects we aggregate markets using the initial allocation of labor, Ln,j
                                                                                      0 .
  36
     According to equation (2) welfare of the average worker in a given labor market has two components; the first
one is the real wage earned in that labor market, and the second one is the option value of staying in that market
or moving to a different labor market. In static trade models, there is not such option value, thus the real wages
perceived in a region or country is a sufficient statistic to compute welfare.



                                                         26
                                                                                                     Percentage change
                            Percentage change




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                         0.5




                                                                                              -0.5




                        0
                            2
                                 4
                                        6
                                                8
                                                    10
           Unemploy                                                                  Unemploy

     Food, Brev, Tob                                                           Food, Brev, Tob
             Textiles                                                                  Textiles
        Wood, Paper                                                               Wood, Paper
     Petroleum, Coal                                                           Petroleum, Coal
          Chemicals                                                                 Chemicals

     Plastics, Rubber                                                          Plastics, Rubber

         Nonmetallic                                                               Nonmetallic

               Metal                                                                     Metal
          Machinery                                                                 Machinery
     Computer, Elect                                                           Computer, Elect




27
       Transport Mfg                                                             Transport Mfg

       Furniture Mfg                                                             Furniture Mfg




                                                         b: Long-run effects
                                                                                                                                       a: Short-run effects




               Trade                                                                     Trade

            Construc                                                                  Construc

      Transport Serv                                                            Transport Serv
                                                                                                                               Fig. 6. Welfare effects across sectors




          Information                                                               Information
             Finance                                                                   Finance
         Real Estate                                                               Real Estate
           Education                                                                 Education
          Healthcare                                                                Healthcare
          Hospitality                                                               Hospitality
         Entert, Prof                                                              Entert, Prof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage change                                                    Percentage change




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Alabama                                                            Alabama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Alaska                                                             Alaska
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Arizona                                                            Arizona
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Arkansas                                                           Arkansas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          California                                                         California
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Colorado                                                           Colorado
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Connecticut                                                        Connecticut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Delaware                                                           Delaware
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Florida                                                            Florida
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Georgia                                                            Georgia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hawaii                                                             Hawaii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Idaho                                                              Idaho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Illinois                                                           Illinois
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Indiana                                                            Indiana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Iowa                                                               Iowa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kansas                                                             Kansas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kentucky                                                           Kentucky
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Louisiana                                                          Louisiana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Maine                                                              Maine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Maryland                                                           Maryland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Massachusetts                                                      Massachusetts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Michigan                                                           Michigan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Minnesota                                                          Minnesota




28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mississippi                                                        Mississippi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Missouri                                                           Missouri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Montana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nebraska                                                            Montana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nevada                                                           Nebraska
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Nevada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b: Long-run effects
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a: Short-run effects




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    New Hampshire                                                      New Hampshire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New Mexico                                                         New Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          New Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the short run as workers reallocate from the depressed industries.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         New York                                                           New York
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fig. 7. Welfare effects across regions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     North Carolina                                                     North Carolina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      North Dakota
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ohio                                                     North Dakota
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oklahoma                                                                  Ohio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oklahoma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Oregon                                                             Oregon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pennsylvania                                                       Pennsylvania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Rhode Island                                                       Rhode Island
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     South Carolina                                                     South Carolina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      South Dakota                                                       South Dakota
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Tennessee                                                          Tennessee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Texas                                                              Texas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Utah                                                               Utah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vermont                                                            Vermont
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Virginia                                                           Virginia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Washington                                                         Washington
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      West Virginia                                                      West Virginia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Wisconsin                                                          Wisconsin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         benefit from access to cheaper intermediate manufacturing inputs from China used in the production




                                                                                                           intermediate goods from China. In addition, since regions can produce with cheaper intermediate
                                                                                                                                                                                                             are better off both in the short run and the long run. Regions benefit from the access to cheaper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 7 shows the welfare effects across regions in the long run and short run. All U.S. states
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       of non-manufacturing goods. In addition, welfare gains are more uniform in the long run than in




     inputs, they can also trade cheaper goods with other U.S. states. Therefore, regions with a compar-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wyoming                                                            Wyoming
ative advantage in sectors less exposed to import competition from China, regions that purchase
materials from sectors where productivity in China increased more, and regions that trade more
with the rest of the U.S. economy benefit more from the increased productivity in China. As an
example, California, the state most exposed to competition from China, still gains more relative
to other states since it trades more with the rest of the U.S. economy. The regional distribution
of welfare is also more uniform in the long run than in the short run as workers reallocate from
regions with lower real income. Across individual labor markets (Figure 8), some labor markets are
worse off with the increased competition from China –for example, wood and paper in Nevada,
transportation equipment in Louisiana, and wholesale and retail trade in Alaska, among others.
          An important takeaway from Figure 8 is that there is a very heterogeneous response to the same
aggregate shock across labor markets . The distribution of welfare gains (and losses) has a long left
tail. We find that welfare loses are concentrated in a few labor markets, but most labor markets
gain as a consequence of cheaper imports from China.




                             Fig. 8. Long run welfare changes across labor markets
           90

           80

           70

           60

           50
Density




           40

           30

           20

           10

          -0.5
             -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0    1   2    3     4   5    6    7       8   9   10   11   12
                                                     Percentage




                                                      29
                                             5. CONCLUSION


  In this paper, we build on Artuc, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010) and Eaton and Kortum (2002),
to develop a dynamic and spatial labor search model. The model explicitly recognizes the role of
labor mobility frictions, goods mobility frictions, geographic factors, input-output linkages, and
international trade in determining allocations. We calibrate the model to 38 countries, 50 U.S.
states and 22 sectors to quantify the impact of increased import competition from China over
the period 2000-2007 on employment and welfare across spatially different labor markets. Our
results indicate that although exposure to import competition from China reduces manufacturing
employment, aggregate U.S. welfare increases. Disaggregate effects on employment and welfare
across regions, sectors, and labor markets, and over time are shaped by all the mechanisms and
ingredients mentioned previously.
  We emphasize that our quantitative framework can be applied to an arbitrary number of sectors,
regions, and countries and can be used to address a broader set of questions, generating a fruitful
future research agenda. For instance, with our framework we can study the impact of changes in
trade costs, or productivity, in any region in any country in the world. It can also be used to explore
the effects of capital mobility across regions, to study the economic effects of different changes in
government policies, such as changes in taxes, subsidies or unemployment benefits, or to study
policies that reduce mobility frictions.37 Other interesting topics to apply this framework are the
quantification of the effects of trade agreements and other changes in trade policy on internal labor
markets, and the impact of migration across countries. In addition, we can study the transmission
of regional and sectoral shocks across a production network when trade and factor reallocation is
subject to frictions.38 The model can also be computed at a more disaggregated level to study
migration across metropolitan areas, or commuting zones, although the challenge here is to collect
the relevant trade and production data at these levels of disaggregation. Quantitative answers to
some of these questions using dynamic models of the type developed here present, at least for us,
an exciting avenue for future research.
  37
     There is a rapid and growing interest to answer these type of questions; see for instance, Fajgelbaum, Morales,
Suárez-Serrato, Zida (2015), Ossa (2015), and Tombe and Zhu (2015).
  38
      We can therefore extend the analysis of Acemoglu et al. (2012) to a frictional economy. Moreover, we could
incorporate local natural disaster shocks and quantify their effect, as recently analyzed in Carvalho et al. (2014).




                                                        30
                                            REFERENCES

 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Brendan Price (2014): “Import
         Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s,” Journal of Labor Economics,
         forthcoming.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): “The
         Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 80(5), 1977-2016.

 [3] Aguirregabiria, Victor, and Pedro Mira (2010): “Dynamic Discrete Choice Structural Models: A
         Survey,” Journal of Econometrics, 156(1), 38-67.

 [4] Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis (2014): “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,”
          Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085-1140.

 [5] Alvarez, Fernando, and Robert E. Lucas (2007): “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-
         Kortum Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 726—68.

 [6] Artuc, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren (2010): “Trade Shocks and Labor Adjust-
         ment: A Structural Empirical Approach,” American Economic Review, 100(3), 1008—45.

 [7] Artuc, Erhan, and John McLaren (2010): “A Structural Empirical Approach to Trade Shocks and
         Labor Adjustment: An Application to Turkey” In Guido Porto (ed.), Adjustment Costs and
         Adjustment Impacts of Trade Policy, World Bank.

 [8] Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013): “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
         Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States,” American Economic Review,
         103(6), 2121—2168.

 [9] Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Fernando Parro (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
          NAFTA,” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1-44.

[10] Caliendo, Lorenzo, Fernando Parro, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte (2014): “The
          Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity Changes on the U.S. Economy,” NBER Working
          Paper No. 20168.

[11] Carvalho, Vasco, Makoto Nirei and Yukiko Saito (2014): “Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence
         From The Great East Japan Earthquake,” RIETI Discussion Paper Series 14-E-035.

[12] Coen-Pirani, Daniele (2010): “Understanding Gross Worker Flows Across U.S. States,” Journal of
         Monetary Economics, 57(7), 769-784.

[13] Cosar, A. K. (2013): “Adjusting to Trade Liberalization: Reallocation and Labor Market Policies,”
         unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.

[14] Cosar, A. K., N. Guner, and J. Tybout (2014): “Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and Wage Distri-
         butions in an Open Economy,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[15] Costinot, Arnaud, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2013): “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
         the Consequences of Globalization,” Handbook of International Economics, forthcoming.

[16] Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel S. Kortum (2008): “Global Rebalancing with Gravity:
         Measuring the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, 55(3), 511-540.


                                                    31
[17] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael. (2014): “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica,
         82(3), 825—885.

[18] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, and Brian Kovak (2014): “Trade Reform and Regional Dynamics: Evidence
         from 25 Years of Brazilian Matched Employer-Employee Data,” unpublished manuscript, Duke
         University.

[19] Dvorkin, Maximiliano. (2014): “Sectoral Shocks, Reallocation and Unemployment in Competitive
         Labor Markets,” unpublished manuscript, Yale University.

[20] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Economet-
         rica, 70(5), 1741—1779.

[21] Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum (2012): “Putting Ricardo to Work,” Journal of Economic
         Perspectives, 26(2), 65—90.

[22] Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez-Serrato, and Owen Zidar (2015): “State
         Taxes and Spatial Misallocation,” unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Princeton
         University, and UCLA.

[23] Handley Kyle, and Nuno Limão (2013): “Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare: Theory and
        Evidence for China and the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 19376.

[24] Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2012): “Interstate Migration Has Fallen Less Than You
         Think: Consequences of hot deck imputation in the Current Population Survey,” Demography,
         49(3), 1061-1074.

[25] Kambourov, Gueorgui, and Iourii Manovskii (2008): “Rising Occupational and Industry Mobility
        in the United States: 1968-1997,” International Economic Review, 49(1), 41-79.

[26] Kennan, John, and James R. Walker (2011): “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migra-
        tion Decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211—251.

[27] Kondo, Illenin (2013) ” Trade Reforms, Foreign Competition, and Labor Market Adjustments in
        the U.S,” International Finance Discussion Papers No 1095, Federal Reserve Board.

[28] Lee, Donghoon, and Kenneth Wolpin (2006): “Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the Growth of the
          Service Sector,” Econometrica, 74(1), 1—46.

[29] Lucas, Robert. and Edward Prescott (1974): “Equilibrium Search and Unemployment,” Journal of
         Economic Theory, 7(2), 188—209.

[30] Melitz, Marc (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
         Productivity," ” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

[31] Menezes-Filho, Naércio Aquino and Marc-Andreas Muendler (2011): “Labor Reallocation in Re-
        sponse to Trade Reform,” NBER Working Paper No. 17372.

[32] Molloy, Raven, Christopher Smith, and Abigail Wozniak (2011): “Internal Migration in the United
         States,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 173-196.

[33] Monte, Ferdinando (2015): “The Local Incidence of Trade Shocks,” unpublished manuscript,
        Princeton University.


                                                   32
[34] Ossa, Ralph (2015): “A Quantitative Analysis of Subsidy Competition in the U.S.” unpublished
         manuscript, University of Chicago.

[35] Pierce, Justin, and Peter Schott (2012): “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
          Employment,” NBER Working Paper No. 18655.

[36] Redding, Stephen (2012): “Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare,” NBER Working Paper No.
         18008.

[37] Rust, John (1987): “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold
         Zurcher,” Econometrica, 55(5), 999-1033.

[38] Rust, John, (1994): “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in R. F. Engle & D.
         McFadden (ed.), Handbook of Econometrics, volume 4, chapter 51.

[39] Tombe Trevor, and Xaiodong Zhu (2015): “Trade, Migration and Regional Income Differences:
        Evidence from China,” unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto.




                                                  33
                                     APPENDIX 1: DATA

List of Sectors and Countries We calibrate the model to the 50 U.S. states, 37 other countries
including a constructed rest of world, and a total of 22 sectors classified according to the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for the year 2000. The list includes 12 manu-
facturing sectors, 8 service sectors, wholesale and retail trade, and the construction sector. Our
selection of the number of sectors and countries was guided by the maximum level of disaggregation
at which we were able to collect the production and trade data needed to compute our model. The
twelve manufacturing sectors are Food, Beverage, and Tobacco Product (NAICS 311—312); Textile,
Textile Product Mills, Apparel, Leather, and Allied Product (NAICS 313—316); Wood Product,
Paper, Printing, and Related Support Activities (NAICS 321—323); Petroleum and Coal Products
(NAICS 324); Chemical (NAICS 325); Plastics and Rubber Products (NAICS 326); Nonmetallic
Mineral Product (NAICS 327); Primary Metal and Fabricated Metal Product (NAICS 331—332);
Machinery (NAICS 333); Computer and Electronic Product, and Electrical Equipment and Appli-
ance (NAICS 334—335); Transportation Equipment (NAICS 336); Furniture and Related Product,
and Miscellaneous Manufacturing (NAICS 337— 339). The eight service sectors are: Transport Ser-
vices (NAICS 481-488); Information Services (NAICS 511—518); Finance and Insurance (NAICS
521—525); Real Estate (NAICS 531-533); Education (NAICS 61); Health Care (NAICS 621—624);
Accommodation and Food Services (NAICS 721—722); Other Services (NAICS 493, 541, 55, 561,
562, 711—713, 811-814). We also include the Wholesale and Retail Trade sector (NAICS 42-45),
and the Construction sector, as mentioned earlier.
        The countries in addition to the United States are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Brazil, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Italy, Ireland, Japan, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Tai-
wan, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the rest of the world.

International Trade, Production, and Input Shares across Countries International trade
flows across sectors and the 38 countries including the United States for the year 2000 are obtained
from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD). The WIOD provides world input-output tables
from 1995 onward. National input-output tables of 40 major countries in the world and a con-
structed rest of the world are linked through international trade statistics for 35 sectors. For three
countries in the database, Luxembourg, Malta, and Latvia, value added and/or gross output data
were missing for some sectors; thus, we decided to aggregate these three countries with the con-
structed rest of the world, which gives us the 38 countries (37 countries and the United States) we
used in the paper. From the world input-output table, we know total purchases made by a given
country from any other country, including domestic sales, which gives us the bilateral trade flows.
In a few cases (12 of 30,118 observations) the bilateral trade flows have small negative values due
to negative change in inventories. Most of these observations involve bilateral trade flows between
the constructed rest of the world and some other countries, and in two cases, bilateral trade flows
of Indonesia. We input zero trade flows when we observe these small negative bilateral trade flows
that in any way represent a negligible portion of total trade.
   From the world input-output table we are also able to collect sectoral value added and gross
output data, as well as the share of value added in gross output and construct the input-output
coefficients for all sectors and countries.
   The sectors, indexed by ci for sector i in the WIOD database, were mapped into our 22 sectors
as follows: Food Product, Beverage, and Tobacco Product (c3); Textile, Textile Product Mills,
Apparel, Leather, and Allied Product (c4—c5); Wood Product, Paper, Printing, and Related Sup-


                                                 34
port Activities (c6—c7); Petroleum and Coal Products (c8); Chemical (c9); Plastics and Rubber
Products (c10); Nonmetallic Mineral Product (c11); Primary Metal and Fabricated Metal Product
(c12); Machinery (c13); Computer and Electronic Product, and Electrical Equipment and Appli-
ance (c14); Transportation Equipment (c15); Furniture and Related Product, and Miscellaneous
Manufacturing (c16); Construction (c18); Wholesale and Retail Trade (c19—c21); Transport Ser-
vices (c23—c26); Information Services (c27); Finance and Insurance (c28); Real Estate (c29—c30);
Education (c32); Health Care (c33); Accommodation and Food Services (c22); Other Services (c34).

Regional trade, production data, and input shares

   Interregional Trade Flows The sectoral bilateral trade flows across the 50 U.S. states were
constructed by combining information from the WIOD database and the 2002 Commodity Flow
Survey (CFS). From the WIOD database we compute the total U.S. domestic sales for the year 2000
for our 22 sectors. We use information from the CFS for the year 2002, which is the closest available
year to 2000, to compute the bilateral expenditure shares across U.S. states, as well as the share
of each state in sectoral total expenditure. The CFS survey for the year 2002 tracks pairwise trade
flows across all 50 U.S. states for 43 commodities classified according to the Standard Classification
of Transported Goods (SCTG). These commodities were mapped into our 22 NAICS sectors by
using the CFS tables for the year 2007, which present such mapping. The 2007 CFS includes
data tables that cross-tabulate establishments by their assigned NAICS code against commodities
(SCTG) shipped by establishments within each of the NAICS codes. These tables allow for mapping
of NAICS to SCTG and vice versa. Having constructed the bilateral trade flows for the NAICS
sectors, we first compute how much of the total U.S. domestic sales in each sector is spent by each
state. To do so, we multiply the total U.S. domestic sales in each sector by the expenditure share
of each state in each sector. Then we compute how much of this sectoral expenditure by each state
is spent on goods from each of the 50 U.S. states. We do so by applying the bilateral trade shares
computed with the 2002 CFS to the regional total spending in each sector. The final product is a
bilateral trade flows matrix for the 50 U.S. states across sectors, where the bilateral trade shares
are the same as those in the 2002 CFS, and the total U.S. domestic sales perfectly match those
from the WIOD for the year 2000.

   Regional production data and input shares We also need to compute value added, gross
outputs, the share of value added in gross output, and the material shares for each states and sector
in the United States for the year 2000. Value added for each of the 50 U.S. states and 22 sectors
is obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) by subtracting taxes and subsidies from
GDP data. Gross outputs for the U.S. states in the 12 manufacturing sectors are computed from
our constructed bilateral trade flows matrix as the sum of domestic sales and total exports. In
a few cases (34 observations), gross output was determined to be a bit smaller than value added
(probably due to some small discrepancies between trade and production data –for instance, a few
missing trade shipments in the CFS database), in these cases we constrain value added to be equal
to gross output. With the value-added data and gross output data for all U.S. states and sectors,
we compute the share of value added in gross output. For the eight service sectors, the wholesale
and retail trade sector, and the construction sector, we have only the aggregate U.S. gross output
computed from the WIOD database. To split these gross output data into the 50 U.S. states, we
proceed as follows. We assume that the share of value added in gross output is constant across
states and equal to the national share of value added in gross output. We then divide value added
for each state in these sectors by the value-added shares computed at the national level using data
from the BEA, as a result we obtain the regional gross output. Then we calculate the regional

                                                 35
share of gross output in each of these 10 sectors, and applied this share to the gross output data
from WIOD. The result is the gross output for each of the 50 U.S. states in the service sectors,
wholesale and retail trade, and construction, that is consistent with the gross output data from the
WIOD.
   While material input shares are available by sector at the country level, they are not disaggregated
by state in the WIOD database. We assume therefore that the share of material in total intermediate
consumption varies across sectors but not across regions. Notice, however, that the material-input
shares in gross output are still sector and region specific as the share of total material expenditure
in gross output varies by sector and region.

Trade between U.S. states and the rest of the world. From the WIOD database we com-
pute the sectoral bilateral trade flows between the United States and the rest of the countries in
our sample. We also need to compute, within the United States, the bilateral trade flows between
each state and the rest of the countries. In our paper, local labor markets have different exposure
to international trade shocks because there is substantial geographic variation in industry special-
ization. Local labor markets that are more important in the production in a given industry should
react more to international trade shocks in that industry. Therefore, our measure for the exposure
of local labor markets to international trade combines trade data with local industry employment.
Specifically, the share of each state in total U.S. trade with any country in the world in each sector
is determined by the regional share of total employment in that industry. The employment shares
used to compute the bilateral trade shares between the U.S. states and the rest of the countries
are constructed using employment data across sectors and states from the BEA. In 22 cases, data
are missing, and in these cases we search for employment data in the closest available year. Still,
in three cases, Alaska in the plastics and rubber industry, and North Dakota and Vermont in the
petroleum and coal industry, we could not find employment data; thus, we input zero employment.
The 19 cases in which we find employment data in years different from 2000 represent in total less
than 0.01% of U.S. employment in 2000.

Share of final goods expenditure The share of income spent on goods from different sectors
is calculated as follows,
                                 PN       PJ     n,kj
                                                      PN PN in,k i,k
                             j      n=1    k=1 γ         n=1  i=1 π X
                           α =             PN                         ,
                                                     n,k  n,k  n
                                             n=1 w       L +ι χ
       P      PJ           PN PN in,k i,k
where N  n=1    k=1 γ
                      n,kj
                            n=1 P i=1 π     X denotes total spending in intermediate goods across
                                 N
all countries and regions, and n=1 w Ln,k + ιn χ is the total world income.
                                        n,k



Share of labor compensation in value added Disaggregated data on labor compensation are
generally very incomplete. Therefore, we compute the share of labor compensation in value added
at the national level and assume that it is constant across sectors. For the United States, data on
labor compensation and value added for each state for the year 2000 are obtained from the BEA.
For the rest of the countries, data are obtained from the OECD input-output table for 2000 or the
closest year. For India, Cyprus, and the constructed rest of the world, labor compensation data
were not available. In these cases we input the median share across all countries from the other 34
countries that are part of the rest of the world.




                                                  36
Further details on the calculation of the labor transition matrix Table 2 summarizes the
information used to construct a quarterly transition matrix across state, industry, and unemploy-
ment. The letter x in the table denotes information available in the matched CPS, and the letter
y denotes information available in the ACS.


                                 Table 2. Information available on ACS and CPS

                                            State A                                                 State B
                                   Ind 1   Ind 2 . . .                  Ind J        Ind 1         Ind 2 . . .           Ind J
                         Ind 1       x       x    ...                     x
               State A




                         Ind 2       x       x    ...                     x
                          ...       ...     ...   ...                    ...
                         Ind J       x       x                            x
                         Total       y       y    ...                     y             y             y            ...     y
                         Ind 1                                                          x             x            ...     x
               State B




                         Ind 2                                                          x             x            ...     x
                          ...                                                          ...           ...           ...    ...
                         Ind J                                                          x             x                    x
                         Total      y           y         ...               y           y             y            ...     y

   As mentioned earlier, information on interstate mobility in the ACS is for moves over the year.
To calculate quarterly mobility we assume that interstate moves are evenly distributed over the year
and we rule out more that one interstate move per year. In this case, our adjustment consists of
keeping only one-fourth of these interstate moves and imputing three-fourths as non-moves. After
this correction, we impute the past industry history for people with interstate moves from state i to
state n and industry j according to the intrastate sectoral transition matrix for state n conditional
on industry j.
   Our computed value for the initial labor transition matrix is consistent with aggregate magnitudes
of interstate and industry mobility for the yearly frequency estimated in Molloy et al. (2011) and
Kamborouv and Manovskii (2008).

                                           APPENDIX 2: PROOFS

   Proposition 1 Consider the temporary equilibrium at state s and a temporary equilibrium at
state s′ . Denote the change in the temporary equilibrium from one state to the other by ω̂ (ŝ, Θ) ,
where ŝ = s′ /s. The solution to the change in the temporary equilibrium from state s to s′ is
independent of Θ. Namely, ω̂ (ŝ, Θ) = ω̂ (ŝ).
   Proof Suppose the economy is at a temporary equilibrium at st . Define the operator ŷ over
a variable yt as ŷt+1 = yt+1
                          yt . Applying the operator over the equilibrium conditions that define a
temporary equilibrium, equations (5) to (10) result in the following set of equilibrium conditions:
                                                                                           J
                                                                                           Y
                                                              n                 n    n,j                    n,jk
                                 x̂n,j       n,j (1−β
                                   t+1 = [(ŵt+1 )
                                                                  )      n,j β γ
                                                                      (r̂t+1 ) ]                    n,k γ
                                                                                                 [P̂t+1 ]          ,             (13)
                                                                                           k=1

                                                    "   N
                                                                                           #−1/θj
                                                        X                          −θj
                                          n,j
                                        P̂t+1   =             π ni,j
                                                                t           x̂i,j
                                                                              t+1                    ,                           (14)
                                                        i=1



                                                                       37
                                                                                   !−θj
                                                                           x̂i,j
                                               π ni,j
                                                 t+1    =   π ni,j
                                                              t
                                                                             t+1
                                                                             n,j
                                                                                          ,                                (15)
                                                                           P̂t+1
                    XJ                 XN                                   X                                       
          n,j                                                                      J
         Xt+1   =           γ   n,kj
                                           π in,k        i,k
                                                        Xt+1      +α   j
                                                                                      ŵn,j L̂n,k wn,k Ln,k     n
                                                                                                              + ι χt+1 ,   (16)
                      k=1               i=1 t+1                                    k=1 t+1 t+1 t        t

                 P PJ i,k i,k i,k
where χt+1 = N      i   k r̂t rt H . By inspecting equations (13) to (16) , we can see that one can
             n,j         n,j
solve for ŵt+1  , and P̂t+1 , given a change in L̂n,k
                                                    t+1 , without knowing Θ. Finally, if we denote the
change in the temporary equilibrium from one state st to st+1 by ω̂ (ŝ, Θ) , then the solution to the
change in the temporary equilibrium is given by ω̂ (ŝ).
                                                 
   Proposition 2 Conditional on s0 , µ−1 and given ⊤              ˆ = {⊤   ˆ t }∞ , the solution to the sequen-
                                                                                t=1
tial equilibrium in relative time differences does not require Θ, and solves the following system of
equations,                                                   h       iρ
                                                     n,j;i,k     i,k
                                   n,j;i,k
                                                   µ t         Yt+2
                                  µt+1 = P         P                  h        iρ ,                        (17)
                                              N       J      n,j;m,h       m,h
                                              m=1     h=0 tµ            Y t+2
                                             X N   X   J             h       iρ
                                      n,j
                                   Yt+1    =               λn,j;i,k
                                                             t+1       Y i,k
                                                                        t+2     ,                          (18)
                                                        i=1          k=0
                                                                      1/σ
                                                   n,j           ˆ t+1
                                                 ŵt+1   ŝt+1 , ⊤
                                   λn,j;i,k
                                    t+1       =                        µn,j;i,k
                                                                              t     ,                                      (19)
                                                   n             ˆ
                                                 P̂t+1 ŝt+1 , ⊤t+1
                                  1/σ                                                   
         i,k           i,k
where Yt+1   ≡ exp Vt+1    − Vti,k                n,j
                                        , and ŵt+1              ˆ t+1 and P̂ n ŝt+1 , ⊤
                                                         ŝt+1 , ⊤           t+1
                                                                                        ˆ t+1 , is the solution
                                                                       ˆ
to the temporary equilibrium given state ŝt+1 and policy ⊤t+1 . The state of the economy evolves
according to (4) .
                                              1/σ
                   i,k             i,k
   Proof Define Yt+1    ≡ exp Vt+1     − Vti,k       . Now consider the fraction of workers who reallocate
from market n, j to i, k, at t + 1, equilibrium condition (3) at t + 1,
                                                                     1/σ
                                                      i,k
                                              exp ρVt+1   − τ n,j;i,k
                            µn,j;i,k
                             t         =                                      1/σ .
                                         PN PJ              m,h        n,j;m,h
                                          m=1   h=0 exp ρVt+1 − τ

Taking the relative time differences of this equation, we get
                                                                             1/σ
                                                               i,k
                                                       exp ρVt+2   −τ n,j;i,k
                                                  PN PJ                               1/σ
                                   µn,j;i,k
                                    t+1            m=1
                                                                      m,h
                                                         h=0 exp ρVt+2 −τ
                                                                               n,j;m,h
                                              =                              1/σ                .
                                   µn,j;i,k
                                    t
                                                               i,k
                                                       exp ρVt+1   −τ n,j;i,k
                                                  PN PJ                               1/σ
                                                                      m,h      n,j;m,h
                                                   m=1   h=0 exp ρVt+1 −τ


  Using the fact that mobility costs do not change over time, this expression can be expressed as
                                                                      1/σ
                                                       i,k         i,k
                   n,j;i,k
                  µt+1                      exp    ρV t+2  −  ρV  t+1
                   n,j;i,k
                           =                                                m,h            1/σ
                                                                                               ,
                  µt         PN PJ                            1/σ exp(ρV        n,j;m,h
                                                                                          )
                                                m,h    n,j;m,h             t+1 −τ
                              m=1   h=0 exp  ρVt+2  −τ                                     1/σ
                                                                            m,h
                                                                     exp(ρVt+1 −τ n,j;m,h )
                                                  PN        PJ                            1/σ
                                                                            m,h
                                                      m=1     h=0    exp ρVt+1  −τ n,j;m,h


                                                                  38
  which is equivalent to
                                                              ρ/σ
                                                   i,k     i,k
                       µn,j;i,k            exp Vt+2    − Vt+1
                        t+1
                                  =                                    ρ/σ .
                       µn,j;i,k     PN PJ     n,j;m,h          m,h  m,h
                                         h=0 µt        exp Vt+2 − Vt+1
                        t
                                     m=1

                            i,k
  Using the definition of Yt+1  we get
                                                            h       iρ
                                   n,j;i,k
                                                   µn,j;i,k
                                                    t         Y i,k
                                                               t+2
                                  µt+1       =P    P                 h       iρ ,                (20)
                                               N     J      n,j;m,h      m,h
                                               m=1   h=0 tµ            Yt+2

which is equilibrium condition (11) in the main text. Now take the equilibrium condition (2) in
time differences at region n and sector j,
                                                                                    1/σ 
                                                       PN PJ           m,h    n,j;m,h
          n,j                                         m=1 h=0 exp ρVt+2 − τ               
       Vt+1   − Vtn,j = u(Ct+1
                           n,j
                               ) − u(Ctn,j ) + σ log                                1/σ  .
                                                       PN PJ           m,h    n,j;m,h
                                                        m=1 h=0 exp ρVt+1 − τ

                                                                                     1/σ
                                                                      m,h
  Multiplying and dividing each term in the numerator by exp ρVt+1        − τ n,j;m,h      , and using
(3) and the fact that mobility costs do not change over time, we obtain
                                            X       XJ                                     1/σ 
      n,j    n,j      n,j        n,j            N            n,j;m,h         m,h         m,h
    Vt+1 − Vt = u(Ct+1 ) − u(Ct ) + σ log                  µt        exp ρVt+2 − ρVt+1              .
                                                             m=1           h=0

                                                               i,k
Taking exponential from both sides and use the definition of Yt+1  to obtain
                                               XN XJ                          h       iρ
                                     n,j
                                   Yt+1  =                           λn,j;i,k
                                                                      t+1       Y i,k
                                                                                 t+2     ,       (21)
                                                   i=1      k=0

and λn,j;i,k
     t+1     is given by
                                                         n,j      n,j
                                                      u(Ct+1 )−u(Ct )
                                       λn,j;i,k
                                        t+1     =e               σ           µtn,j;i,k ,
and given Assumption 1, we obtain
                                                             n,j
                                                           ŵt+1
                                             λn,j;i,k
                                              t+1     =(     n
                                                                     )1/σ µn,j;i,k
                                                                           t       ,             (22)
                                                           P̂t+1
        n,j       n solve the temporary equilibrium. Note that by Proposition 1, the sequence
where ŵt+1 and P̂t+1
of temporary equilibriums given ⊤ ˆ does not depend on Θ. The equilibrium conditions (20) , (21) ,
                                                                ˆ = {⊤
and (22) do not depend on Θ either. Therefore, given a sequence ⊤      ˆ t }∞ , the solution to the
                                                                            t=1
                                                        ˆ W∞ (⊤),
change in the sequential equilibrium of the model given ⊤,     ˆ does not require Θ.

      APPENDIX 3 EQUILIBRIUM CONDITIONS IN RELATIVE CHANGES

   In this appendix, we present the set of equilibrium conditions of our model in relative time
differences. All the equations have already been introduced earlier, but to ease the exposition and
facilitate the understanding of our model, we present then again here. We report the number of
equations for that economic condition given the dimension of our model in parentheses.

                                                            39
  Cost of the input bundle (N J equations):
                                                                                         J 
                                                                                   γ n,j Y                 γ n,jk
                                                    n,j (1−β n ) n,j β n
                                x̂n,j
                                  t+1    =       (ŵt+1 )       (r̂t+1 )                            n,k
                                                                                                  P̂t+1               .
                                                                                          k=1

  Price index (N J equations):
                                             "   N
                                                                                                            #−1/θj
                                                 X                            −θj            θj γ i,j
                                  n,j
                                P̂t+1 =                π ni,j
                                                         t    x̂i,j   ni,j
                                                                t+1 κ̂t+1               Âi,j
                                                                                          t+1                         .
                                                 i=1

  Trade shares ((N )2 J equations):
                                                                                   !−θj
                                                                    x̂i,j   ni,j
                                                                      t+1 κ̂t+1
                                                                                                     θj γ i,j
                                         π ni,j
                                           t+1    =    π ni,j
                                                         t              n,j
                                                                                                i,j
                                                                                              Ât+1
                                                                      P̂t+1

  Market clearing in final goods (N J equations):
                      XJ                  XN                                       X                                     
              n,j                                                                     J
             Xt+1 =             γ n,kj                 π in,k i,k
                                                         t+1 Xt+1 + α
                                                                      j                          n,j n,k n,k n,k
                                                                                               ŵt+1 L̂t+1 wt Lt + ιn χt+1 ,
                          k=1                    i=1                                   k=1

  Labor mobility shares (N 2 (J + 1)2 equations):
                                                                      h       iρ
                                             n,j;i,k
                                                             µn,j;i,k
                                                              t         Y i,k
                                                                         t+2
                                          µt+1         =P    P                 h       iρ ,
                                                         N     J      n,j;m,h      m,h
                                                         m=1   h=0 tµ            Yt+2

  Value function changes (N (J + 1) equations)39 :
                                      XN XJ                 h       iρ
                                n,j
                              Yt+1  =              λn,j;i,k
                                                    t+1       Y i,k
                                                               t+2     ,
                                                                i=1        k=0

  Labor reallocation dynamics (N (J + 1) equations):
                                                                    N X
                                                                    X J
                                                       Ln,j
                                                        t+1     =                µi,k;n,j
                                                                                  t       Li,k
                                                                                           t
                                                                    i=1 k=0

  Finally, labor market clearing has to hold in equilibrium (N J equations):
                                                                                          N
                                                                                          X
                                    n,j n,j n,j n,j
                                  ŵt+1 L̂t+1 wt Lt = γ n,j (1 − β n )                           π in,j i,j
                                                                                                   t+1 Xt+1 ,
                                                                                          i=1
               P PJ            i,k i,k                                          n,j
where χt+1 = N   i=1
                                         i,k
                         k=1 r̂t rt H . We also have that in equilibrium ŵt        = ŵtn = r̂tn,j = r̂tn for
all n such that τ n,j;n,k = 0. This condition means that if there is free mobility across sectors in a
given region n, factor prices will equalize across sectors in that region. In the context of our model,
this happens in all countries outside the United States.
   We take as given Ln,j      n,j    nj,ik   ni,j    n,j                                       n,j
                       0 , w0 , µ−1 , π 0 , r0 , χ0 , for all n, j, i, k. We need to find ŵt+1 ((N J) ×
                                                                        n,j                n,j
t), where the term in parenthesis denotes the number of elements, r̂t+1     ((N J) × t), P̂t+1  ((N J) × t),
π t+1 ((N J) × t), Xt+1 ((N J) × t), µt+1 ((N (J + 1) ) × t), Yt+1 ((N (J + 1)) × t), and Ln,j
  ni,j    2            n,j                   n,j;i,k     2   2          n,j
                                                                                                           t+1
((N (J + 1)) × t) for all t > 0.
                                                                    
  39                                                      n,j    n
       Note that, with an abuse of notation, for j = 0, ŵt+1 /P̂t+1   = 1.


                                                                          40
