                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       TEMPERATURE AND HUMAN CAPITAL IN THE SHORT- AND LONG-RUN

                                         Joshua S. Graff Zivin
                                          Solomon M. Hsiang
                                          Matthew J. Neidell

                                         Working Paper 21157
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21157


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015




We thank Eli Berman, Gordon Dahl, and seminar participants at the University of California, San
Diego, the University of Illinois – Urbana Champagne, Lausanne, Verona, Royal Holloway University,
the Paris Environmental and Energy Economics Seminar, and PERC for numerous useful comments.
We are particularly indebted to Wolfram Schlenker for generously sharing data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Matthew J. Neidell. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Temperature and Human Capital in the Short- and Long-Run
Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Matthew J. Neidell
NBER Working Paper No. 21157
May 2015
JEL No. H41,I0,Q5,Q54

                                                ABSTRACT

We provide the first estimates of the potential impact of climate change on human capital, focusing
on the impacts from both short-run weather and long-run climate. Exploiting the longitudinal structure
of the NLSY79 and random fluctuations in weather across interviews, we identify the effect of temperature
in models with child-specific fixed effects. We find that short-run changes in temperature lead to statistically
significant decreases in cognitive performance on math (but not reading) beyond 26C (78.8F). In contrast,
our long-run analysis, which relies upon long-difference and rich cross-sectional models, reveals no
statistically significant relationship between climate and human capital. This finding is consistent with
the notion that adaptation, particularly compensatory behavior, plays a significant role in limiting the
long run impacts from short run weather shocks.


Joshua S. Graff Zivin                                   Matthew J. Neidell
University of California, San Diego                     Department of Health Policy and Management
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519                              Columbia University
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                                 722 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
and NBER                                                New York, NY 10032
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu                                    and NBER
                                                        mn2191@columbia.edu
Solomon M. Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

         The threat of climate change and its increasing prominence in public discourse has

inspired a significant body of economic research that explores the potential consequences of

such change on a variety of outcomes.1 Inspired by the neurological literature that documents

the brain’s sensitivity to temperature (Bowler and Tirri, 1974; Schiff, and Somjen, 1985; and

Hocking et al., 2001), we provide the first estimates of the potential impacts of climate

change on human capital, focusing on the impacts from both short-run weather and long-run

climate. Given the importance of human capital as a principal driver of economic growth

(e.g., Nelson and Phelps, 1966; Romer, 1986), these relationships represent an important and

unexplored channel through which climate change may impact economic well-being.

         Our analysis, which focuses on the same study population over both the short- and

long-run, is to our knowledge the first of its kind and serves an important purpose.2

Comparisons across the two models provides a framework through which we can examine

the potential offsetting effects from adaptive behaviors, which are expected to be play a

critical role in determining the ultimate impacts of a gradual changing climate in the coming

century (IPCC, 2007; Libecap and Steckel, 2011). As such, our analysis has significant

implications for the interpretation of other results in the literature, as most economic studies

of climate change impacts rely on identification from short-run weather phenomena.3


1
  These include impacts on such wide ranging outcomes as agriculture, human health, and economic growth.
See, for example, Mendelsohn et al., 1994; Schlenker et al., 2006; Deschenes and Greenstone, 2007; Burke et
al., 2009; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Feng et al., 2010; Hsiang, 2010; Nordhaus, 2010; Deschenes and
Greenstone, 2011; Dell et al., 2012; Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2013; Barreca et al., 2013; Sinha and Cropper,
2013.
2
  A similar approach has been taken to examine adaptation in the context of agriculture (Burke and Emerick,
2012), though as we describe below our approach differs due to the dynamic accumulation of impacts in the
human capital context.
  See Dell et al. (2014) for discussion of the key conceptual challenges in translating results from short-run
3

analyses to the long-run.

                                                       1
        We begin our analysis by focusing on the relationship between weather and cognitive

performance. We use assessments of cognitive ability from the children of the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) and merge these data with meteorological

conditions at the county level on the day of the assessment. We take advantage of the

longitudinal nature of the survey to estimate models with child fixed effects, exploiting the

exogenous interview date and daily fluctuations in weather across the same children over

time to identify the causal effect of temperature on cognitive performance.

        Using a flexible specification for temperature, we find that math performance declines

linearly above 21C (70F), with the effect statistically significant beyond 26C (79F).4 We do

not find a statistically significant relationship with the two assessments of reading

performance. The disparity across mathematics and other subjects is consistent with

differences in the heat-sensitivity of the regions within the brain on which they rely (Hocking

et al., 2001; Kiyatkin, 2007). These differential effects across cognitive tasks also generally

supports a neurological rather than behavioral explanation for our results, a finding further

bolstered by evidence that child's time to completion of each assessment is not related to

temperature.

        While the negative impacts from idiosyncratic and short-lived weather-shocks have

potentially important implications for the optimal scheduling of cognitively-demanding tasks,

the key policy question regarding long run human capital impacts under climate change

depends on the impact of a permanent shift in the distribution of weather outcomes. This is

important because the slow-moving changes associated with climate change provide greater

opportunities for adaptation. As such, the second stage of our analysis exploits two

approaches to capture the long-run effects: long-difference fixed effects models that examine

the impacts of average weather exposure between tests and cross-sectional regressions with

4
 Note that assessments were only conducted during the spring and summer, so we cannot explore the effects of
colder temperatures on performance.

                                                      2
extremely rich controls, including parental and grandparental human capital, to examine the

impacts of climate exposure from birth until test-taking.

        The difference between our approaches for the short- and long-run is important

because they capture two distinct adaptation channels that have generally been conflated in

the literature.5 Ex-ante avoidance behavior, such as technological adoption, mobility, and

cultural changes designed to buffer against the effects of climate, may limit exposure to

temperature extremes.6 Our short-run regressions will net out all such avoidance at least

insofar as they have been adopted based on historical climate up until the time of the test.

Ex-post compensatory behavior occurs when individuals respond to insults on hot days

through subsequent investments that partially or fully offset short run effects, thus

minimizing their enduring impact. For example, if a child learns less material during a hot

day, parents or teachers may invest additional time or the child may increase her effort in the

following days, potentially offsetting the effect of lost learning. This compensating behavior

encompasses a wide range of potential responses, and is almost certainly costly, but persistent

human capital effects may thus be minimized in the long run. Such ex post behaviors will

only be captured by our long-run analysis since responses are predicated on the feedback

from earlier tests and thus only depend on weather/climate indirectly.

        Despite large predicted long-run effects based on our short-run results, we fail to find

evidence that climate is significantly related to human capital accumulation in the long run.

In both the long-difference and cross-sectional models, our estimated effects are considerably

smaller than projections based on short-run estimates. Furthermore, allowing for a flexible

functional form for temperature reveals a flat relationship between temperature and human

  This distinction is conceptually similar to that made by Graff Zivin and Neidell (2013) with respect to the
5

health effects from pollution. Individual can engage in avoidance behavior by spending more time indoors or
ameliorate the impacts of exposure through the use of medical inputs, such as asthma inhalers.
  See Deschenes and Moretti (2009), Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), and Barreca et al. (2013) for evidence
6

on the impacts of adaptation on the relationship between temperature extremes and mortality. An example of a
cultural change that reflects adaptation is differences in school schedules throughout the country: schools in
southern states typically end in May, a month before schools in northern states.

                                                       3
capital over the entire temperature range. These results highlight the importance of

compensatory behavior in our setting and complements existing literature on the human

capital production function for children, an area of emerging interest in economics (e.g.

Currie, 2009; Cunha et al., 2010; Almond and Currie, 2011). Our results also highlight the

caution needed when using results from short-run weather shocks to project long-run climate

impacts.

       This paper unfolds as follows. In section 2, we provide some relevant neurological

information on temperatures and brain functioning, and provide a conceptual framework for

our econometric models. In section 3, we describe our data in more detail. Section 4

discusses the empirical strategy for the short-run analysis and presents results on the

relationship between temperature and test scores. Section 5 describes the empirical strategy

for the long-run analysis and presents results on the relationship between climate and human

capital. Section 6 offers concluding remarks.



2. Background and Conceptual Framework

       In order for climate to affect human capital, we need a plausible mechanism that

relates brain function to ambient temperature. A particularly important and likely pathway is

through the environment’s effect on brain temperature. The brain’s chemistry, electrical

properties, and function are all temperature sensitive (Bowler and Tirri, 1974; Schiff and

Somjen, 1985; Deboer, 1998; Yablonskiy et al., 2000; Hocking et al., 2001), with theory

suggesting that the brain's performance as a computational network will be influenced by

these parameters (Doya et al., 2007; Moore and Cao,2008; Varshney, 2011). Furthermore,

both warm environmental temperatures and cognitive demands can elevate brain temperature.

Despite being only 2% of its mass, approximately 20% of the heat released by a human body

originates in brain tissue, of which four-fifths is a direct by-product of neuronal signaling


                                                4
(Raichle and Mintun, 2006). Under normal conditions, most excess heat diffuses into the

bloodstream and is transported to either the skin or lungs, where it is then transferred to the

environment. When environmental temperatures rise, heat transfer at the skin and lungs

slows, reducing the flow of cool blood to the brain, which can temporarily elevate brain

temperatures up to 2.5C (Kiyatkin, 2007; Nybo and Secher, 2004).

       Higher temperatures could have different effects on different subject areas because

they use distinct parts of the brain that are differentially affected by temperature. For

example, mathematical problem-solving relies on the ability to retain and manipulate abstract

numerical information, drawing heavily on the pre-frontal cortex to supply the “working

memory” which stores this data in neural circuits. Performing tasks that utilize working

memory when core body temperature is elevated increases neuronal activity in the pre-frontal

cortex for any given level of performance, suggesting that working memory is less effective

when brain temperature is high (Hocking et al., 2001).

       That high temperatures could impair cognitive function is also consistent with

experimental evidence that documents impaired brain function in a wide range of domains as

a result of heat stress. Military research has shown that soldiers executing complex tasks in

hot environments make more errors than soldiers in cooler conditions (Fine and Kobrick,

1978; Froom et al., 1993). Exposure to heat has also been show to diminish attention,

memory, information retention and processing, and the performance of psycho-perceptual

tasks (e.g. Vasmatzidis et al., 2002; Hocking et al., 2001; Hyde et al., 1997). The impacts of

thermal stress on working memory performance are especially relevant as cognitively

challenging tasks rely more heavily on the working memory for multi-step processing.

       Given the dynamic nature of human capital production, insults from warmer

temperatures may accumulate, leading to decreases in human capital attainment levels. If,

however, people respond to short-run deficits with compensatory behaviors, long run changes


                                                5
in human capital may be minimized. One of the key questions in this paper is whether

sustained exposure to warmer temperatures, as is expected under climate change, results in

accumulated effects on cognitive ability. We outline a framework for conceptualizing these

effects in order to facilitate the interpretation of our econometric models.

       We begin with a simple 2-period model of cognitive performance. In the first period,

performance y is defined as follows:

(1)    y1 = f(k1, [1-a1(w1)]*w1),

where k1 represents human capital endowments at birth, w1 is weather exposure in period 1

and a1 is avoidance behavior in period 1. Avoidance behavior is a transient action, such as

turning on air conditioning or staying indoors, which depends upon weather. As such, the

second argument in the performance production function ([1-a1(w1)]* w1) can be viewed as a

measure of the effective exposure to ambient temperatures that results from this behavioral

response to local weather conditions. Any time-invariant changes in behavior, such as the

adoption of air conditioning, are excluded from this model because they will be captured

empirically through the use of various fixed effects.

       Performance in the second period is defined similarly to first period performance with

two key distinctions. Human capital accumulates from earlier periods and individuals now

have the opportunity to respond to feedback embodied in their first period performance

through compensatory behaviors. As such, second period performance is expressed as

follows:

(2)    y2 = f(k2, [1-a2(w2)]*w2, b(y1)).

As with the initial period, performance will depend on human capital levels and exposure to

weather conditions, which depends upon ambient weather and avoidance behavior. For

simplicity, we assume that k2 = k1 + g(y1) to reflect human capital accumulation between

periods, where the function g reflects the growth in human capital, which depends on prior


                                                6
period learning as reflected by test performance. Compensatory behaviors b are an ex post

response to performance in period 1. They could include activities such as spending

additional time studying or the devotion of time and resources to a more formal tutoring

relationship. As noted earlier, a key feature of this compensatory behavior is that it does not

require that individuals understand that their performance depends on weather.

           Our short-run analysis focuses on the impact of weather on the day of the assessment

on cognitive performance. Since we do not observe avoidance behavior, our short run

estimate reflects the total derivative of yt with respect to wt, as follows:

(3)        dyt/dwt = (1-at)*δf/δwt - wt*δf/δat*δat/δwt.

The first term represents the direct (neurological) effect of temperature on performance. The

second term represents the ex ante behavioral effect of temperature, which depends upon the

effectiveness of that avoidance behavior in diminishing the impacts on cognitive performance

and the extent of that avoidance behavior.7 Our empirical estimates of the short-run impacts

will capture the direct effect of temperature net of any avoidance.

           Our long run analysis is focused on the impacts of climate on test performance. In

our simple framework, climate is simply a combination of weather exposure in both periods.

If we define climate as c = w1 + w2, the impacts of climate on test performance in period 2 is

the sum of impacts from contemporaneous and past period weather, plus any component of

the ex post response to observed first period performance b(y1) that is affected by first period

weather and the dynamic accumulation of human capital. Thus, our long run estimate reflects

the total derivative of y2 with respect to c, which can be expressed as follows:

(4)        dy2/dc = (1-a2)*δf/δw2 – w2 *δf/δa2*δa2/δw2 + δf/δg* δg/δy1*dy1/dw1 +

                             δf/δb*δb/δy1*dy1/dw1,

where dy1/dw1 is as defined in equation (3).

7
    This expression is identical for both first and second period performance.


                                                          7
        The first two terms are identical to those in equation (3) and reflect the

contemporaneous effect of weather on second period performance – both the direct and ex

ante avoidance impacts. The third term (δf/δg*δg/δy1*dy1/dw1) captures the impacts of first

period weather on learning and thus human capital accumulation by period 2. The fourth

term (δf/δb*δb/δy1*dy1/dw1) captures the impacts of ex post compensatory behavior. It

appears in this climate analysis precisely because compensatory behavior responds to prior

period performance. Thus, the difference between the short-run estimates characterized in

equation (3) and the long-run estimates described by equation (4) will reflect the accumulated

impacts of weather extremes on learning plus the impacts of any ex post compensatory

behaviors undertaken.



3. Data

        The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) is a nationally representative

sample of over 12,000 men and women in the United States aged 14-22 in 1979, with

participants surveyed annually until 1994 and biannually thereafter. The survey was designed

to collect detailed social and economic information for a transitioning demographic.

Beginning in 1986, all children of women in the initial sample were surveyed in their homes,

with various developmental assessments conducted biannually on a prearranged date. We

focus on examinations in mathematics, reading recognition, and reading comprehension,

which are derived from the Peabody Individual Achievement Tests (PIAT) and transformed

into age-specific standardized scores.8 These tests are designed to measure cognitive

achievement and capture gains in knowledge over time, making them a popular measure of

human capital in the economics literature (e.g. Todd and Wolpin, 2007). All three tests,

which were administered to children age five and over, have been found to have high test-
8
 Despite the availability of additional assessments, we focus solely on these three assessments because they
were the most frequently administered across the widest age range, thus yielding the largest sample size and
greatest opportunity to explore long run outcomes.

                                                       8
retest and concurrent validity (Rodgers et al., 1994). Each child is tested across multiple

waves for as long as the child is part of the survey, with test data available as early as 1988

and as late as 2006 depending on the age of the child. In our sample of 8,003 children, 80.9%

were tested more than once and 41.2% were tested at least four times, enabling us to precisely

estimate within-child effects of temperature. Since these tests were predominantly given

during the warmer periods of the year,9our analysis of short-run temperature effects will only

be informative for temperatures in this range.

        Using 8 waves of the geocoded version of the NLSY, which contains the child’s

county of residence at each survey wave, we match data on each child's test scores with the

average temperature in their county on the day of their assessment using data from Schlenker

and Roberts (2009), who linearly interpolated temperatures at each county centroid using the

seven nearest stations with daily temperature data. County temperature is defined as

(maximum temperature + minimum temperature)/2, computed daily at the geographic

centroid of each county and matched to the county of residence for each child for each wave

of the survey. We also assign precipitation, specific humidity, wind speed, and pressure in an

analogous fashion. We repeat a similar procedure for assigning climate, except that we

match the full history of temperature (and the other meteorological variables) between

successive tests and from birth until the date of the test.

        Since temperature is likely to have a non-linear relationship with our outcomes of

interest, we use various definitions in our analysis. In the short run analysis, we use both the

number of degree days above 21C (DD>21) and below 21C (DD<21), as well as a

nonparametric specification with a full set of indicator variables for every 2C. As will

become clear, our choice of 21C for the degree day model was chosen based on the

nonparametric analysis that revealed a kink at that level. This degree day measure is useful in

9
 Assessments were conducted between May and October, except for 1986, which conducted between February
and April. To ensure common overlap across seasons and years, however, we exclude the 1986 wave.

                                                   9
studies of temperature impacts when (1) a response to daily temperature is roughly constant

across days but changes nonlinearly in temperature and (2) the response to daily temperature

can be well approximated by a piece-wise linear function, with kinks at the specified cut-off

temperatures.10 The use of indicator variables is even more flexible, allowing for a non-

parametric relationship between temperature and performance.

        For the long run analysis, we use 3 measures of climate for the between test and

lifetime exposure models. First, we take the average of the number of degree days above 21C

over the relevant time period. Second, we take the average of the 2C indicator bins for

temperature, which amounts to the percent of days in each bin. Third, we calculate the mean

January-February and July-August temperatures over the relevant time period to provide

estimates with a more intuitive interpretation. We also compute the same time-period

averages for humidity, precipitation, wind speed, and pressure.

        Table 1 contains summary statistics for the data used in this study. Our final sample

includes 8,003 children across 951 counties in 48 states that received exams during multiple

survey waves. Children’s test scores are at roughly the national median. Since assessments

were conducted in warmer months, average temperature exposure on the day of the test is

relatively warm, at 22.8°C (73F), reflecting the fact the assessments were conducted during

the warmer months. Although children were given the PIAT assessments for all 3 subjects,

discrepancies in sample sizes largely reflect differences in the ability to convert raw scores

into standardized and percentile scores (Baker and Mott, 1989). Since weather is unrelated to

the probability of a test score being available (shown below), we are not concerned that these

differences induce a sample selection bias.




10
 Degree days are defined as the number of degrees by which the average daily temperature exceeds 21C, with
values below 21C assigned a value of 0. The degree day approach has been widely used to study the non-linear
impact of temperature on crop yields (e.g. Schlenker and Roberts, 2009), electricity demand (e.g. Auffhammer
and Aroonruengsawat, 2011) and GDP growth (Hsiang, 2010).

                                                     10
4. The Short-Run: Temperature and Cognitive Performance

         To explore the short run relationship between temperature and cognitive performance,

we estimate linear fixed effects regression models of the following form:

(5)      yi,t = f(βSR,Tc(i),t) + η1Xit + η2Zc(i),t + g(t,s(i)) + αc(i) + εi,t

The test score (y) of child i on date t is regressed on the temperature faced by that child in

county c on the same day (Tc(i),t).11 βSR reflects dyt/dwt from equation (3). We include the

child’s age (Xi,t) and other meteorological variables (Zc(i),t) that may confound the

relationship between temperature and test scores. Our regression models also control for the

month and weekday of the assessment and state-specific non-linear time trends in order to

capture time-varying factors that influence performance (g(t,s(i))). Importantly, these time

trends will capture any changes in time-invariant adaptive behaviors during our period, such

as air-conditioning penetration or other avoidance ‘technologies’, to the extent they are

common to families in each state.12 The longitudinal nature of the survey enables us to

specify child fixed effects (αc(i)), which controls for all time invariant characteristics of a

child. The disturbance term (εi,t) consists of an individual idiosyncratic component and a

clustered component by state-week, which serves three purposes: to allow for arbitrary spatial

correlation across counties within a state, to allow for autocorrelation in test scores within a

week, and to account for the fact that the same temperature measure can be assigned to

multiple children. Since the date the child has the assessment is prearranged, it is unlikely to

respond to short-run changes in temperature and thus plausibly exogenous, allowing us to

identify the causal effect of temperature on performance.13

11
   We also explore lagged temperatures as well, shown below.
   According to the 2001 American Housing Survey, 79.5% of all households had some form of air conditioning,
12

with the rate of ownership much higher in warmer regions (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2014). We directly probe
the role of air conditioning in blunting the short-run impacts of temperature on cognition in the Appendix.
While the results are statistically insignificant, our coefficients change in the expected direction, i.e. air
conditioning appears to be protective against cognitive harm, though small in magnitude.
13
   We test our exogeneity assumption by separately regressing the probability that a child is male, Hispanic,
black, the child’s age in months, the child’s height in inches, the mothers age at the child’s birth, and the birth
order of the child, on our full suite of temperature dummies as well as county and state-by-year fixed effects

                                                        11
          As described earlier, temperature is included in our model using two distinct

approaches to explore its potentially non-linear relationship with performance: (1) a series of

indicator variables for temperatures in 2°C bins from 12 to 32°C, with 20-22°C as the

reference category; and (2) a linear function in heating and cooling degree days with a cutoff

at 21°C, so chosen because the temperature bin at 20-22°C was the local maximum in the

first approach.



Results

          Table 2 presents the core short-run results for our three test outcomes of interest:

math, reading comprehension, and reading recognition. Given our interest in temperature

extremes at the high end, we begin with a specification that only includes degree days above

21C. We then add degree days below 21C to capture any effects that might occur at lower

temperatures. Columns 1 and 3 present results with mother fixed effects (since siblings are in

the sample). Columns 2 and 4 present results with child fixed effects. The math results,

shown in Panel A, indicate that warmer temperatures lead to a statistically significant

decrease in performance. The results are insensitive to whether we include degree days below

21 and to the type of fixed effect used.14 The estimate of -0.219 in the first row of Column 4

implies that each degree day above 21C lowers the math score by 0.219 of a percentile.

          In contrast, we find that temperature does not have a statistically significant

relationship with reading recognition or reading comprehension, regardless of the

specification, shown in Panels B and C. As described earlier, one potential explanation for

the discrepancy in impacts by subject is that mathematical problem solving utilizes functions



(results available upon request). We find no systematic or significant patterns of selection by these observables
with respect to the temperature on the day of the interview and exam.
14
   The insignificance of degree days below 21 should be interpreted with caution since very few exams occur on
cold days. As such the coefficient on DD<21 largely reflects the impacts of moderate temperatures on test
performance.

                                                       12
of the brain that are distinct from the other subject areas, and different parts of the brain are

differentially affected by temperature.15

            Figure 1 plots estimates for each of our three outcome variables using the more

flexible specification for temperature. Shown in Panel A, we find that child performance in

mathematics shows a monotonic decline in outdoor temperatures above 22°C (71.6°F) but is

relatively flat and statistically insignificant for temperatures below this point. Furthermore,

two of the estimates in the four highest bins are individually statistically significant at the 5%

level, with the other two at the 10% level. This monotonic relationship at the high-end

reassures us that the significant estimates for math in Table 2 are not simply the result of a

Type I error. We interpret the magnitude of our estimates as follows: changing the

temperature of the outdoor environment from 20-22°C (68-71.6°F) to 30-32°C (86-89.6°F)

decreases a child’s mathematics score by 1.6 percentile points, which is a sizeable 0.12 of a

standard deviation. The predicted effect using estimates from our degree days specification

matches these results quite closely, suggesting that our math estimates are largely insensitive

to how we specify our temperature variable.

            The nonparametric results for both reading outcomes, shown in Panels B and C of

Figure 1, are consistent with the results in Table 2. The coefficients are small, statistically

insignificant, and relatively flat across the entire temperature range, providing additional

support for the conclusion that performance on these measures is unaffected by temperature.

            One concern with interpreting these results is that weather may affect the child’s

value from alternative activities, and this affects the child’s effort on the exam. For example,

warmer weather makes playing outside more attractive, and a child may rush through the

assessment in order to play outside, which lowers her performance.16 Given the differential

effect by subject, such a mechanism seems unlikely in this setting. Nonetheless, we probe this

15
     We note that math is always the first of the three exams, so increased fatigue cannot explain this pattern.
16
     In the conceptual framework, this would amount to δbt/δwt < 0.

                                                           13
channel using data on the speed at which children complete tests. If children hurry to finish

the assessment in warmer weather, then time to completion will fall as temperatures rise.

Such data was collected in the 1994, 1996, and 1998 waves, thus providing a useful test for

detecting changes in the child’s effort on the day of the test.

           Consistent with the differential effects by subject, we fail to find evidence to support

this channel. Column 1 of Table 3 fails to find a statistically significant relationship between

temperature and assessment completion time for all 3 assessments. Allowing for a more

flexible specification for temperature, shown for math in Figure 2, we see a generally flat

relationship between temperature and time to completion, with only a decline at the highest

temperature bin, though it is not statistically significant. This drop at the highest bin, while

large in magnitude, does not coincide with the general pattern of temperature effects on

performance, suggesting completion time is unlikely to explain our short-run findings.

           Table 3 also provides two additional robustness checks. First, the different sample

sizes across the subjects (as seen in Table 1), which indicates that some scores are

unavailable for children, is a potential concern. In particular, one might worry about sample

selection bias if the missing test scores correlate with warmer temperatures, perhaps because

families cancel the visit or the child scored below a certain value, making a standardized

score infeasible. To assess this, we regress our weather variables on score availability.

Shown in column 3 of Table 4, we find that probability of completing the assessment is

unrelated to warmer weather, suggesting that sample composition across subjects is unlikely

to bias our results. Second, one might be concerned that exams are shifted to cooler times of

the day to avoid peak exposure, thereby minimizing the effect on performance. In column 4,

we show results using the start time of the assessment as the dependent variable, and find the

start time is unrelated to the temperature on the day of the test.17


17
     We only show results for math because it is always the first test given.

                                                           14
        Our analysis has thus far focused solely on the effects of weather on the day of the

assessment, thereby ignoring potential lagged effects. While the neurological mechanisms

discussed in Section 2 suggest a rather immediate effect from exposure, lagged exposure has

been shown to affect health and thus might also affect performance.18 Figure 3 presents

results when we add 3 lags of temperature, and also 1 lead of temperature as a falsification

test. The coefficient on contemporaneous temperature is largely unchanged (though precision

is comprised) and the coefficients on lagged temperature are considerably smaller than our

main estimate.19 The absence of an effect for lead temperature offers further assurance that

our results are not driven by unobserved confounding. In the end, and despite moderate to

high-levels of air-conditioning penetration, these results provide strong evidence for a

contemporaneous and negative effect of warmer temperatures on mathematical

performance.20

        Before turning to our long-run analysis, we simulate the potential long run effects

based on our short run estimates to give a sense for the potential magnitude of the effects we

might find. To do so, we need to make some assumptions about the human capital

accumulation process (the function g( ) in our conceptual model). First, we assume children’s

percentile performance on the test is equivalent to a ranking in human capital. Absent

negative shocks, children accumulate human capital at comparable rates so that their rank

remains unchanged. Second, exposure to a simulated distribution of weather shocks,

measured in 2C bins, leads to a reduction in rank. We assume this reduction is permanent.

Further, we assume that a change in performance, absent compensatory behaviors, amounts


18
   Furthermore, since we do not know the exact time assessments were given for all years, we may be assigning
weather with error. A lagged specification may better capture exposure for those with, for example, morning
exams. We note, however, that for the sample years in which we observe assessment times, the average start
time is 2:41pm.
19
   The effect of the prior day’s temperature is roughly half the size of our main estimate, suggesting that
temperature impacts on cognitive function might accumulate over short periods or that hot nights might interfere
with sleep, although this effect is not significant..
20
   As noted earlier, approximately 80% of U.S. households had some form of air conditioning in 2001, with the
rate of ownership much higher in warmer regions (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2014).

                                                      15
to a change in learning. Although our short run estimates do not directly test for learning

effects, the ergonomics literature reviewed above demonstrates effects on memory,

information retention, and information processing, suggesting the plausibility of such an

effect. Given uncertainties about the magnitude of this learning effect, we scale the change in

performance by λ, under a variety of parameter values λ = {0.1, 0.3, 0.5}. For example,

λ=0.5 implies that a 10 percentage point decrease in test performance translates into a 5

percentage point decrease in learning. We then accumulate the shocks between tests based on

the realized weather exposure for each child to compute the change in human capital. Our

simulation based on our short-run estimates under the quite conservative assumption that

λ=0.1 implies that children’s exposure between tests would reduce performance by 6.2

percentile points on average. At λ=0.3 and 0.5, this rises to 18.6 and 31.0 percentile points,

respectively, thereby implying quite large long run effects.



5. The Long-Run: Climate and Human Capital

       The analysis thus far focused on the contemporaneous impacts of temperature on

performance. In this section, we turn our attention to the long run impacts of climate on

human capital, where additional adaptation strategies are expected to play a significant role.

While our short-run results are net of any avoidance behavior undertaken to minimize

exposure to temperature extremes, individuals can respond to outcomes (as opposed to

weather) over the longer-run. To capture these compensatory behaviors, we estimate two

distinct models.

       In our first approach, we estimate a “long difference” model of the following form:

(6)    yi,t - yi,t-1 = f(βLD,      ) + η1(Xit - Xit-1) + η2         + g(t,s(i)) + (εi,t - εi,t-1)

The dependent variable is the change in performance over time, which reflects the

accumulation of human capital between tests. The variable                reflects our measure of


                                               16
climate, which is a summary measure of temperature between successive tests. We continue

to define Tc(i) in degree days and indicator bins as before. Given the different structure of this

model, the interpretation of βLD now takes a slightly different form. When we use degree

days, we interpret βLD as the increase in human capital from a 1C degree day increase in

temperature across all days between tests. When we use indicator bins, we interpret βLD as the

increase in human capital from a 1 percent increase in the number of days that the

temperature falls in a certain bin (relative to 20-22C) between tests. For example, we would

interpret the coefficient on the 30-32C bin as the effect from shifting 1 percent of all days

between successive tests from 20-22C to 30-32C. To better align with intuition we also use

seasonal average temperature (separately for January-February and July-August). In this

case, the coefficients reflect the impacts of a 1C increase in the mean July-August (or

January-February) temperature between tests on human capital accumulation. The other

meteorological variables (Z) are defined analogously, while the variables Xit and g(t,s(i))

remain unchanged from equation (3).

       By defining the model in long differences (LD), the model captures a wider range of

adaptive responses (Dell et al., 2014; Burke and Emerick, 2012), where the coefficient βLD =

dy2/dc from equation (4). For example, if parents respond to poor performance in school with

compensatory investments, regardless of whether they know the source of the poor

performance, our estimate for βLD is net of this investment. The model also remains well-

identified because we are controlling for all time invariant characteristics of the child.

       In our second approach, we assign climate as the accumulated temperature from birth

until the date of the test, hence providing an even longer-term measure of climate exposure.

This necessitates the use of cross-sectional models, which leaves greater scope for omitted

variable bias since parents choose where to raise their children and thus climate exposure

may be correlated with other characteristics that influence human capital attainment. To


                                                17
address this concern, we exploit the unusual richness of the NLSY to control for a wide range

of background factors in the human capital production function (Black et al., 2005). In

particular, we estimate the following regression specification:

(7)    yi,t = f(βCS,          ) + η1Xit + η2        + η3Xm(i) + g(t,s(i)) + εi,t

Climate (              ) is now measured as lifetime exposure from birth until the time of the

test, and we continue to specify this in terms of degree days, indicator bins, and seasonal

averages. The interpretation of coefficients is similar to the “between-test” model except

they now reflect the effect from birth until the time of the test. The other meteorological

variables (Z) are defined analogously.

       Given the greater concern for omitted variable bias in this specification, we also add

several measures that reflect the child’s potential human capital endowment at birth. Xi now

includes the child’s birth weight, an important measure of intellectual endowments (Black et

al., 2007), which we control for flexibly by including a series of indicator variables for each

pound. It also includes the child’s sex, birth order indicators, and maternal age at birth. Xm(i)

includes the mother’s scores on the armed forces qualifying test (AFQT), completed years of

schooling, a measure of self-esteem, height, weight, race/ethnicity, foreign language, the

religion she was raised, and her spouse's level of education. We also include flexible controls

by allowing for all two-way interactions between these variables and 3rd order polynomials

for all continuous variables. Including grandparent characteristics (grandmother and

grandfather's years of schooling, Duncan SEI, foreign born) in Xm(i) further helps to minimize

concerns about omitted variable bias. Z is also extended to include numerous county level

characteristics, including the age of housing stock, birth rate, death rate, infant mortality rate,

physicians per capita, hospital beds per capita, education per capita, household income per

capita, fraction below poverty, geographic size of the county, maximum elevation, and

whether it borders an ocean or great lake.


                                                  18
Results

          Table 4 presents our long-difference results based on the “between test” specification.

We focus solely on mathematical performance since this is the only outcome where we find

an effect in the short run. In contrast to the short run results, however, we do not find a

statistically significant relationship between climate and human capital. Column 1, which

only includes degree days above 21C (DD>21), reveals a statistically insignificant estimate of

-0.630. This estimate indicates that a 1 degree day increase in temperature across all days

between two tests, a rather substantial change, decreases math performance by only 0.630

percentile points. Under the conservative case where λ = 0.1, this result implies that parent

are offsetting more than a 6 percentile point accumulated decrease in human capital due to

warmer temperature exposures. Since the absence of a long-term impact is somewhat

imprecise, it may also be instructive to look at the lower bound of the 95% confidence

interval, which corresponds to an estimate of -1.304. Even at this tail of the parameter

distribution, our results imply considerable adaptive behaviors or a λ no larger than an

implausibly small value of 0.007.     When we add degree days below 21C (DD<21), shown in

column 2, our estimate for warmer temperatures rises slightly to -0.250 but remains

statistically insignificant. Focusing on mean winter and summer temperatures yields

estimates that are again statistically insignificant and considerably smaller than the simulated

long run estimates under even highly conservative assumptions. For example, our estimate of

-0.196 for July-August suggests that a 1C increase for every day in those two months

decrease math performance by 0.196 percentile points.

          In Table 5, we show results using lifetime temperature exposure. Given that these

estimates rely on cross-sectional models, we assess the sensitivity of results to slowly adding

more controls, continuing to use different assumptions about the functional form for


                                                19
temperature. In the first panel, which only uses degree days above 21C, we see in column 1

that temperature is negatively associated with math performance. Adding simple controls for

maternal human capital, a strong predictor of children’s human capital attainment (Black et

al., 2005), raises that coefficient to -0.463 as shown in Column 2. As we include more

control variables, this estimate remains fairly stable and far from statistically significant.

Panel B adds degree days below 21, while Panel C uses winter and summer temperatures. In

both cases, the estimates show the same general pattern: statistically insignificant estimates

that are much smaller than those implied by the simulation exercise.

       In Figure 4 we show results allowing for the flexible specification in temperature for

the “between test” and “from birth” models that matches the indicators used in the short run

model. As with the previous long run results, we do not find statistically significant estimates.

Moreover, we do not find a pattern in the estimates that comports with the short run results –

estimates are relatively flat over the entire temperature distribution. The consistently

insignificant and small coefficients across our long-run models are consistent with the notion

that individuals engage in non-trivial amounts of adaptation to minimize the effects of high

temperature days on the human capital accumulation of children.



6. Conclusion

       In this paper, we merge rich data from the NLSY with meteorological data to provide

the first economic analysis of the relationship between temperature/climate and human

capital. We find that short-run changes in temperature lead to statistically significant

decreases in cognitive performance on math (but not reading) beyond 26C (78.8F). Notably,

these results obtain despite quite high levels of air conditioning penetration in our study

region, suggesting that in the short run, individuals do not completely insulate themselves

from climatic factors. In contrast, our long-run analysis fails to find a statistically significant


                                                20
relationship between climate and human capital, and one that is much smaller in magnitude

than that suggested by the short run estimates. These results are consistent with the notion

that individuals compensate for short-run setbacks with additional investments in subsequent

periods.

       This set of results is important for several reasons. Our short-run results indicate that

analytical thinking is compromised at modest temperatures well below our popular

conventions regarding a very hot day. Cognitive performance of this sort is the lifeblood of

homo economicus and critical for decision making in a wide range of domains. That this

temperature range is a regular occurrence in summer across much of the globe and all year

long in parts of the tropics portends potentially sizable impacts on economic well-being.

These findings also appear to have strong implications for the optimal timing of cognitively

demanding tasks, such as financial decision-making and significant health choices.

       While cognitive performance and decision making may be compromised by warmer

weather, our long-run results demonstrate that these insults have no demonstrable effect on

human capital attainment in the long-run. Since permanent adaptation strategies are largely

held fixed in our comparisons across our short and long run specifications, we argue that the

difference between these results are driven by compensatory behavior. An interesting feature

of this compensatory behavior is that it requires no knowledge of the ‘harmful’ effects of

temperature since it is an ex-post adaptive strategy. The feedback from poor test

performance may be sufficient to induce individuals to increase investments in learning.

           It is important to note, however, that there may be an alternative explanation for the

absence of a long-run effect. Test scores are a composite measure of knowledge and

performance, and the inter-temporal dependencies of one on the other are largely unknown.

Thus, it is possible that short-run changes in performance simply do not add up to sizable

long-run changes in learning. Given our parameter estimates and simulations, the plausibility


                                                 21
of this explanation hinges on a near-zero relationship between the two. Evidence from

randomized laboratory studies which find that learning is compromised from higher

temperatures further bolsters the claim that the difference between our short- and long-run

estimates reflects the offsetting effects of compensatory behaviors.

        Finally, our results suggest a cautionary tale regarding what we can learn about

policy-relevant climate change impacts from studying the well-identified influences from

weather. Whether the same pattern applies to other settings is an open question. Regardless,

the absence of long-run impacts in our setting should not be interpreted as the absence of

welfare impacts. Compensatory behavior is not costless, and represents a potentially

important, and heretofore largely ignored, element in the optimal design of climate change

policies.




                                              22
References

Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. “Human capital development before age five.”
Handbook of Labor Economics 4 (2011): 1315-1486.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Anin Aroonruengsawat. “Simulating the impacts of climate
change, prices and population on California’s residential electricity consumption.” Climatic
change 109, no. 1 (2011): 191-210.

Baker, Paula C., and Frank Mott. NLSY child handbook 1989: A guide and resource
document for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1986 Child Data. Center for Human
Resource Research, The Ohio State University, 1989.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro.
“Adapting to climate change: The remarkable decline in the US temperature-mortality
relationship over the 20th century.” NBER Working Paper 18692, 2013.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall Far:
Understanding the Intergenerational Transmission of Education.” American Economic
Review 95(2005): 437-449.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122, no. 1 (2007): 409-439.

Bowler, K., and R. Tirri. “The temperature characteristics of synaptic membrane ATPases
from immature and adult rat brain.” Journal of neurochemistry 23, no. 3 (1974): 611-613.

Burke, Marshall B., Edward Miguel, Shanker Satyanath, John A. Dykema, and David B.
Lobell. “Warming increases the risk of civil war in Africa.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106, no. 49 (2009): 20670-20674.

Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. “Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US
agriculture.” Available at SSRN 2144928 (2012).

Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. “Estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation.” Econometrica 78(3) (2010): 883-931.

Currie, Janet. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 47, no. 1
(2009): 87-122.

Deboer, Tom. “Brain temperature dependent changes in the electroencephalogram power
spectrum of humans and animals.” Journal of sleep research 7, no. 4 (1998): 254-262.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. “What do we learn from the
weather? The new climate-economy literature.” Journal of Economic Literature 52, no 3
(2014): 740–798.




                                             23
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. “Temperature shocks and
economic growth: Evidence from the last half century.” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 4, no. 3 (2012): 66-95.

Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. “The economic impacts of climate change:
evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather.” The American
Economic Review (2007): 354-385.

Deschênes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics (2011): 152-185.

Deschenes, Olivier, and Enrico Moretti. “Extreme weather events, mortality, and migration.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 4 (2009): 659-681.

Doya, Kenji, Shin Ishii, Alexandre Pouget, and Rajesh PN Rao. “Bayesian Brain:
Probabilistic Approaches to Neural Coding (Computational Neuroscience).” (2007).

Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell, “Temperature and the Allocation of Time:
Implications for Climate Change,” Journal of Labor Economics, 32(2014): 1-26.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. “Environment, Health, and Human Capital.”
Journal of Economic Literature 51, no. 3 (2013): 689-730.

Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B. Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. “Linkages among climate
change, crop yields and Mexico–US cross-border migration.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107, no. 32 (2010): 14257-14262.

Fine, Bernard J., and John L. Kobrick. “Effects of altitude and heat on complex cognitive
tasks.” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 20, no. 1
(1978): 115-122.

Froom, Paul, Yeheskial Caine, Igal Shochat, and Joseph Ribak. “Heat stress and helicopter
pilot errors.” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 35, no. 7 (1993): 720-
732.

Hocking, Chris, Richard B. Silberstein, Wai Man Lau, Con Stough, and Warren Roberts.
“Evaluation of cognitive performance in the heat by functional brain imaging and
psychometric testing.” Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: Molecular &
Integrative Physiology 128, no. 4 (2001): 719-734.

Hsiang, Solomon M. “Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic
production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107, no. 35 (2010): 15367-15372.

Hyde, Dale, John R. Thomas, John Schrot, and W. F. Taylor. Quantification of special
operations mission-related performance: Operational evaluation of physical measures. No.
NMRI-97-01.Naval Medical Research Institute, Bethesda MD, 1997.



                                            24
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L.
Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA.

Kiyatkin, Eugene A. “Brain temperature fluctuations during physiological and pathological
conditions.” European Journal of Applied Physiology 101, no. 1 (2007): 3-17.

Libecap, Gary D., and Richard H. Steckel, eds. The economics of climate change:
Adaptations past and present. University of Chicago Press, 2011.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. “The impact of global
warming on agriculture: ARicardian analysis.” The American Economic Review (1994): 753-
771.

Moore, Christopher I., and Rosa Cao. “The hemo-neural hypothesis: On the role of blood
flow in information processing.” Journal of Neurophysiology 99, no. 5 (2008): 2035-2047.

Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund S. Phelps. “Investment in humans, technological diffusion,
and economic growth.” The American Economic Review (1966): 69-75.

Nordhaus, William D. “Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new findings.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, no. 10
(2006): 3510-3517.

Nordhaus, William D. “The economics of hurricanes and implications of global warming.”
Climate Change Economics 1, no. 01 (2010): 1-20.

Nybo, Lars, and Niels H. Secher. “Cerebral perturbations provoked by prolonged exercise.”
Progress in Neurobiology 72, no. 4 (2004): 223-261.

Raichle, Marcus E., and Mark A. Mintun. “Brain work and brain imaging.” Annual Review of
Neuroscience 29 (2006): 449-476.

Romer, Paul M. “Increasing returns and long-run growth.” The Journal of Political Economy
(1986): 1002-1037.

Rodgers, Joseph Lee, David C. Rowe, and Kim May. “DF analysis of NLSY IQ/achievement
data: Nonshared environmental influences.” Intelligence 19, no. 2 (1994): 157-177.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner. “Sources of slow growth in African economies.”
Journal of African Economies 6, no. 3 (1997): 335-376.

Schlenker, Wolfram, W. Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. “The impact of global
warming on US agriculture: an econometric analysis of optimal growing conditions.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 88, no. 1 (2006): 113-125.




                                            25
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
damages to US crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106, no. 37 (2009): 15594-15598.

Schiff, Steven J., and George G. Somjen.”The effects of temperature on synaptic
transmission in hippocampal tissue slices.” Brain Research 345, no. 2 (1985): 279-284.

Sinha, Paramita, and Maureen L. Cropper. “The value of climate amenities: Evidence from us
migration decisions.” NBER Working Paper 18756, 2013.

Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. “The production of cognitive achievement in
children: Home, school, and racial test score gaps.” Journal of Human capital 1.1 (2007): 91-
136.

Varshney, Lav R. “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decoding.” Information
Theory, IEEE Transactions on 57, no. 7 (2011): 4427-4444.

Vasmatzidis, Ioannis, Robert E. Schlegel, and Peter A. Hancock. “An investigation of heat
stress effects on time-sharing performance.” Ergonomics 45, no. 3 (2002): 218-239.

Yablonskiy, Dmitriy A., Joseph JH Ackerman, and Marcus E. Raichle.”Coupling between
changes in human brain temperature and oxidative metabolism during prolonged visual
stimulation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97, no. 13 (2000): 7603-7608.




                                             26
Table 1. Summary Statistics

A. Cognitive outcomes
                                            N          Mean         SD       within SD
Math                       percentile     24361        49.70       27.45      14.37
                           length         10389         9.98       4.91        3.14
                           energy         24260         0.11       0.31        0.25
Reading comprehension      percentile     20439        51.60       27.74      14.34
                           length          8557        10.19        5.26       3.15
                           energy         20041         0.16       0.36        0.28
Reading recognition        percentile     24229        56.52       28.50      13.00
                           length         10367         3.59       1.92        1.25
                           energy         22814         0.15       0.35        0.28
# of tests per child                      24361         3.66       1.20          -
# of years between tests                  16304         2.15       0.64          -

B. Temperature measures
                                N           °C          SD       within SD       °F
Day of test
Temperature                   24361       22.77        4.96         3.12       72.99
Degree days ≥ 21              24361        3.05        3.12         1.85       5.49
Degree days < 21              24361        1.28        2.65         1.92       2.30

Between tests
Degree days ≥ 21              16304        1.21        0.99         0.22       2.18
Degree days < 21              16304       13.07        3.75         0.71       23.52
January-February              16304        4.61        6.86         1.33       40.30
July-August                   16304       24.57        3.03         0.63       76.23

 From birth
 Degree days ≥ 21             24294        1.23          0.98         -         2.22
 Degree days < 21             24294       13.08          3.68         -        23.54
 January-February             24294        4.12          6.85         -        39.42
 July-August                  24294       24.53          2.95         -        76.15
Notes: Length is the number of minutes for the child to complete the evaluation. Energy is
the percent of children reported by the interviewer as acting lethargic. Temperature measures
are reported for the math test only. 'Day of test' reflects temperature the day the test is taken.
'Between tests' reflects the mean temperature between successive tests. 'From birth' reflects
the mean temperature from birth until the time of the test. Degree days >= 21 (<21) is the
number of degrees above (below) 21°C. January-February and July-August are the mean
temperatures for those months.




                                                 27
Table 2. Fixed effect estimates of relationship between short-run temperature and cognitive
performance

                         1             2              3            4
A. Math
Degree days ≥ 21     -0.211*       -0.205*         -0.240**    -0.219*
                     [0.0903]      [0.0960]        [0.0925]    [0.0984]
Degree days < 21                                    -0.151     -0.0749
                                                   [0.0899]    [0.0934]
Fixed effect          mother          child         mother       child
Observations          24,361        24,361          24,361      24,361
R-squared              0.551         0.737           0.551       0.737

B. Reading comprehension
Degree days ≥ 21     0.0607         0.0611          0.0524      0.0711
                     [0.102]        [0.102]         [0.104]     [0.104]
Degree days < 21                                   -0.0434      0.0509
                                                   [0.0942]    [0.0985]
Fixed effect          mother          child         mother       child
Observations          20,439        20,439          20,439      20,439
R-squared              0.601         0.779           0.601       0.779

B. Reading recognition
Degree days ≥ 21       -0.027       0.0441         -0.0325        0.0461
                      [0.0899]     [0.0875]        [0.0919]      [0.0896]
Degree days < 21                                   -0.0286        0.0101
                                                   [0.0856]      [0.0828]
Fixed effect            mother          child       mother         child
Observations            24,229        24,229        24,229        24,229
R-squared                0.587         0.802         0.587         0.802
Notes: The above coefficients reflect estimates of the relationship between temperature on the
day of the test and cognitive performance. Standard errors clustered on state-week in
brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regression models control for precipitation, pressure, wind
speed, humidity, and dummy variables for day of week, month, year, and state-by-year.
Regressions with mother fixed effects also control for child sex, birth order dummies, age of
mother at birth of child, and child birth weight dummies.




                                              28
Table 3. Robustness checks for estimates of short-run temperature relationship

                          1            2                3
                      Time to     Assessment        Start time
A. Math              completion   completed
Degree days ≥ 21       -0.011      -0.0012           0.0138
                      [0.054]      [0.0012]         [0.0447]
Degree days < 21        0.004      -0.0015          -0.0282
                      [0.052]      [0.0013]         [0.0418]
Observations            8,620       26,091            8,621
R-squared               0.663        0.566            0.707

B. Reading comprehension
Degree days ≥ 21     -0.038         -0.0008
                     [0.064]       [0.0019]
Degree days < 21     -0.025        -0.0038*
                     [0.069]       [0.0019]
Observations          7,092          26,062
R-squared             0.725           0.52

C. Reading recognition
Degree days ≥ 21         -0.011       -0.0010
                        [0.023]       [0.0013]
Degree days < 21        -0.051*       -0.0015
                        [0.024]       [0.0014]
Observations              8,597        26,089
R-squared                 0.65          0.55
Notes: The above coefficients reflect estimates of the relationship between temperature on the
day of the test and the following outcomes: column 1 is the number of minutes it takes the
child to complete the assessment; column 2 is whether the assessment is completed, and
column 3 is the start time of the assessment, only relevant for math since it is always first.
Standard errors clustered on state-week in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regression
models control for precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity, dummy variables for day of
week, month, year, and state-by-year, and child fixed effects.




                                               29
Table 4. Long difference estimates of relationship between temperature between tests and
math performance

                         1           2            3
Degree days ≥ 21      -0.630      -0.250
                      [0.344]    [0.466]
Degree days < 21                 -0.414*
                                 [0.203]
July-August                                    -0.196
                                              [0.134]
January-February                              -0.0905
                                              [0.135]
Observations           16,304     16,304      16,304
R-squared               0.034      0.035       0.035
Notes: The above coefficients reflect estimates of the relationship between temperature
exposure between tests and the change in math performance. Standard errors clustered on
state-week in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regression models control for between test
measures of precipitation, pressure, wind speed, and humidity; dummy variables for day of
week, month, year, and state-by-year.




                                             30
Table 5. Cross-sectional estimates of relationship between lifetime temperature exposure and
math performance

                         1              2             3              4
A. Cooling degree days
Degree days ≥ 21     -1.211          -0.463         -0.440        -0.329
                     [0.977]         [1.116]        [1.087]       [0.999]
Observations         24,294          24,294         24,294        24,294
R-squared             0.151           0.269          0.271         0.281

B. Cooling and heating degree days
Degree days ≥ 21       0.347         0.0368          0.102         0.158
                      [0.962]        [1.009]        [0.970]       [0.918]
Degree days < 21 -1.694**            -0.550         -0.600        -0.543
                      [0.548]        [0.430]        [0.440]       [0.420]
Observations          24,294         24,294         24,294        24,294
R-squared              0.152          0.269          0.271         0.281

 C. Seasonal temperatures
 July-August          -0.691*         -0.496         -0.422         -0.349
                       [0.297]        [0.291]       [0.312]        [0.302]
 January-February      -0.285          0.237          0.139          0.125
                       [0.281]        [0.237]       [0.235]        [0.230]
 Observations          24,294         24,294        24,294         24,294
 R-squared              0.155          0.270          0.273          0.282
 County chars.            Y              Y              Y              Y
 Geography                Y              Y              Y              Y
 Child chars.             Y              Y              Y              Y
 Maternal HC              N              Y              Y              Y
 Grandparent HC           N              N              Y              Y
 f(Maternal HC)           N              N              N              Y
Notes: The above coefficients reflect estimates of the relationship between temperature
exposure from birth until the time of test and math performance. Standard errors clustered on
state-week in brackets. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regression models control for from-birth
measures of precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity, and dummy variables for day of
week, month, year, and state-by-year. County chars. includes county level measures of age of
housing stock, birth rate, death rate, infant mortality rate, physicians per capita, hospital beds
per capita, education per capita, household income per capita, and fraction below poverty.
Geography includes county size, max. elevation, and borders ocean or great lake. Child chars.
includes sex, birth order dummies, maternal age at birth, and age of child at time of test.
Maternal HC includes mother’s years of schooling, AFQT, self-esteem, height, weight, race,
foreign language, religion, and dummy variables to indicate when schooling, AFQT and self-
esteem were imputed. Grandparent HC includes grandmother and grandfather's years of
schooling, Duncan SEI, foreign born, and dummies if schooling missing. f(maternal HC)
includes 3rd order polynomial for all continuous maternal HC variables and all 2-way
interactions.

                                               31
Figure 1. Relationship between short-run temperature and cognitive performance

A. Mathematics




B. Reading comprehension




                                            32
C. Reading recognition




Notes: The solid line shows coefficient estimates of the effect of temperature on the day of
the test of cognitive performance, with 95% confidence intervals in dotted lines. The
regression includes indicators for each 2°C, and also controls for precipitation, pressure, wind
speed, humidity, dummy variables for day of week, month, year, and state-by-year, and child
fixed effects. The predicted effect using degree days above and below 21°C is shown in the
dashed line, and is based on a regression using the same set of controls.




                                              33
Figure 2. Relationship between short-run temperature and time to completion for math
assessment




Notes: The solid line shows coefficient estimates of the effect of temperature on the day of
the test, with 95% confidence intervals in dotted lines. The regression includes indicators for
each 2°C, and also controls for precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity, dummy
variables for day of week, month, year, and state-by-year, and child fixed effects. The
predicted effect using degree days above and below 21°C is shown in the dashed line, and is
based on a regression using the same set of controls.




                                               34
Figure 3. Timing of exposure and math performance




Notes: The solid line shows coefficient estimates of the effect of degree days ≥ 21 on
cognitive performance for 3 days before, the day of, and one day after the test. The regression
also controls for degree days < 21 3 days before, the day of, and one day after the test. Other
controls include precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity, dummy variables for day of
week, month, year, and state-by-year, and child fixed effects. The estimate for the
contemporaneous only model (Table 2, column 4) is shown with the gray square, along with
the 95% confidence interval.




                                              35
Figure 4. Relationship between long-run temperature and math performance

A. Temperature exposure between successive tests




B. Temperature exposure from birth until time of test




Notes: The solid line shows coefficient estimates with 95% confidence intervals in dotted
lines. Panel A focuses on measures of temperature between successive tests. Panel B focuses
on measures of temperature from birth until the time of the test. The regressions include
indicators for the fraction of days the temperatures was in each 2°C bin, and also controls for
precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity (measured analogously), dummy variables for
day of week, month, year, and state-by-year. Panel B includes the full set of controls as used
in column 4 of Table 5.




                                              36
Appendix – Exploring the role of air conditioning

        While our short-run results are net of any protective effects from the availability of air

conditioning at the time children take their exam, we use this Appendix to directly explore

the role of air conditioning as a moderator of the short-run relationship between temperature

and cognitive performance. A core challenge in this analysis is the limited availability of data

on air conditioning (AC) penetration, particularly over the relevant spatial and temporal

scales. The best data available comes from the American Housing Survey (AHS), and even

this data is rather incomplete for our purposes. As a result, our analysis relies on imputed

estimates of AC ownership based on the following procedure. First, we create a balanced

panel of 131,904 observations from 21,984 housing units from biannual observations of the

2001-2011 AHS surveys.21 From this survey, we create an indicator for whether the housing

unit has a window or central AC unit. We then perform a logit regression of AC ownership

on indicators for race and age of the head of household, SMSA and year. We then map the

NLSY counties into SMSAs, though 1/3 of NLSY respondents could not be mapped into an

SMSA since not all counties reside in an SMSA. Using the coefficients from this equation,

we then predict the probability of AC ownership in the NLSY. Given data limitations and the

strong assumptions required to construct this measure, the results that follow should be

viewed as suggestive and treated with considerable caution.

        Using our imputed measure of AC ownership, we interact AC ownership with our

temperature variables as given in equation (5). The results for degree days are shown in

Appendix Table 1. Re-estimating equation (5) for this reduced sample gives an estimate of -

0.133, which is somewhat smaller than the corresponding estimate in Table 2 of -.205. When

we include interactions with AC, the level effect of DD>21, which should be interpreted as

21
  Although the NLSY test score data we use goes back to 1988, 2001 is the first year of the AHS survey. We
are unaware of any national sources of AC data with geographic identifiers that covers the years between 1988
and 2000.


                                                      37
the effect if someone does not own AC, drops to -.464. The interaction term is 0.415, which

implies that the effect of temperature for those with AC is -.049. While imprecise, this pattern

is as expected: owning AC decreases the effect of temperature on cognitive performance. We

find a similar pattern when we include DD<21, although we obtain the surprising result that

DD<21 is also affected by AC ownership. The results using the more flexible specification

for temperature are shown in Appendix Figure 1. While estimates are generally decreasing in

temperature, the interaction with AC ownership has little impact on our estimates.




                                              38
Appendix Table 1. Relationship between short-run temperature, air conditioning, and
cognitive performance

                             1           2             3             4
Degree days ≥ 21          -0.133      -0.464        -0.148        -0.379
                          [0.118]     [0.378]      [0.121]        [0.396]
Degree days < 21                                   -0.0874        -0.314
                                                   [0.127]        [0.291]
AC*Degree days ≥ 21                      0.415                     0.287
                                        [0.453]                   [0.480]
AC*Degree days < 21                                                0.345
                                                                  [0.388]
Observations                15,719      15,719       15,719       15,719
R-squared                   0.745        0.745       0.745         0.745
Notes: The above coefficients reflect estimates of the relationship between temperature on the
day of the test and math performance. Standard errors clustered on state-week in brackets. **
p<0.01, * p<0.05. All regression models control for precipitation, pressure, wind speed, and
humidity; dummy variables for day of week, month, year, and state-by-year; and child fixed
effects. 'AC' is imputed air conditioning ownership.




                                             39
Appendix Figure 1. Relationship between short-run temperature, air conditioning, and
cognitive performance




Notes: The solid line shows coefficient estimates of the effect of temperature on the day of
the test of cognitive performance, with 95% confidence intervals in dotted lines. The dashed
line adds to this the coefficient estimates from temperature interacted with imputed air
conditioning ownership. The regression includes indicators for each 2°C, and also controls
for precipitation, pressure, wind speed, humidity, dummy variables for day of week, month,
year, and state-by-year, and child fixed effects.




                                             40
