NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-FULFILLING DEBT CRISES:
CAN MONETARY POLICY REALLY HELP?
Philippe Bacchetta
Elena Perazzi
Eric van Wincoop
Working Paper 21158
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21158

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We would like to thank Luca Dedola, Kenza Benhima, Celine Poilly, and seminar participants at the
University of Lausanne, ETH Zurich, and participants at the ECB conference "Nonlinearities in macroeconomics
and finance in light off crises" and the UVA-Richmond Fed research conference for helpful comments
and suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Bankard Fund for Political
Economy and the ERC Advanced Grant #269573. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Philippe Bacchetta, Elena Perazzi, and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: Can Monetary Policy Really Help?
Philippe Bacchetta, Elena Perazzi, and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 21158
May 2015
JEL No. E52,E60,E63
ABSTRACT
This paper examines quantitatively the potential for monetary policy to avoid self-fulfilling sovereign
debt crises. We combine a version of the slow-moving debt crisis model proposed by Lorenzoni and
Werning (2014) with a standard New Keynesian model. We consider both conventional and unconventional
monetary policy. Under conventional policy the central bank can preclude a debt crisis through inflation,
lowering the real interest rate and raising output. These reduce the real value of the outstanding debt
and the cost of new borrowing, and increase tax revenues and seigniorage. Unconventional policies
take the form of liquidity support or debt buyback policies that raise the monetary base beyond the
satiation level. We find that generally the central bank cannot credibly avoid a self-fulfilling debt crisis.
Conventional policies needed to avert a crisis require excessive inflation for a sustained period of time.
Unconventional monetary policy can only be effective when the economy is at a structural ZLB for
a sustained length of time.

Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Intranef 523
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch
Elena Perazzi
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Intranef 506
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
Elena.Perazzi.2@unil.ch

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu

1

Introduction

A popular explanation for the sovereign debt crisis that has impacted European
periphery countries since 2010 is self-ful…lling sentiments. If market participants
believe that sovereign default of a country is more likely, they demand higher
spreads, which over time raises the debt level and therefore indeed makes eventual default more likely.1 This view of self-ful…lling beliefs is consistent with the
evidence that the surge in sovereign bond spreads in Europe during 2010-2011
was disconnected from debt ratios and other macroeconomic fundamentals (e.g.,
de Grauwe and Ji, 2013). However, countries with comparable debt and de…cits
outside the Eurozone (e.g., the US, Japan or the UK) were not impacted. This difference in experience has often been attributed to the fact that the highly indebted
non-Eurozone countries have their own currency.2 The central bank has additional
tools to support the …scal authority, either in the form of standard in‡ation policy
or by providing liquidity, which can avoid self-ful…lling debt crises. In fact, the
decline in European spreads since mid 2012 is widely attributed to a change in
ECB policy towards explicit backing of periphery government debt.
The question that we address in this paper is whether central banks can credibly
avert self-ful…lling debt crises. This is a quantitative question that requires a
reasonably realistic model. Existing models of self-ful…lling sovereign debt crises
either take the form of liquidity or rollover crises, such as Cole and Kehoe (2000),
or models in the spirit of Calvo (1988), where default becomes self-ful…lling by
raising the spread on sovereign debt.3 In this paper we are interested in the
second type of self-ful…lling crises, which …ts more closely with the experience in
1

This view was held by the ECB President Draghi himself: “... the assessment of the Governing Council is that we are in a situation now where you have large parts of the euro area
in what we call a “bad equilibrium”, namely an equilibrium where you may have self-ful…lling
expectations that feed upon themselves and generate very adverse scenarios.” (press conference,
September 6, 2012). In the academic literature, versions of this argument can be found, among
others, in Aguiar et al. (2013), Camous and Cooper (2014), Cohen and Villemot (2015), Conesa
and Kehoe (2015), Corsetti and Dedola (2014), de Grauwe (2011), de Grauwe and Ji (2013),
Gros (2012), Jeanne (2012), Jeanne and Wang (2013), Krugman (2013), Lorenzoni and Werning
(2014), Navarro et al. (2014), and Miller and Zhang (2012).
2
See for example de Grauwe (2011), de Grauwe and Jin (2013), Jeanne (2012) and Krugman
(2013).
3
Navarro et al. (2014) show that this mechanism can also arise in sovereign debt models in
the line of Eaton and Gersovitz (1988).

1

Europe. However, while the contribution by Calvo was important in highlighting
the mechanism, it uses a two-period setup that quantitatively is of limited interest.
We therefore analyze the role that the central bank can play in the context
of a framework developed by Lorenzoni and Werning (2014), which extends the
mechanism of Calvo (1988) to a more dynamic setting. The model exhibits "slow
moving" debt crises. The anticipation of a possible future default on long term
bonds leads interest rates and debt to gradually rise over time, justifying the
belief of ultimate default. This framework has two advantages. First, while the
mechanism is in the spirit of Calvo (1988), the presence of long-term debt and more
realistic dynamics provides a better framework for quantitatively evaluating the
role of monetary policy. The slow-moving nature of the crisis also gives the central
bank more time to act to support the …scal authority. Second, the model connects
closely to the recent experience in Europe, where sovereign default spreads rose
over several years without setting o¤ immediate default events.
While the LW model is real and does not have a monetary authority, we analyze
the role of monetary policy by incorporating the LW framework into a standard
New Keynesian model. We follow the literature and consider a speci…cation that
yields empirically consistent responses of output and in‡ation to monetary shocks.
We then …rst analyze the role of conventional monetary policy. Expansionary
policy that lowers interest rates, raises in‡ation and raises output slows down
government debt accumulation in four ways. First, lower real interest rates reduce
the real cost of new borrowing. Second, in‡ation erodes the value of outstanding
debt. Third, higher output raises government tax revenue. Finally, an increase in
the money supply generates seigniorage revenue.
Most of the paper considers the case, also analyzed in LW, where the decision to
default or not takes place at a known future date T . At that time uncertainty about
future …scal surpluses is resolved. At an initial date 0 a self-ful…lling expectation
shock can lead to beliefs of default at time T . Investors then demand a higher yield
on new debt, which leads to a more rapid accumulation of debt between the initial
period 0 and the default period T . If debt is large enough, default may occur due
to insolvency. There is a range of initial debt levels at time 0 for which self-ful…lling
crises may occur. Monetary policy can be used to relax the solvency constraint
both ex ante, before T , and ex post, after T . We also consider an extension in
which there is uncertainty about T .
Su¢ ciently aggressive monetary policy can in principle preclude a self-ful…lling
2

debt crisis. However, the policy needs to be credible and therefore not too costly,
especially in terms of in‡ation. Assuming reasonable parameters of the model and
the debt maturity structure, we …nd that avoiding a crisis equilibrium is typically
very costly. For example, with an initial debt level in the middle of the multiplicity
range (112% of GDP), optimal policy that avoids a self-ful…lling crisis implies that
prices ultimately increase by a factor of 5 and the peak annual in‡ation rate is 24%.
Avoiding self-ful…lling equilibria requires very steep in‡ation rates for a sustained
period of time, the cost of which is likely to be much larger than that of allowing
the government to default. We …nd that this result is robust to signi…cant changes
in the assumed parameters of both the LW and NK components of the model.
We also consider unconventional monetary policy, where the monetary base is
expanded beyond the satiation level of money demand. We consider both a liquidity support policy, whereby the consolidated government issues monetary liabilities
instead of new debt, and a debt buyback policy, where existing government debt
is replaced with monetary liabilities. An important advantage of such policies is
that, in contrast to government debt, there is no payment of default premia on
monetary liabilities. Nonetheless we …nd that such policies can only be e¤ective
if the economy is at a structural zero lower bound (ZLB), where the natural real
interest rate is zero or negative, for a sustained period of time.
We consider the case where a central bank aims to avoid default of the central
government. As we brie‡y discuss toward the end of the paper, our main result
that a central bank can generally not credibly avoid a self-ful…lling debt crisis does
not apply to the situation in Europe in the summer of 2012, when the ECB aimed
to avoid default in a limited periphery of the currency union. The ECB could for
example sell German bonds and buy Spanish bonds at low interest rates, without
any monetary expansion. Just the threat alone of such a policy is su¢ cient to
avoid the default equilibrium.
The impact of monetary policy in a self-ful…lling debt crisis environment was
…rst analyzed by Calvo (1988), who examined the trade-o¤ between outright default and debt de‡ation. Corsetti and Dedola (2014) extend the Calvo model to
allow for both fundamental and self-ful…lling default. They show that with optimal monetary policy debt crises can still happen, but for larger levels of debt.
They also show that a crisis can be avoided if government debt is replaced by central bank debt that is convertible into cash. Reis (2013) and Jeanne (2012) both
develop stylized two-period models with multiple equilibria to illustrate ways in
3

which the central bank can act to avoid the bad equilibrium.
Some papers consider more dynamic models. Camous and Cooper (2014) use
a dynamic overlapping-generation model with strategic default. They show that
the central bank can avoid self-ful…lling default if they commit to a policy where
in‡ation depends on the state (productivity, interest rate, sunspot). Aguiar et
al. (2013) consider a dynamic model to analyze the vulnerability to self-ful…lling
rollover crises, depending on the aversion of the central bank to in‡ation. Although
a rollover crisis occurs suddenly, it is assumed that there is a grace period to repay
the debt, allowing the central bank time to reduce the real value of the debt through
in‡ation. They …nd that only for intermediate levels of the cost of in‡ation do debt
crises occur under a narrower range of debt values.
All these papers derive analytical conditions under which central bank policy
would avoid a self-ful…lling debt crisis. This delivers interesting insights, but does
not answer the more quantitative question whether realistically the central bank
can be expected to adopt a policy that prevents a self-ful…lling crisis. In order to do
so we relax the assumptions of one-period bonds, ‡exible prices, and instantaneous
crises that are adopted in the literature above for tractability reasons.4
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the slow-moving
debt crisis model based on LW. It starts with a real version of the model and
then presents its extension to a monetary environment. Subsequently, it analyzes
the various channels of monetary policy in this framework. Section 3 describes
the New Keynesian part of the model and its calibration. Section 4 analyzes
the quantitative impact of conventional monetary policy and Section 5 considers
unconventional monetary policy. After a discussion of related questions in Section
6, Section 7 concludes. Some of the technical details are left to the Appendix,
while additional algebraic details and results can be found in a separate Technical
Appendix.
4

There are recent models that examine the impact of monetary policy in the presence of longterm government bonds. Leeper and Zhou (2013) analyze optimal monetary (and …scal) policy
with ‡exible prices, while Bhattarai et al. (2013) consider a New Keynesian environment at ZLB.
These papers, however, do not allow for the possibility of sovereign default. Sheedy (2014) and
Gomes et al. (2014) examine monetary policy with long-term private sector bonds.

4

2

A Model of Slow-Moving Self-Ful…lling Debt
Crisis

In this section we present a dynamic sovereign debt crisis model based on LW.
We …rst describe the basic structure of the model in a real environment. We then
extend the model to a monetary environment and discuss the impact of monetary
policy on the existence of self-ful…lling debt crises. We focus on the dynamics of
asset prices and debt for given interest rates and goods prices. The latter will be
determined in a New Keynesian model that we describe in Section 3.

2.1

A Real Model

We consider a simpli…ed version of the LW model. As in the applications considered
by LW, there is a key date T at which uncertainty about future primary surpluses
is resolved and the government makes a decision to default or not.5 Default occurs
at time T if the present value of future primary surpluses is insu¢ cient to repay
the debt. We assume that default does not happen prior to date T as there is
always a possibility of large primarily surpluses from T onward. In one version
of their model LW assume that T is known to all agents, while in another they
assume that it is unknown and arrives each period with a certain probability. We
mostly adopt the former assumption. In section 4.3 we brie‡y discuss an extension
where T is uncertain.
The only simpli…cation we adopt relative to LW concerns the process of the
primary surplus. For now we assume that the primary surplus st is constant
at s between periods 0 and T 1. Below we extend this by allowing for a procyclical primary surplus.6 A second assumption concerns the primary surplus value
starting at date T . Let s~ denote the maximum potential primary surplus that the
government is able to achieve, which becomes known at time T and is constant
from thereon. LW assume that it is drawn from a log normal distribution. Instead
we assume that it is drawn from a binary distribution, which simpli…es the algebra
5

One can for example think of countries that have been hit by a shock that adversely a¤ected
their primary surpluses, which is followed by a period of uncertainty about whether and how
much the government is able to restore primary surpluses through higher taxation or reduced
spending.
6
LW assume a …scal rule whereby the surplus is a function of debt.

5

and the presentation. It can take on only two values: slow with probability and
shigh with probability 1
. When the present discounted value of s~ is at least as
large as what the government owes on debt, there is no default at time T and the
actual surplus is just su¢ cient to satisfy the budget constraint (generally below
s~). We assume that shigh is big enough such that this is always the case when
s~ = shigh .7 When s~ = slow and its present value is insu¢ cient to repay the debt,
the government defaults.
A key feature of the model is the presence of long-term debt. As usual in the
literature, assume that bonds pay coupons (measured in goods) that depreciate at
a rate of 1
over time: , (1
) , (1
)2 , and so on.8 A smaller therefore
implies a longer maturity of debt. This facilitates aggregation as a bond issued
at t s corresponds to (1
)s bonds issued at time t. We can then de…ne all
outstanding bonds in terms of the equivalent of newly issued bonds. We de…ne bt
as debt measured in terms of the equivalent of newly issued bonds at t 1 on which
the …rst coupon is due at time t. As in LW, we take as given. It is associated
with tradeo¤s that are not explicitly modeled, and we do not allow the government
to change the maturity to avoid default.
Let Qt be the price of a government bond. At time t the value of government
debt is Qt bt+1 . In the absence of default the return on the government bond from
t to t + 1 is
(1
)Qt+1 +
(1)
Rtg =
Qt
If there is default at time T , bond holders are able to recover a proportion < 1
of the present discounted value spdv of the primary surpluses slow .9 In that case
the return on the government bond is
RTg

1

=

spdv
QT 1 bT

(2)

Government debt evolves according to
Qt bt+1 = Rtg 1 Qt 1 bt
7

st

(3)

See Technical Appendix for details.
See for example Hatchondo and Martinez (2009).
9
One can think of as the outcome of a bargaining process between the government (representing taxpayers) and bondholders. Since governments rarely default on all their debt, we
assume > 0.
8

6

In the absence of default this may also be written as Qt bt+1 = ((1 )Qt + )bt st .
The initial stock of debt b0 is given.
We assume that investors also have access to a short-term bond with a gross
real interest rate Rt . The only shocks in the model occur at time 0 (self-ful…lling
shock to expectations) and time T (value of s~). In other periods the following
risk-free arbitrage condition holds (for t 0 and t 6= T 1):
Rt =

(1

)Qt+1 +
Qt

(4)

For now we assume, as in LW, a constant interest rate, Rt = R. In that
case spdv = Rslow =(R 1) is the present discounted value of slow . There is no
default at time T if spdv covers current and future debt service at T , which is
((1
)QT + )bT . Since there is no default after time T , QT is the risk-free price,
equal to the present discounted value of future coupons. For convenience it is
assumed that = R 1 + , so that (4) implies that QT = 1. This means that
there is no default as long as spdv RbT , or if
bT

1
R

1

~b

slow

(5)

When bT > ~b, the government partially defaults on debt, with investors seizing a
fraction of the present value spdv .
This framework may lead to multiple equilibria and to a slow-moving debt
crisis, as described in LW. The existence of multiple equilibria can be seen graphically from the intersection of two schedules, as illustrated in Figure 1. The …rst
schedule, labeled "pricing schedule", is a consistency relationship between price
and outstanding debt at T 1, in view of the default decision that may be taken
at T . This is given by:
QT

1

pdv

=

~b

(6)

if bT > ~b

(7)

if bT

= 1
s
+ (1
RbT

)

~b, the arbitrage condition (4) also applies to t = T
When bT
1, implying
QT 1 = 1. When bT is just above ~b, there is a discrete drop of the price because
only a fraction of primary surpluses can be recovered by bond holders in case of
default. For larger values of debt, QT 1 will be even lower as the primary surpluses
have to be shared among more bonds.
7

The second schedule is the "debt accumulation schedule", which expresses the
amount of debt that accumulates through time T 1 as a function of prices between
0 and T 1. Since every price Qt between 0 and T 1 can be expressed as a function
of QT 1 , by integrating (4) backwards from T 1 to 0 we obtain
Qt

1=

T 1 t

1

(QT

R

(8)

1)

1

Substituting in (3) and integrating the government budget constraint forward from
0 to T 1, we get (see Appendix A):
bT = (1

)T b0 +

b0
QT

s

s

(9)

1

where
= RT
s

1

+ (1

)RT

2

+ (1

= 1 + R + R2 + ::: + RT

)2 RT

3

+ ::: + (1

)T

1

1

s
The numerator
b0
s in (9) corresponds to the accumulated new borrowing
between 0 and T . We assume that it is positive, which happens when the primary
surplus is insu¢ cient to pay the coupons on the initial debt. A su¢ cient, but not
necessary, condition is that the primary surplus itself is negative during this time.
The debt accumulation schedule then gives a negative relationship between and
bT and QT 1 . When QT 1 is lower, asset prices from 0 to T 2 are also lower.
This implies a higher yield on newly issued debt, re‡ecting a premium for possible
default at time T . These default premia lead to a more rapid accumulation of debt
and therefore a higher bT at T 1.
Figure 1 shows these two schedules and illustrates the multiplicity of equilibria.
There are two stable equilibria, represented by points A and B. At point A, QT 1 =
1. The bond price is then equal to 1 at all times. This is the "good" equilibrium
in which there is no default. At point B, QT 1 < 1. This is the "bad" equilibrium.
Asset prices starting at time 0 are less than 1 in anticipation of possible default
at time T . Intuitively, when agents believe that default is likely, they demand
default premia (implying lower asset prices), leading to a more rapid accumulation
of debt, which in a self-ful…lling way indeed makes default more likely.
In the bad equilibrium there is a slow-moving debt crisis. As can be seen
from (8), using QT 1 < 1, the asset price instantaneously drops at time 0 and

8

then continues to drop all the way to T
1. Correspondingly, default premia
gradually rise over time. Such a slow-moving crisis occurs only for intermediate
levels of debt. When b0 is su¢ ciently low, the debt accumulation schedule is
further to the left, crossing below point C, and only the good equilibrium exists.
When b0 is su¢ ciently high, the debt accumulation schedule is further to the right,
crossing above point D, and only a bad equilibrium exists. In that case default is
unavoidable when s~ = slow .

2.2

A Monetary Model

We now extend the model to a monetary economy. The goods price level is Pt . Rt
is now the gross nominal interest rate and rt = Rt Pt =Pt+1 the gross real interest
rate. The central bank can set the interest rate Rt and a¤ect Pt . The coupons on
government debt are now nominal. The number of bonds at time t 1 is Bt and
B0 is given. We de…ne bt = Bt =Pt . The arbitrage equation with no default remains
(4), while the government budget constraint for t 6= T becomes
Qt Bt+1 = ((1

)Qt + )Bt

s t Pt

(10)

Zt

where st is now the real primary surplus, st Pt the nominal surplus, and Zt is a
nominal transfer from the central bank.
The central bank budget constraint is :
c
Qt Bt+1
= ((1

)Qt + )Btc + [Mt

Mt 1 ]

Zt

(11)

where Btc are government bonds held by the central bank and are its sole assets.
The value of central bank assets decreases with the depreciation of government
bonds and payments Zt to the treasury. It is increased by the coupon payments
and an expansion Mt Mt 1 of monetary liabilities.
The balance sheets of the central bank and government are interconnected as
most central banks pay a measure of net income (including seigniorage) to the
Treasury as a dividend.10 We will therefore consider the consolidated government
budget constraint by substituting the central bank constraint into the government
budget constraint:
p
Qt Bt+1
= ((1
10

)Qt + )Btp

See Hall and Reis (2013) for a discussion.

9

[Mt

Mt 1 ]

s t Pt

(12)

where Btp = Bt Btc is government debt held by the general public. The consolidated government can reduce debt to the private sector by issuing monetary
liabilities Mt Mt 1 .
Let m
e represent accumulated seigniorage between 0 and T 1:
m
e =

MT

MT

1

PT

2

MT

+ rT

2

2

PT

1

MT

3

+ ::: + r0 r1 :::rT

M0

2

M

1

P0

2

(13)

Similarly, let mpdv denote the present discounted value of seigniorage revenues
starting at date T :
mpdv =

MT

MT

1

PT

+

1 MT +1 MT
1 MT +2 MT +1
+
+ :::
rT
PT +1
rT rT +1
PT +2

At time T the real obligation of the government to bond holders is [(1
]bT . The no-default condition is bpT ~b, with the latter now de…ned as
~b =
where
spdv = 1 +

(14)
)QT +

spdv + mpdv
(1
)QT +

(15)

1
1
+
+ ::: slow
rT
rT rT +1

(16)

and QT is equal to the present discounted value of coupons:
QT =

RT

+

(1
)
(1
)2
+
+ :::
RT RT +1 RT RT +1 RT +2

(17)

In analogy to the real model, the new pricing schedule becomes
QT

1

=
=

(1

)QT +
RT 1
minf0; spdv + mpdv g
+ (1
RT 1 bpT

~b

(18)

if bpT > ~b

(19)

if bpT
)

(1

)QT +
RT 1

Since mpdv can potentially be negative, in (19) the minimum return in the bad state
is set at 0. The new pricing schedule implies a relationship between QT 1 and bT
that has the same shape as in the real model, but is now impacted by monetary
policy through real and nominal interest rates, in‡ation, and seigniorage.
The debt accumulation schedule now becomes (see Appendix A):
bpT

= (1

B0p PT 1
)
+
PT
PT
T

10

B0p =P0
QT

s
1

s

m
e

(20)

where
=
s

rT

2 :::r1 r0

= 1 + rT

2

+ (1

+ rT

2 rT

P0
+ (1
P1
3 + ::: + rT 2 :::r1 r0
)rT

2 :::r1

)2 rT

2 :::r2

P0
+ ::: + (1
P2

)T

1

P0
PT 1

The schedule again implies a negative relationship between QT 1 and bT . Monetary policy shifts the schedule through its impact on interest rates, in‡ation, and
seigniorage.

2.3

The Impact of Monetary Policy

Conventional monetary policy a¤ects the paths of interest rates, prices, output
and seigniorage, which in turn shifts the two schedules and therefore can a¤ect the
existence of self-ful…lling debt crises. The idea is to implement a monetary policy
strategy conditional on expectations of sovereign default, which only happens in the
crisis equilibrium. If this strategy is successful and credible, the crisis equilibrium is
avoided altogether and the policy does not need to be implemented. It is therefore
the threat of such a policy that may preclude the crisis equilibrium.
In terms of Figure 1, the crisis equilibrium is avoided when the debt accumulation schedule goes through point C or below. This is the case when
minf0; spdv + mpdv g
+1
1
spdv + mpdv
)T B0 =PT
spdv + mpdv
(21)
Note that point C itself is not on the price schedule as its lower section starts for
bt > ~b. It is therefore su¢ cient that this condition holds as an equality, which
corresponds to point C. The central bank can impact this condition through both
ex ante policies, taking place between 0 and T 1, and ex post policies, taking
place in period T and afterwards. Ex-ante policies have the e¤ect of shifting the
debt accumulation schedule down, while ex-post policies shift the pricing schedule
to the right.
Conventional monetary policy can a¤ect the existence of a default equilibrium
through in‡ation, real interest rates, seigniorage and output. In‡ation reduces the
real value of nominal coupons on the debt outstanding at time 0. Ex-ante policy
in the form of in‡ation prior to time T reduces the real value of coupon payments
both before and after T . This is captured respectively through
in the numerator
of (21) and the term B0 =PT in the denominator in (21). In‡ation after time T only
s
B0 =P0
s m
e
((1
)QT + ) (1

rT

11

reduces the real value of coupons after T , which is re‡ected in a lower value of QT
in the denominator.
Reducing real interest rates lowers the cost of new borrowing. For ex-ante
policy this is captured through both
and s in the numerator of (21), which
represents the accumulated new borrowing from 0 to T . For ex-post policy it shows
up through a rise in spdv in the denominator of (21).11 Expansionary monetary
policy can also lead to a rise in seigniorage. Seigniorage prior to time T reduces the
numerator of the left hand side of (21), while seigniorage after time T raises the
denominator. Finally, we will also consider an extension where monetary policy
can have a favorable e¤ect through output. If we allow the primary surplus to be
pro-cyclical, expansionary monetary policy that raises output will raise primary
surpluses.
Beyond these implications of conventional monetary policy, we will also consider
unconventional monetary policy whereby the money supply is expanded beyond the
satiation level, which happens at the zero lower bound. Since the impact of such
policies is not immediately transparent from (21), we will postpone a discussion
until Section 5.

3

A Basic New Keynesian Model

We consider a standard New Keynesian model based on Galí (2008, ch. 3), with
three extensions suggested by Woodford (2003): i) habit formation; ii) price indexation; iii) lagged response in price adjustment. These extensions are standard
in the monetary DSGE literature and are introduced to generate more realistic
responses to monetary shocks. The main e¤ect of these extensions is to generate
a delayed impact of a monetary policy shock on output and in‡ation, leading to
the humped-shaped response seen in the data.
11

There is one more subtle real interest rate rate e¤ect, which is speci…c to the assumption
that the central bank knows exactly when the default decision is made. By reducing the real
interest rate rT 1 the central bank can o¤set the negative impact of expected default on QT 1 .
This is captured through the last term on the left hand side of (21).

12

3.1

Households

With habit formation, households maximize
E0

1
X

Ct 1 )1

(Ct

t

Nt1+
1+

1

t=0

z

t

!

(22)

where total consumption Ct is
Ct =

Z

1
1

Ct (i)

1
"

"
" 1

(23)

di

0

and Nt is labor and z is a default cost. We have t = 0 if there is no default at
time t and t = 1 if there is default. The default cost does not a¤ect households’
decisions, but provides an incentive for authorities to avoid default. Habit persistence, measured by , is a common feature in NK models to generate a delayed
response of expenditure and output.
The budget constraint is
p
Pt Ct + Dt+1 + Qt Bt+1
+ Mt =

W t Nt +

t

(24)

f (Mt ; Ytn ) + Rt 1 Dt + Rtg 1 Qt 1 Btp + Mt

1

Tt

Here Dt+1 are holdings of one-period bonds that are in zero net supply. Pt is the
standard aggregate price level and Wt is the wage level. t are …rms pro…ts distributed to households and Tt are lump-sum taxes. We will abstract from government
consumption, so that the primary surplus is Pt st = Tt . f (Mt ; Ytn ) is a transaction
cost, where Ytn = Pt Yt is nominal GDP and @f =@M 0.
p
The …rst-order conditions with respect to Dt+1 and Bt+1
are
et+1
et = Et Rt Pt C
C
Pt+1
et = Et Rtg Pt C
et+1
C
Pt+1

where
et
C

(Ct

Ct 1 )

Et (Ct+1

(25)
(26)

Ct )

The combination of (25) and (26) gives the arbitrage equations (4), (18), and
(19). This is because government default, which lowers the return on government

13

bonds, does not a¤ect consumption due to Ricardian equivalence.12
Let Yt denote real output and ct , yt and ytn denote logs of consumption, output
and the natural rate of output. Using ct = yt , and de…ning xt = yt ytn as
the output gap, log-linearization of the Euler equation (25) gives the dynamic IS
equation
1
x~t = Et x~t+1
(it Et t+1 rn )
(27)
where
x~t = xt

xt

Et (xt+1

1

xt )

(28)

Here it = ln(Rt ) will be referred to as the nominal interest rate and rn = ln( )
is the natural rate of interest. The latter uses our assumption below of constant
productivity, which implies a constant natural rate of output.

3.2

Firms

There is a continuum of …rms on the interval [0; 1], producing di¤erentiated goods.
The production function of …rm i is
Yt (i) = ANt (i)1

(29)

We follow Woodford (2003) by assuming …rm-speci…c labor.
Calvo price setting is assumed, with a fraction 1
of …rms re-optimizing their
price each period. In addition, it is assumed that re-optimization at time t is based
on information from date t d. This feature, adopted by Woodford (2003), is in
the spirit of the model of information delays of Mankiw and Reis (2001). It has the
e¤ect of a delayed impact of a monetary policy shock on in‡ation, consistent with
the data.13 Analogous to Christiano et al. (2005), Smets and Wouters (2003) and
many others, we also adopt an in‡ation indexation feature in order to generate
more persistence of in‡ation. Firms that do not re-optimize follow the simple
indexation rule
ln(Pt (i)) = ln(Pt 1 (i)) + t 1
(30)
p
When substituting the consolidated government budget constraint Qt Bt+1
= Rtg Qt 1 Btp
(Mt Mt 1 ) Tt into the household budget constraint (24), and imposing asset market equilibrium, we get Ct = Yt , which is real GDP and una¤ected by default. Here we assume that
the transaction cost f (Mt ; Ytn ) is paid to intermediaries that do not require real resources and
return their pro…ts to households. It is therefore included in t .
13
This feature can also be justi…ed in terms of a delay by which newly chosen prices go into
e¤ect.
12

14

where t 1 = ln Pt 1 ln Pt 2 is aggregate in‡ation one period ago.
Leaving the algebra to the Technical Appendix, these features give the following
Phillips curve (after linearization):
t

=

t 1

+ Et d (

t)

t+1

(31)

+ Et d (! 1 xt + ! 2 x~t )

where
!1 =
!2 =

3.3

1
1

(1

)

(1

)

1
1

+
+ ( + )"
1
+ ( + )" (1

)(1

)

Money Demand

Most of the conventional monetary policy results we report are for a cashless
economy. But to consider the additional role of seigniorage we use a convenient
form of the transaction cost that gives rise to a standard speci…cation for money
demand when it > 0 (mt = ln(Mt ))14 :
mt =

m

+ pt + yt

(32)

i it

When it is close to zero, money demand reaches the satiation level m + pt + yt .
Under conventional monetary policy we assume that money supply does not go
beyond the satiation level, so that there is a direct correspondence between the
chosen interest rates and money supply.

3.4

Monetary Policy

We follow most of the literature by using a quadratic approximation of utility.
Conditional on avoiding the default equilibrium, the central bank then minimizes
the following objective function:
E0

1
X

t

x (xt

xt 1 )2 +

(

t

2
t 1)

(33)

t=0

t
The transaction cost f (Mt ; Ytn ) = 0 + Mt ln PM
1
m = i gives rise to money
t Yt
demand (32). This function applies for values of Mt where @f =@M
0. Once the derivative
becomes zero, we reach a satiation level and we assume that the transaction cost remains constant
for larger Mt .

14

15

where , x and
a function of model parameters (see the Technical Appendix
for the derivation). The central bank chooses the optimal path of nominal interest
rates over H > T periods. After that, we assume an interest rate rule as in Clarida
et al. (1999):
it

{ = (it

1

{) + (1

)(

Et

t+1

+

y xt )

(34)

where { = ln( ) is the steady state nominal interest rate. We will choose H to
be large. Interest rates between time T and H involve ex-post-policy.15
Optimal policy is chosen conditional on two types of constraints. The …rst is
the ZLB constraint that it 0 for all periods. In the good equilibrium that is the
only constraint and the optimal policy implies it = { each period, delivering zero
in‡ation and a zero output gap. However, conditional on expectations of default
that raise default premia, the central bank will engage in expansionary policy that
is just su¢ cient to avoid the self-ful…lling bad equilibrium, so that (21) is satis…ed
as an equality. Graphically, this means that the debt accumulation schedule goes
through point C in Figure 1.
Using the NK Phillips curve (31), the dynamic IS equation (27), and the policy
rule (34) after time H, we solve for the path of in‡ation and output gap conditional
on the set of H interest rates chosen. We then minimize the welfare cost (33) over
the H interest rates subject to it 0 and (21) as an equality.

3.5

Calibration

We consider one period to be a quarter and normalize the constant productivity
A such that the natural rate of output is equal to 1 annually (0.25 per quarter).
The other parameters are listed in Table 1. The left panel shows the parameters
from the LW model, while the right panel lists the parameters that pertain to the
New Keynesian part of the model.
Consider …rst the LW parameters. We set = 0:99, implying a 4% annualized
interest rate. A key parameter, which we will see has an impact on the results,
is . In the benchmark parameterization we set it equal to 0.05, which implies a
government debt duration of 4.2 years. This is typical in the data. For example,
OECD estimates of the Macauley duration in 2010 are 4.0 in the US and 4.4 for
the average of the …ve European countries that experienced a sovereign debt crisis
15

Since H will be large, the precise policy rule after H does not have much e¤ect on the results.

16

(Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Ireland). The coupon is determined such that
= 1=
1+ .
The other parameters, T and the …scal surplus parameters, do not have a direct
empirical counterpart, but are chosen so that there is a broad range of self-ful…lling
equilibria. If the range of initial debt B0 for which multiple equilibria are feasible
is very narrow, the entire problem would be a non-issue.
The range of B0 for which there are multiple equilibria under passive monetary
policy (it = {) is [Blow ; Bhigh ], where16
Blow =
Bhigh =

(
1

+1
) T slow + (1
1 (1
)(1
)T T
T

1

slow + (1

T

)s

T

)s

(35)
(36)

Under the parameters in Table 1 this range is [0:79; 1:46]. This means that debt is
between 79% and 146% of GDP. This is not unlike debt of the European periphery
hit by the 2010 crisis, where debt ranged from 62% in Spain to 148% in Greece.
Note that the assumption s = 0:01, corresponding to a 4% annual primary de…cit,
also corresponds closely to Europe, where the …ve periphery crisis countries had
an average primary de…cit of 4.4% in 2010. We set T = 20 for the benchmark,
corresponding to 5 years. We will see in section 4.2 that there are other parameter
choices that lead to the same values of Blow and Bhigh without much e¤ect on
results.
The New Keynesian parameters are standard in the literature. The …rst 5
parameters correspond exactly to those in Gali (2008). The habit formation parameter, the indexation parameter and the parameters in the interest rate rule are
all the same as in Christiano et al. (2005). We take d = 2 from Woodford (2003,
p. 218-219), which also corresponds closely to Rotemberg and Woodford (1997).
This set of parameters implies a response to a small monetary policy shock under
the Taylor rule that is similar to the empirical VAR results reported by Christiano
et al. (2005). The level of output and in‡ation at their peak correspond exactly to
that in the data. Both the output and in‡ation response is humped shaped like the
data, although the peak response (quarter 6 and 3 respectively for in‡ation and
output) occurs a bit earlier than in the data. We discuss the two money demand
parameters in section 4.3, where we consider the role of seigniorage.
16

These values lead to equilibria at points C and D in Figure 1.

17

4

Can Monetary Policy Credibly Avoid a Debt
Crisis?

The optimal monetary policy that we have described is credible as long as the
welfare cost associated with in‡ation and non-zero output gaps is less than the
cost of default. In reporting the results, we will mainly focus on the in‡ation cost.
We do so for two reasons. First, the cost of default is hard to measure, including
reputational costs, trade exclusion costs, costs through the …nancial system and
political costs. In addition, even within our model the cost of in‡ation is very
sensitive to parameters that otherwise have very little e¤ect on optimal in‡ation.
Second, we will see that the key message that an excessive amount of in‡ation is
needed avoid a self-ful…lling default, is very robust and not a¤ected by parameter
assumptions that signi…cantly a¤ect the welfare cost in the model.17
We will …rst consider optimal monetary policy in a cashless economy where
we abstract from seigniorage. After considering the benchmark parametrization,
we show that the results are robust to signi…cant changes in parameters. We
…nally consider seigniorage and extensions with a pro-cyclical …scal surplus and
uncertainty about T , none of which change the …ndings.

4.1

Results under Benchmark Parameterization

Figure 2 shows the dynamics of in‡ation under optimal policy under the benchmark
parameterization for H = 40 (which we assume throughout). The results are shown
for various levels of B0 . The optimal path for in‡ation is hump shaped. Optimal
in‡ation gradually rises, both due to rigidities and because the welfare cost (33)
depends on the change in in‡ation. Eventually optimal in‡ation decreases as it
becomes less e¤ective over time when the original debt depreciates and is replaced
by new debt that incorporates in‡ation expectations. When B0 = Bmiddle =
1:12, which is exactly in the middle of range of debt levels giving rise to multiple
17

At a deeper level, a problem is that there is no consensus on what the exact welfare costs
of in‡ation and output gap are. In‡ation costs depend signi…cantly on the type of price setting
(see Ambler (2007) for a discussion of Taylor pricing versus Calvo pricing). In‡ation costs are
also broader than the ine¢ ciencies associated with relative price changes that in‡ation induces.
In the model the in‡ation cost would be zero if all …rms raised prices simultaneously. It is also
well known that the representative agent nature of the model understates the welfare costs of
non-zero output gaps.

18

equilibria, the maximum in‡ation rate reaches 23.8%. In‡ation is over 20% for 4
years, over 10% for 8 years and the price level ultimately increases by a factor 5.3.
Such high in‡ation is implausible. In‡ation needed to avoid default gets even
much higher for higher debt levels. When B0 reaches the upper bound Bhigh for
multiple equilibria, the maximum in‡ation rate is close to 47% and ultimately the
price level increases by a factor 25! Only when B0 is very close to the lower bound
for multiplicity, as illustrated for B0 = 0:8, is little in‡ation needed.
In order to understand why so much in‡ation is needed, …rst consider a rather
extreme experiment where all of the increase in prices happens right away in the
…rst quarter. This cannot happen in the NK model, so assume that prices are
perfectly ‡exible, the real interest rate is constant at 1= and the output gap
remains zero. When B0 = Bmiddle = 1:12, the price level would need to rise by
42%. This is needed to lower debt so that we are no longer in the region where
multiple equilibria are possible. Of course such a policy, even if possible, is not
plausible either as it would involve an annualized in‡ation rate for that quarter of
168%.
In reality in‡ation will be spread out over a period of time, both because sticky
prices imply a gradual change in prices and because it is optimal from a welfare
perspective not to have the increase in the price level happen all at once. However,
such a delay increases the ultimate increase in the price level that is needed. As
the time zero debt depreciates (is repaid), in‡ation quickly becomes less e¤ective
as it only helps to reduce the real value of coupons on the original time zero debt.
More in‡ation is then needed to avoid the default equilibrium.
In‡ation may be limited to the extent that lower real interest rates, by lowering
the costs of borrowing, help to avoid the default equilibrium. But the bene…t from
lower real interest rates turns out to be limited. Under the benchmark parameterization the real interest rate goes to zero for two quarters, since we reach the
ZLB and in‡ation is initially zero, but after that it soon goes back to its steady
state. In order to understand why this result is more general than the speci…c parameterization here, consider the consumption Euler equation, which in linearized
form implies (27). It is well known that without habit formation ( = 0) this can
be solved as
1
1X
E0 (rt rn )
(37)
x0 =
t=0

This precludes a large and sustained drop in the real interest rate as it would imply
19

an enormous and unrealistic immediate change in output at time zero, especially
with = 1 as often assumed.
For the benchmark parameterization, where = 1 and = 0:65, we derive
an analogous expression in the Technical Appendix. Removing the expectation
operator and the rn for convenience, we have
x0 =

0:58r0 0:73r1 0:83r2 0:89r3 0:93r4 0:95r5 0:97r6 0:98r7 0:99r8 :::
(38)
Subsequent coe¢ cients are very close to -1. For the path of real interest rates
under optimal policy this implies x0 = 0:0157. This translates into an immediate
increase in output of 6.3% on an annualized basis, which is already pushing the
boundaries of what is plausible.

4.2

Sensitivity Analysis

We now consider changes to both the LW and NK parameters. An issue arises
when changing the LW parameters as they a¤ect the region [Blow ; Bhigh ] for B0
under which multiple equilibria arise. For example, when T = 10, there is less time
for a debt crisis to develop and a higher level of initial debt is needed to have a
self-ful…lling crisis. Naturally the question that we address here has little content
when this region [Blow ; Bhigh ] is very narrow. This issue does not arise for the NK
parameters, which leave this region unchanged.
We should …rst point out that the same region [Blow ; Bhigh ] under which there
are multiple equilibria under the benchmark parameterization applies to many
other reasonable combinations of LW parameters. The left panel of Figure 3 shows
combinations of T , s and slow that generate the same Blow and Bhigh . The panel on
the right shows that this has little e¤ect on the path of optimal in‡ation. Varying
T from 10 to 30, while adjusting s and slow to keep Blow and Bhigh unchanged,
gives very similar paths for optimal in‡ation.
In Figure 4 and Table 2 we present results when varying one parameter at a
time, but keeping B0 =Blow the same as under the benchmark parameterization.
Table 2 shows that Blow and Bhigh can be signi…cantly a¤ected by the LW parameters. But the results control for this by keeping B0 =Blow = 1:42 as under the
benchmark. For the LW parameters this implies values of B0 that can be relatively
closer to Blow or Bhigh , dependent on their values for that parameter.18
18

Only for

= 0:7 is B0 now slightly above Bhigh . For all other parameters the B0 is within

20

Each panel of Figure 4 reports optimal in‡ation for two values of a parameter,
one higher and the other lower than in the benchmark. The last two columns of
Table 2 report the price level after in‡ation and the maximum level of in‡ation.
Figure 4 shows that for most parameters the optimal in‡ation path is remarkably
little a¤ected by the level of parameters. For example, optimal in‡ation is only
slightly higher for T = 10 than T = 30. When T is low, ex-post policies will
be much more important than for higher values of T , but the overall impact on
in‡ation is similar. Also notice that setting the probability
of the bad state
equal to 1 has little e¤ect on the results.
There are three parameters, , and d, for which there are more signi…cant
di¤erences. A lower debt depreciation , which implies a longer maturity of debt,
implies lower in‡ation. The reason is that in‡ation is e¤ective for a longer period
of time as the time 0 debt depreciates more slowly. But even when = 0:025, so
that the duration is 7.2 years, optimal in‡ation is still above 10% for 6.5 years and
the price level ultimately triples. A lower value for the lag in price adjustment,
d, also allows for a lower in‡ation rate. With d = 0 it is possible to increase
in‡ation from the start, when debt de‡ation is the most powerful. But even with
d = 0, optimal in‡ation still peaks close to 20% and the price level still more than
quadruples as a result of years of in‡ation. No matter what the parameter values,
an implausibly high level of in‡ation is needed to avert a self-ful…lling debt crisis.
Finally, we also see a clear di¤erence when we lower the in‡ation indexation
parameter . Lower indexation reduces in‡ation persistence. But more importantly, it directly a¤ects optimal policy through (33). With = 1, only changes
in in‡ation matter, while with < 1 the level of in‡ation is also undesirable. To
avoid higher in‡ation levels, the central bank takes advantage of the real interest
rate channel to avoid the bad equilibrium. But the sharp drop in the real interest rate leads to an unrealistic output response: with = 0:9, output increases
at an annual rate of 24% in the …rst quarter. The same happens when we set
= d = = 0 as in the Gali (2008) textbook model. In that case in‡ation starts
at 23% APR in the …rst quarter, but the ultimate increase in the price level is now
much less, only 66%. In‡ation, while still substantial, is again limited in this case
because of a sharp drop in real interest rates. There is now an incredulous 25%
increase in output in the …rst quarter, which is a 100% annualized growth rate.
the interval for B0 generating multiple equilibria.

21

Introducing additional features that limit such unrealistic changes in the level of
output would again generate signi…cantly higher in‡ation rates.
A couple of comments are in order about welfare versus in‡ation. As already
pointed out, the welfare cost is very sensitive to NK parameters even when in‡ation
is little a¤ected. For example, the benchmark case gives a welfare cost of 2.8%,
measured as a one year percentage drop in consumption or output that generates
the same drop in welfare. This seems quite small. But when we increase from
0.66 to 0.8, the welfare cost more than triples to 8.7, with very little di¤erence in
optimal in‡ation. If we adopt the textbook Gali model, where = d = = 0, the
welfare cost is a staggering 85% and would be even much larger if we restricted
the massive increase in output in the …rst quarter.
The welfare criterion depends signi…cantly on the speci…c model that maps
the chosen interest rates into in‡ation and output. But even if we substantially
changed the NK model (beyond changes in parameters), the government is still
trying to satisfy the no default constraint. The key message is that this constraint
cannot be satis…ed for a remotely credible path of in‡ation and plausible path of
output.

4.3

Seigniorage and Other Extensions

We now discuss how the results are a¤ected when we introduce seigniorage, a
pro-cyclical primary surplus and uncertainty about T . So far we have assumed a
cashless economy. In order to consider seigniorage, we need to make an assumption
about the semi-elasticity i of money demand. Seigniorage revenue is larger for
lower values of i as that leads to a smaller drop in real money demand when
in‡ation rises. Estimates of i vary a lot, from as low as 6 in Ireland (2009) to as
high as 60 in Bilson (1978).19 The biggest e¤ect from seigniorage therefore comes
from the lowest value i = 6. But even in that case the e¤ect is limited. When
B0 = Bmiddle , the maximum in‡ation rate is reduced from 23.8% to 19.9% and
the price level ultimately increases by a factor 4.1 instead of 5.3.20 Here we have
19

Lucas (2000) …nds a value of 28 when translated to a quarterly frequency. Engel and West
(2005) review many estimates that also fall in this range.
20
We calibrate m to the U.S., such that the satiation level of money corresponds to the
monetary base just prior to its sharp rise in the Fall of 2008 when interest rates approached
the ZLB. At that time the velocity of the monetary base was 17. This gives m = 1:45. The
velocity is 4Pt Yt =Mt as output needs to be annualized, which is equal to 4e m at the satiation

22

assumed that the money supply cannot go beyond the satiation level, a case we
consider in the next section with unconventional monetary policy. There is clearly
some bene…t from conventional seigniorage, but quantitatively it is small and does
not change our conclusion that an excessive amount of in‡ation is needed to avoid
the crisis equilibrium. This result is consistent with Reis (2013) and Hilscher et al.
(2014). As Reis (2013) puts it, “In spite of the mystique behind the central bank’s
balance sheet, its resource constraint bounds the dividends it can distribute by the
present value of seigniorage, which is a modest share of GDP”.
Nominal rigidities also give the central bank control over the accumulation of
debt through the level of output that a¤ects the primary surplus. So far we have
abstracted from this channel, but we now introduce a pro-cyclical primary surplus.
From 0 through T 1 we have
st = s + (yt

y)

(39)

where y is steady-state output. We similarly assume that slow is pro-cyclical:
slow = slow + (yt y). We set the value of the cyclical parameter of the …scal
surplus to = 0:1, in line with empirical estimates.21
With this additional e¤ect from an output increase, the required in‡ation decreases slightly. For B0 = Bmiddle , the maximum in‡ation rate is reduced from
23.8% in the benchmark to 19.9%. The increase in the price level after in‡ation
is reduced from 5.3 under the benchmark to 4.0, which remains excessive. Optimal policy now gives more emphasis to raising output, leading to a …rst quarter
increase that is 10% APR, pushing the boundary of what is plausible.
In the Technical Appendix we discuss one …nal extension, uncertainty about
the date T of the default decision. This signi…cantly complicates the model and
we only consider two possible values, T1 and T2 , which occur with probabilities p
and 1 p. The key results remain the same. As one might expect, the range for
B0 over which there are multiple equilibria is now in between that for the cases
where T = T1 and T = T2 without uncertainty. Monetary policy after T1 is now
contingent on whether there was a default decision at T1 or not. The key conclusion
that an excessive amount of in‡ation is needed to avoid default (at both T1 and
T2 ) remains unaltered.
level.
21
Note that since Y = 0:25 for quarterly GDP, the speci…cation implies that s = 0:4 Y .
This is consistent for example with estimates by Girouard and André (2005) for the OECD.

23

5

Unconventional Monetary Policy

In this section we consider what the central bank can achieve through a signi…cant
increase in money supply beyond the satiation level. We will argue that this is
only helpful in averting a self-ful…lling crisis if the economy is at a structural ZLB,
where the natural real interest rate is zero, for a long time.

5.1

Seigniorage

It is …rst useful to point out that expanding the money supply beyond the satiation
level does not provide any support to the government through seigniorage. The
present discounted value of seigniorage is
1
r0 :::rT

1
m
~ +
r0 :::rT
2

m
1

pdv

=

M 1 X 1
+
(Rt
P0
r
:::r
0
t
t=0
1

1)

Mt
Pt+1

(40)

An increase in the money supply beyond the satiation level has no e¤ect on interest
rates, which are already zero, and on prices. Money balances expand, but they are
multiplied by a zero nominal interest rate Rt 1 at the ZLB. The present discounted
value of seigniorage is therefore una¤ected. One can think of seigniorage in two
ways. One is the real value of the changes in monetary liabilities. In that context,
any expansion of money beyond the satiation level will eventually be unwound
as the economy will not be at the ZLB forever. Positive seigniorage is therefore
eventually o¤set later by negative seigniorage. Alternatively, seigniorage can be
thought of as the saving to the government from not having to pay interest on
monetary liabilities. But this saving is zero when the nominal interest rate is 0.

5.2

Liquidity Support and Buyback Policies

We consider two speci…c policies that both reduce government debt held by the
private sector and therefore default premia that the government pays on its debt.
It is these default premia that are at the heart of the self-ful…lling crisis.
The …rst is a liquidity support policy whereby the central bank provides the
government with liquidity equal to Bt st Pt from time 0 through T~ 1. This
quantity corresponds to the new debt issued each period. Under the liquidity
support policy, the government avoids paying default premia on new debt in the

24

bad equilibrium. This policy implies that the consolidated government issues new
monetary liabilities of Bt st Pt in period t.
The increase in money supply following from this policy goes well beyond the
satiation level.22 When the debt to GDP ratio is 1, it implies a seigniorage of 28%
per year under the benchmark. We will therefore be at the ZLB as long as this
policy is in place. However, as long as the natural real interest rate is positive,
or at least not zero forever, an expansion of money beyond the satiation level will
be impossible to maintain. We assume that at time T~, the end of the policy, the
expansion of monetary liabilities is replaced by new debt.
The second policy is a “buyback policy,”whereby the consolidated government
(i) buys back government bonds in exchange for monetary liabilities prior to time
T and (ii) reverses this at time T~ by replacing the increase in monetary liabilities
with new debt. For simplicity we will assume that the buyback happens all at
once, although this is not important.

5.3

Policy under Structural Zero Lower Bound

It is instructive to …rst consider the case where we are at a structural ZLB, so that
the natural real interest rate is zero or below, while the policies discussed above
are implemented. To illustrate this, assume that = 1 through period T , after
which is a constant less than 1.
In this case, assuming T T , the default equilibrium can be avoided through
the liquidity support policy we described when this policy lasts through time T 1
(T~ = T ). A formal proof of this is provided in Appendix B. The policy has no
cost as we are already at the ZLB before the policy is implemented, and therefore
prices and output are una¤ected. The default equilibrium is avoided because the
government does not need to pay default premia from time 0 until time T . Instead
of issuing new debt on which default premia are paid, it now issues monetary
liabilities.
However, when T < T the monetary expansion beyond the satiation level
needs to be reversed prior to time T if we wish to avoid the costs associated with
changes in prices and output gap. With T~ < T under either the liquidity support
or buyback policies, default is not averted as seigniorage is not a¤ected. mpdv is
22

In section section 4.3 we have estimated the satiation level to be about 4% of GDP.

25

unchanged as the policy occurs prior to time T and m
~ can be written as
m
~ =

MT
PT

1
1

r0 :::rT

2

M 1
+ r1 :::rT
P0

2

(R0

1)

M0
+ ::: + (RT
P1

2

1)

MT
PT

2

(41)

1

m
~ does not change as any money balances that are beyond the satiation level are
multiplied by zero (Rt = 1) and MT 1 does not change (the money expansion is
reversed prior to time T ). Since neither the pricing nor the debt accumulation
schedules are a¤ected in that case, the same default equilibrium exists as before.
The intuition behind this result is as follows. On the one hand, the government
does not need to pay default premia on monetary liabilities. On the other hand,
there is an exactly o¤setting loss that is a result of a gradual decline in the price
of government bonds in the default equilibrium. Under the buyback policy, the
government would therefore buy back its debt at a price higher than the price at
which it later sells new debt (prior to time T ). Under the liquidity support policy,
the government sells new debt prior to time T to replace its expanded money
supply. The debt is sold at a lower price than the government would have received
if it had sold new debt earlier instead of issuing monetary liabilities.

5.4

Policy Outside a Structural ZLB

Now assume that the economy is not at a structural ZLB. Therefore assume that
< 1 is a constant as before and the natural real interest rate rn = ln( ) is
positive. It is easy to see that neither the liquidity support nor buyback policies
are e¤ective if in place only through time T~ < T 1. We can think of these policies
in two steps. The …rst step involves expanding the money supply to the satiation
level. The second step involves a further expansion of money beyond the satiation
level. The latter has no e¤ect for the same reason that it has no e¤ect under a
structural ZLB. The …rst step also cannot credibly avoid a default as it can be no
better than the optimal policy considered in section 4.3 when the money supply
was restricted to be no larger than the satiation level.
For T~ T 1 as well, neither of the two policies can credibly avoid the default
equilibrium. First consider a liquidity support policy that lasts through time T 1.
As already discussed, the required increase in monetary liabilities is well beyond
the satiation level from the very start. The nominal interest rate is then lowered
to 0 from period 0 to at least T 1. We argue that this is either impossible or
excessively costly by generating substantial de‡ation and a steep recession.
26

To see this, using the consumption Euler equation without habit formation for
illustration, and setting the nominal interest rate at 0 for the …rst T periods, we
have
T
X
E0
x0 ) = T r n
(42)
t + E0 (xT
t=1

With a 4% natural rate (benchmark parameterization), = 1 and T = 20, the
right hand side is -20%. (42) then implies either a sharp drop in output or steep
de‡ation. In general there will be a combination of the two.23 It is implausible
that a central bank would wish to engineer a deep recession on purpose in order
to avoid a government default.24
It is also hard to see how a buyback policy that ends at time T or later could be
e¤ectively implemented when the natural real interest rate is positive. Appendix B
shows that at the structural ZLB such a policy would avoid the default equilibrium
without any costs. There are two problems with this policy though. The …rst
problem is associated with time consistency and applies whether we are at the
structural ZLB or not. This occurs when the debt buyback happens su¢ ciently
close to time T , for example at T 1. In that case the government is already
insolvent in the bad equilibrium.25 The only hope for the government to avoid
default would be to buy back debt at the depressed low-equilibrium price and sell it
again at T at the high risk-free price. But if the capital gain arising from this policy
could succeed in avoiding default, the price at the buyback time would already be
at its risk-free level, so default could not be avoided. Thus, the government has no
incentive to follow through its promise to buy at T 1. Since investors are aware
of this, the bad equilibrium can arise at t = 0.
If instead the debt buyback happens closer to time 0, when the government
23

The output drop is larger with stronger downward nominal rigidities. Particularly wages are
rigid downward, an aspect that is not captured in the model. Daly and Hobijn (2014) show that
downward nominal wage rigidities bend the Phillips curve. During recessions, when the rigidities
become more binding, they …nd that the labor market adjusts more through the unemployment
margin than through wages.
24
Moreover, it is not even guaranteed that this policy would succeed in achieving its objective.
While the government will not need to pay default premia on new debt, de‡ation increases the
real coupons on the original debt from period 0, while a recession can signi…cantly lower tax
revenues.
25
LW show that the government becomes insolvent sometime between date 0 and T as the
debt accumulates due to default premia.

27

is not yet insolvent, this problem would not arise. But, as already discussed in
the context of the liquidity support policy, it would require lowering the nominal
interest rate to 0 for a substantial period of time, which creates de‡ation and a
deep recession.

6

Discussion

Here we brie‡y discuss three related questions. The …rst one is a proposal by
Corsetti and Dedola (2014) that the central bank issue risk-free liabilities that are
convertible into cash. Second, we ask why many highly indebted non-Eurozone
countries with their own currencies have escaped such crises recently if our conclusion is correct that the central bank cannot play much of a role. Finally, we
ask why a change in ECB policy in the summer of 2012 was successful in lowering
sovereign debt spreads, which seemingly goes against our message that there is
little that central banks can do.
Under the Corsetti-Dedola proposal government liabilities are replaced by central bank liabilities. When consolidating the accounts of the central government
and central bank, there is in principle little di¤erence between debt issued by
the government and the central bank. Nothing stops investors from demanding
a default premium on non-monetary liabilities of the central bank. Convertibility
into cash is not credible for the same reasons we discussed that simply replacing
government debt with monetary liabilities does not help.
With regards to the second question, why countries with their own central
banks seem to have escaped sovereign debt crises recently, there are many possible
answers. The answer may partly be that since the end of 2008 many countries have
been at a structural ZLB, which is the only case we identi…ed where central bank
policy may be e¤ective. But the answer can also be that these countries are less
exposed to self-ful…lling debt crises even with passive monetary policy when the
market believes that their governments are more likely to make signi…cant …scal
adjustments when needed. Other parameters of the model, such as higher expected
recovery rates, may play a role as well. Even if there are multiple equilibria, at
any point in time there may not be a trigger leading investors to coordinate on the
bad equilibrium. The bottom line here is that there are many explanations that
have nothing to do with whether these countries have their own currency.

28

Regarding the last question, the analysis in this paper applies to a central
bank that aims to avoid a self-ful…lling default by the central government. The
situation where the central bank of a currency union aims to avoid sovereign default
in periphery countries of the union is quite di¤erent. Speci…cally, the ECB could
buy government bonds of the periphery countries that experience high default
premia and sell government bonds of countries that are not subject to a sovereign
debt crisis. No monetary liabilities need to be issued in the process, generating no
in‡ation.
The ECB could keep interest rates on new debt of the periphery governments
equal to their no-default levels and buy all new bonds that would otherwise be
sold to the private sector at that low interest rate. The threat alone of doing
so is su¢ cient, which is exactly what happened under the OMT policy in the
summer of 2012 and the famous Draghi statement “to do whatever it takes”. Such
a threat was credible as such an intervention would not overwhelm the ECB.26
This explains why sovereign spreads quickly fell due to the change in policy. But
such a policy applies to a periphery and is of no help if a central bank aims to
avoid a self-ful…lling sovereign debt crisis associated with its central government.
Analogously, it would not work if the ECB aimed to avoid a self-ful…lling sovereign
debt crisis across the entire Eurozone.

7

Conclusion

Several recent contributions have derived analytical conditions under which the
central bank can avoid a self-ful…lling sovereign debt crisis. Extreme central bank
intervention, generating extraordinary in‡ation, would surely avoid a sovereign
debt crisis. But the cost would be excessive, making such actions not credible.
The aim of this paper has been to quantify this cost in order to better assess
whether countries with their own currency (and therefore central bank) are less
likely to be subject to such self-ful…lling debt crises.
To address this question, we have adopted a dynamic model with many realistic
elements that make a quantitative assessment more meaningful. We introduced a
26

For example, in 2010 the sum of all the periphery country government de…cits together
(Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Italy) amounted to 13% of the ECB balance sheet. And a
self-ful…lling default can be avoided even if only a portion of these …nancing needs are covered
by the ECB.

29

New Keynesian model with nominal rigidities in which monetary policy has realistic
e¤ects on output and in‡ation. We introduced long-term bonds and calibrated the
maturity to what is observed in many industrialized countries. We allowed for
slow-moving debt crises that are a good representation of the recent European
sovereign debt crisis. We have considered both conventional monetary policy that
impacts in‡ation, real interest rates and output, and unconventional monetary
policy that leads to a large expansion of the monetary base.
Overall our conclusion is that the ability to avert self-ful…lling crises is limited.
Unless debt is close to the bottom of an interval where multiple equilibria occur,
conventional policies involve very high in‡ation for a sustained period of time. Unconventional monetary policy is only useful when the economy is at the structural
ZLB for a sustained length of time.
Several extensions are worthwhile considering for future work. We have focused
on a closed economy. In an open economy monetary policy also a¤ects the exchange
rate, which a¤ects relative prices and output. While we made some brief comments
at the end, it would also be of interest to more explicitly consider a monetary union,
where sovereign default may be limited to only a segment of the union. Finally,
we have only considered one type of self-ful…lling debt crises, associated with the
interaction between sovereign spreads and debt. It would be of interest to also
consider rollover crises or even a combination of both types of crises. This also
provides an opportunity to consider the optimal maturity of sovereign debt, which
we have taken as given.

30

Appendix
A. Derivation of the Debt Accumulation Schedule.
We derive the debt accumulation schedule in the general case of Section 2.4.
The debt accumulation schedule in the cashless economy (Section 2.2) is a special
case of this where Mt = 0 at all times. We …rst derive a relationship between Q0
and QT 1 . Integrating forward the one-period arbitrage equation (4) from t = 1
to t = T 1, we have:
Q0 = A + AQ QT 1
(43)
where
A
AQ

1
(1
)2
(1
)T 2
1
+
+
+ ::: +
R0 R0 R1 R0 R1 R2
R0 R1 R2 :::RT
(1
)T 1
=
R0 R1 R2 :::RT 2

(44)

=

2

(45)

Next consider the consolidated budget constraint (12):
p
Qt Bt+1
= ((1

where vt = [Mt

)Qt + )Btp

vt

(46)

st Pt

Mt 1 ]. The government budget constraint at t = 0 is:
Q0 B1p
= ((1
P0

For 1 < t < T

p
Qt Bt+1
= rt
Pt

)Q0 + ) bp0
Qt 1 Btp
1
Pt 1

v0
P0

s

s

(47)

vt
Pt

(48)

Using equations (48) and (47) and integrating forward, we obtain
Q0 B1p
QT 1 BTp
= rT 2 :::r1 r0
s(1 + rT
PT 1
P0
v1
v2
vT
r1 :::rT 2 + r2 :::rT 2 + ::: +
P1
P2
PT

2

+ rT

2 rT 1

+ ::: + rT

1

2 rT 1 :::r1 )

(49)

1

Combining equation (49) with (47) and (43), we obtain:
QT 1 BTp
PT 1

= rT

)bp0 Q0 + rT

2 :::r1 r0 (1

s(1 + rT
r0 :::rT

2 :::r1 r0

bp0

+ rT 2 rT 3 + ::: + rT 2 :::r1 r0 )
v0
v1
vT 1
+ r1 :::rT 2 + ::: +
2
P0
P1
PT 1
2

31

(50)

Using equations (43)-(45), we can rewrite equation (50) as
QT 1 BTp
PT 1

=

P0
(1
PT 1

)T bp0 QT

(51)

1

(1
)2
(1
)T 1
+ ::: +
R0
R0 R1
R0 R1 R2 :::RT
s(1 + rT 2 + rT 2 rT 3 + ::: + rT 2 :::r1 r0 )
v1
vT 1
v0
r0 :::rT 2 + r1 :::rT 2 + ::: +
P0
P1
PT 1

+rT

2 :::r1 r0 1 +

1

+

2

bp0

Using the expression for vt , the last term in brackets is equal to m
~ as de…ned
in (13). This yields (20).
B. Avoiding Self-ful…lling Default at a Structural ZLB
Assume that the discount rate is 1 for t = 0; ::; T with T
T 1 and it
is a constant < 1 for t > T . Under this assumption the central bank can keep
the interest rate zero through time T , and raise it to 1= after time T , while
keeping in‡ation and the output gap at zero all along. So we have Rt = 1 for
t = 0; ::; T and Rt = 1= for t > T . The price level is always 1. We then have
PT T
)i + (1
)T T +1 .
QT =
i=0 (1
Using (41) we have m
~ = MT 1 M 1 . Let M be the level of money demand
starting at T +1, when we are no longer at the ZLB. Then mpdv = M MT 1 . De…ne
M = MT 1 M 1 and dm = M M 1 . Then m
~ = M and mpdv = dm
M.
Assuming that we are already at the ZLB at time -1, dm is negative.
Using the results from section 2.4, the pricing schedule is then
QT

1

= (1
=

~b
if BTp > ~b

if BTp

)QT +

h( M ) + (1

)((1

)QT + )

where h( M ) = 0 if spdv + dm
M 0 and otherwise h( M ) =
and
pdv
M
~b = s + dm
(1
)QT +
The debt accumulation schedule is
BTp = (1

)T B0p +

B0p

Ts
QT

M

spdv +dm
BTp

(52)
(53)
M

,

(54)

(55)

1

Passive monetary policy takes the form M = 0. The central bank then does
not expand the money supply between 1 and T 1. Under passive monetary
32

policy there are multiple equilibria when B0 is within a range that we have called
[Blow ; Bhigh ]. The condition B0 Bhigh implies that the debt accumulation schedule crosses at or below (1
)QT + when BTp = ~b (point D in Figure 1) and
M = 0. This can be written as
B0p T s
(1
)T B0p

~b

(1

Substituting the expression for ~b with
spdv + dm

(1

(56)

)QT +

M = 0, this becomes

)T B0p ((1

)QT + )

B0p

Ts

(57)

Now assume that M
B0p T s conditional on a sunspot shock. We will
show that this is a su¢ cient condition to avoid the bad equilibrium. If there
were a bad equilibrium with default, we know from the pricing schedule that
QT 1 < (1
)QT + . In that case the debt accumulation schedule, together
with the assumption M
B0p T s, implies
BTp

(1

T

)

B0p

+

B0p T s
M
(1
)QT +

(58)

It can be shown that the right hand side is less than or equal to ~b, so that BTp ~b
and there cannot be a default equilibrium. The condition that the right hand side
is less than ~b is
(1

T

)

B0p

+

B0p T s
M
(1
)QT +

spdv + dm
M
(1
)QT +

(59)

Multiplying both sides by (1
)QT + , we can rewrite this as (57), which holds
if there are multiple equilibria under passive monetary policy.
Notice that M =
B0p T s is exactly the amount that implements the
liquidity support policy described in Section 5. Alternatively, M could be used
to buy outstanding debt in the secondary market at any time before time T . The
latter would be the buyback policy, also described in Section 5.

33

References
[1] Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Fahri and Gita Gopinath (2013),
“Crisis and Commitment: In‡ation Credibility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crisis,”working paper, Harvard University.
[2] Ambler, Steve (2007), “The Costs of In‡ation in New Keynesian Models,”
Bank of Canada Review, Winter 2007–2008, 5-14.
[3] Bilson, John F.O. (1978), “The Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate:
Some Empirical Evidence,”International Monetary Fund Sta¤ Papers 25(1),
48-75.
[4] Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti Eggertsson, and Bulat Gafarov (2013), “Time Consistency and the Duration of Government Debt: A Signalling Theory of Quantitative Easing,”working paper, Brown University.
[5] Calvo, Guillermo (1988), “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,”American Economic Review 78(4), 647-661.
[6] Camous, Antoine and Russell Cooper (2014), “Monetary Policy and Debt
Fragility,”NBER Working Paper No. 20650.
[7] Christiano, L.J., M. Eichenbaum and C.L. Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,”Journal of Political
Economy 1(113), 1-45.
[8] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New-Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature
37, 1661–1707.
[9] Cohen, Daniel and Sebastian Villemot (2015), “Endogenous Debt Crises,”
Journal of International Money and Finance 51, 337-369.
[10] Cole, Harold L. and Tim Kehoe (2000), “Self-ful…lling Debt Crises,” Review
of Economic Studies 67, 91-116.
[11] Conesa, Juan Carlos and Timothy J. Kehoe (2015), “Gambling for Redemption and Self-Ful…lling Debt Crises,”Minneapolis Fed Sta¤ Report 465.

34

[12] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola (2014), “The Mystery of the Printing
Press: Monetary Policy and Self-Ful…lling Debt Crises,”working paper, Cambridge University.
[13] Daly, Mary C. and Bart Hobijn (2014), “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities
Bend the Phillips Curve,”San Francisco Fed Working Paper 2013-08.
[14] Gali, Jordi (2008), Monetary Policy, In‡ation and the Business Cycle: An
Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
[15] de Grauwe, Paul (2011), “The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone” CEPS
Working Documents, CEPS, Brussels.
[16] de Grauwe, Paul and Juemei Ji (2013), “Self-Ful…lling Crises in the Eurozone:
An Empirical Test,”Journal of International Money and Finance 34, 15-36.
[17] Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981), “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies 48,
289-309.
[18] Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West (2005), “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals,”Journal of Political Economy 113(3), 485-517.
[19] Girouard, N. and C. André (2005), “Measuring Cyclically adjusted Budget
Balances for OECD Countries,”OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 434.
[20] Gomes, Joao, Urban Jerman and Lukas Schmid (2014), “Sticky Leverage,”
mimeo.
[21] Gros, Daniel (2012), “A simple model of multiple equilibria and default,”
CEPS Working Document No. 367.
[22] Hall, Robert E. and Ricardo Reis (2013), “Maintaining Central-Bank Solvency
under New-Style Central Banking,”working paper, Stanford University.
[23] Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez (2009), “Long-Duration
Bonds and Sovereign Default,” Journal of International Economics 79, 117125.
35

[24] Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis (2014), “In‡ating Away the
Public Debt? An Empirical Assessment,”NBER Working Paper No. 20339.
[25] Ireland, Peter N. (2009), “On the Welfare Cost of In‡ation and the Recent
Behavior of Money Demand,”American Economic Review 99(3), 1040-52.
[26] Jeanne, Olivier (2012), “Fiscal Challenges to Monetary Dominance in the
Euro Area: A Theoretical Perspective,” working paper, Johns Hopkins University.
[27] Jeanne, Olivier and Hou Wang (2013), “Fiscal Challenges to Monetary Dominance,”working paper, Johns Hopkins University.
[28] Krugman, Paul (2013), “Currency Regimes, Capital Flows and Crises,”IMF
Mundell-Fleming Lecture.
[29] Leeper, Eric M. and Xuan Zhou (2013), “In‡ation’s Role in Optimal
Monetary-Fiscal Policy,”NBER Working Paper No. 19686.
[30] Lorenzoni, Guido and Ivan Werning (2014), “Slow Moving Debt Crises,”working paper, Northwestern University.
[31] Lucas, Robert E. (2000), “In‡ation and Welfare,” Econometrica 68(2), 247274.
[32] Miller, Marcus and Lei Zhang (2012), “Saving the Euro: Self-ful…lling Crisis
and the Draghi Put,”CEPR Discussion Paper 9976.
[33] Navarro, Gaston, Juan Pablo Nicolini and Pedro Teles (2014), “Sovereign
Default: The Role of Expectations,”mimeo.
[34] Reis, Ricardo (2013), “The Mystique Surrounding the Central Bank’s Balance
Sheet,”American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 103(3), 134-140.
[35] Rotemberg, Julio and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization Based
Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,”NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1997, 297-346.
[36] Sheedy, Kevin (2014), “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for
Nominal GDP Targeting,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring
2014.
36

[37] Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters (2003), “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic
General Equilibria Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(5), 1123-1175.
[38] Woodford, Michael (2003), “Interest Rates and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,”Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

37

Table 1 Calibration
Lorenzoni-Werning parameters
New Keynesian parameters
Parameter
Description
Parameter
Description
= 0:99
discount rate
=1
elasticity of intertemporal subsitution
= 0:05
coupon depreciation rate
=1
Frisch elasiticity
= 0:06
coupon
"=6
demand elasticity
T = 20
quarters before default decision
= 0:33
capital share
= 0:5
recovery rate
= 0:66
Calvo pricing parameter
= 0:95
probability low surplus state
= 0:65
habit parameter
slow = 0:02
low state surplus
=1
indexation parameter
s = 0:01
surplus before T
d=2
lag in price adjustment
= 0:8
persistence in interest rate rule
= 1:5
in‡ation parameter in interest rule
output parameter in interest rule
y = 0:1

38

Table 2 Sensitivity Analysis
Parameters

maximum price level
in‡ation
after
in‡ation
Benchmark
0.79 1.46
23.8
5.3
Lorenzoni-Werning Parameters
T = 10
1.15 1.71
25.8
6.3
T = 30
0.56 1.22
21.4
4.5
= 1=40
0.89 1.46
15.1
3.0
= 1=10
0.71 1.46
37.5
12.0
s = 0:02
0.58 1.28
23.2
5.1
s=0
1.00 1.64
23.9
5.3
slow = 0:01
0.28 0.63
23.2
5.1
slow = 0:03
1.27 2.25
23.7
5.3
= 0:3
0.46 1.46
26.4
6.1
= 0:7
1.08 1.46
21.3
4.5
= 0:7
0.98 1.46
22.0
4.7
=1
0.75 1.46
24.0
5.4
= 0:98
0.61 1.17
26.7
6.7
= 0:995
0.90 1.62
21.8
4.6
New Keynesian Parameters
= 0:5
0.79 1.46
23.7
5.0
= 0:8
0.79 1.46
22.9
5.5
=0
0.79 1.46
22.3
4.9
= 0:8
0.79 1.46
23.8
5.3
=4
0.79 1.46
24.1
5.3
=8
0.79 1.46
23.2
5.2
d=0
0.79 1.46
19.6
4.2
d=4
0.79 1.46
29.6
7.2
=2
0.79 1.46
22.7
5.0
= 0:5
0.79 1.46
24.4
5.4
=2
0.79 1.46
23.6
5.3
= 0:5
0.79 1.46
23.7
5.2
= 0:9
0.79 1.46
18.0
3.2
= = d = 0 0.79 1.46
23.0
1.7
Blow

Bhigh

39

Figure 1 Multiple Equilibria Lorenzoni-Werning Model
QT-1
1

A

D

C

debt accumulation schedule

B

~
b

pricing schedule

bT

Figure 2 Benchmark NK Model: Inflation Needed to Avoid Default

Inflation (APR)

Price Level After Inflation

B0 = Bhigh = 1.46

50

9
40

7
30

B0 = Bmiddle = 1.12
5

20

3

10

B0 = 0.8

0
0

8

16

24

Time (quarters)

32

40

48

1
0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Initial Debt B0

1.4

1.6

Figure 3 Sensitivity Analysis LW Parameters

T, s and s low for same [Blow , Bhigh ]

Inflation when B0=Bmiddle=1.12

slow , s
0.04
35

slow

30

0.02
25

T=10
T

0
10

-0.02

20

15

s

25

30

20

T=30
15

T=20

10
5
0

-0.04

0

8

16

24

32

Time (Quarters)

40

48

Figure 4 Sensitivity Analysis Optimal Inflation (B0/Blow=1.42)
1. Role of T

35

2. Role of δ

35

δ=1/10

30

30

T=10

25
20

T=30

15

25

20

20

15
10

5

5

δ=1/40

0

8

16

24

32

40

5. Role of ζ

35

8

16

24

32

40

ζ =0.3

25

ψ=1

20

ζ =0.7

15

ψ=0.7

15

5

5
0
0

8

16

24

32

40

0

48

7. Role of β
β=0.98

25

20

20

10

10

5

5

5

5

0

0
8

16

24

32

40

48

9. Role of η

35

0

30

25

25

16

24

32

40

48

10. Role of ε

35

30

20

8

20

η=0.9

15

15

η=0

10

10

5

0

8

16

24

32

40

48

16

24

32

40

48

11. Role of d

30

25

25

20

20

d=4

d=0

8

16

24

32

40

48

θ=0.8

8

16

24

32

40

48

32

40

48

12. Role of γ
γ=1

15

γ=0.9

10
5
0

0
0

48

θ=0.5

0

30

5

0

40

8. Role of θ

35

10

5

0

8

15

ε=8

32

0
0

35

ε=4

24

15

β=0.995

10

0

16

30

25

15

8

35

10

0

slow=0.01

15
10

30

25

20

20

s = −0.02

35

30

slow=0.03

25

10

48

6. Role of ψ

35

30

s =0

0

0

48

4. Role of slow

35
30

15

0

0

s

30

25

10

3. Role of

35

0

8

16

24

32

40

48

0

8

16

24

