NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VOLUNTARY ASSOCIATIONS, CORPORATE RIGHTS, AND THE STATE:
LEGAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF AMERICAN CIVIL SOCIETY, 1750-1900
Ruth H. Bloch
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Working Paper 21153
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21153

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We would especially like to thank John Wallis, Jonathan Levy, Sally Clarke, Johann Neem, and
Jonathan Sassi, who wrote comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and Guillaume Frencia,
Brittany Adams, and Ben Nelson, who assisted us with research. In addition, we benefited from
valuable feedback from the anonymous referees for the University of Chicago Press and from the
participants at preparatory conferences sponsored by NBER and the Yale Program in Economic
History in 2012, 2013, and 2014. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ruth H. Bloch and Naomi R. Lamoreaux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Voluntary Associations, Corporate Rights, and the State: Legal Constraints on the Development
of American Civil Society, 1750-1900
Ruth H. Bloch and Naomi R. Lamoreaux
NBER Working Paper No. 21153
May 2015, Revised October 2016
JEL No. N11
ABSTRACT
The freedom of citizens to form voluntary associations has long been viewed as an essential
ingredient of modern civil society. Our chapter revises the standard Tocquevillian account of
associational freedom in the early United States by accentuating the role of state courts and
legislatures in the creation and regulation of nineteenth-century American nonprofit corporations.
Corporate status gave associations valuable rights that went beyond the basic right of individuals
to associate. Government officials selectively used their power to grant and enforce corporate
charters to reward politically favored groups while denying equivalent rights to groups they
viewed as politically or socially disruptive.

Ruth H. Bloch
2150 Broadway, Apt. 9-D
New York, NY 10023-8259
bloch@history.ucla.edu
Naomi R. Lamoreaux
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Ave., Rm. 39
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
naomi.lamoreaux@yale.edu

1
New Jersey farmer George Hutchins catalyzed a major legal dispute in the late 1880s by
bequeathing part of his modest estate to support the propagation of political radicalism.
Hutchins’s will set up a trust fund dedicated to the free distribution of the writings of Henry
George, the popular critic of private property and leader of New York’s United Labor Party,
naming George and his “heirs, executors and administrators” as the trustees managing the fund.1
Legally, this bequest fell into the realm of charitable trust law, a contested branch of (originally
British) equity law that allowed testators to give property to groups without corporate charters as
long as courts deemed their purposes to be sufficiently “charitable.”2 At the urging of Hutchins’s
widow and son, the will’s executor asked the state’s Chancery Court to invalidate the bequest.
Since the American Revolution, state courts and statutes had overturned dozens of similar wills
leaving legacies to unincorporated associations.3 The outcome of this case proved no different.
New Jersey’s Chancery Court rejected Hutchins’ bequests on what were in effect political
grounds.
The legal question at the heart of the case, according to Vice Chancellor John Taylor
Bird, was “What is a charity?”4 Reviewing the precedents, Bird conceded that some types of
voluntary associations, such as evangelical missionary societies, were routinely regarded as
1

Hutchins’ Ex’r v. George (NJ 1888) 44 N.J. Eq. 124, quote at 125.
In England, charitable trust law had since the sixteenth century allowed specific kinds of unincorporated groups to
receive legacies. In the wake of the American Revolution several states, most notably Virginia, passed statutes
rejecting British practice, though most other states (including New Jersey) did not. The courts’ willingness to
enforce charitable trusts varied widely from state to state until the U.S. Supreme Court, in the 1844 case Vidal v.
Girard's Executors 43 U.S. 127 (also known as the Girard’s Will Case) reversed a contrary decision of 1819 by
recognizing charitable trusts as an embedded feature of American common law. Soon almost all American states
either tacitly or actively came to accept that unincorporated groups pursuing religious, educational, or
conventionally charitable purposes could receive bequeathed property. Useful surveys of this history include Gareth
Jones, History of the Law of Charity, 1532-1827 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1960) and Howard
S. Miller, The Legal Foundations of American Philanthropy, 1776-1844 (Madison, Wisc.: State Historical Society
of Wisconsin, 1961).
3
For the key cases, see Miller, Legal Foundations, pp. 21-50. Well into the twentieth century, appellate decisions
about the disposition of charitable trusts for political causes continued to vary according to judges’ assessments of
the threats posed by the recipient groups. See Note, “Charitable Trusts for Political Purposes,” Virginia Law Review,
37 (1951), esp. pp. 988-94.
4
Hutchins’ Ex’r v. George, quote at 126.
2

2
charitable even though they aimed to destroy “existing laws, customs, institutions, and
religions.”5 He also acknowledged two recent path-breaking decisions by the Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania supreme courts that defined charity widely enough to encompass bequests for the
dissemination of abolitionist and atheist ideas (albeit only on the condition that the trustees
accept their primary goal to be education and not opposition to the law or Christianity).6 In
Bird’s view, however, the purposes of the book fund were more fundamentally subversive.
George’s vilification of private landholding posed too great a threat to the law for the trust to
stand. “Whatever might be the rights of the individual author in the discussion of such questions
in the abstract, it certainly would not become the court to aid in the distribution of literature
which denounces as robbery--as a crime--an immense proportion of the judicial determinations
of the higher courts. This would not be legally charitable.”7
George successfully appealed to New Jersey’s high court the following year, but the
damage was done. Reversing the Chancery Court’s verdict, Chief Justice Mercer Beazley ruled
the key issue was not George’s radicalism but Hutchins’s intentions. The will itself, which
benignly described George’s works as “spreading the light” of “liberty and justice in these
United States of America,” disclosed no inclination to violate the law. Rather the book fund,
Beazley concluded, was best understood as akin to a library and, therefore, stood squarely within
the “charitable” domain of education.8 Nonetheless, George’s hard-won victory brought little
satisfaction to him and his followers. According to a biography written later by his son, legal fees
devoured a sizeable portion of the bequest, and the public fallout from the case damaged

5

Hutchins’ v. George, quote at 137.
Jackson v. Phillips, 96 Mass. 539 (1867); Manners v. Philadelphia Library Company 93 Pa. 165 (1880).
7
Hutchins’ v. George, quote at 139.
8
George v. Braddock, 45 N.J. Eq. 757 (1889).
6

3
George’s pride and reputation.9 He was not only injured by the Vice Chancellor’s hostile
description of his work but was also plagued by rumors that he personally profited from the
legacy.
Without question, George and his fellow trustees would have been better off had they
been able to organize as a nonprofit corporation. The wills of benefactors leaving property to
incorporated groups stood on firmer legal ground because corporations had a standard right to
“take” or “receive” property.10 Not only would George’s organization almost certainly have
avoided going to court to get this legacy, but it also would likely have acquired several other
valuable rights that came with corporate status: the right to acquire property by means other than
bequests; the right to buy and sell property (as well as receive it); the right to sue and be sued as
a party in court; the right to offer their members limited liability for debts; and the right to legally
enforceable self-governance. This impressive menu of rights remained out of reach to virtually
all nineteenth-century voluntary associations that advocated social and political change because
they failed to meet the judicial and statutory requirements to incorporate. The only legal recourse
available to them if they were bequeathed an endowment was to claim that they qualified as a
charitable trust.
9

Henry George, Jr., The Life of Henry George, by his Son (London: William Reeves, 1900), pp. 509-10. This loyal
account also claims that the legacy of around $5,000 was too small to be worth the bother, and that George initially
chose not to accept the legacy out of compassion for Hutchins’ widow until other “collateral kin” who stood to
benefit from the defeat of the will stood in his way. A degree of skepticism is in order. First of all, many charitable
trust cases involved smaller amounts. Second, Hutchins’ widow herself, along with their son, were the parties
opposing the bequest; and the biography itself depicts George as so offended by the Chancery Court’s negative
decision that he fought to appeal it. Third, New Jersey gave no rights to “collateral kin” in intestate cases except in
the absence of widows or children. Carole Shammas, Marylynn Salmon, and Michel Dahlin, Inheritance in
America: From Colonial Times to the Present (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1987), pp. 240-41.
10
A partial exception was the state of New York, which in 1830 passed a statute denying corporations the automatic
right to receive bequests. The state legislature, however, continued routinely to grant the privilege in special
charters, and New York’s general incorporation act of 1848 included it for “benevolent, charitable, scientific and
missionary societies.” There were no suits in New York that challenged bequests to corporations in the nineteenth
century, whereas there were many such cases involving unincorporated groups (which from 1846 to 1893 were
uniformly blocked from receiving them by the New York Constitution and courts). See Stanley N. Katz, Sullivan,
Barry Sullivan, and C. Paul Beach, “Legal Change and Legal Autonomy: Charitable Trusts in New York, 17771893,” Law and History Review 3 (Spring 1985): 51-89.

4
Being deprived of corporate rights did not mean that such associations could not exist or,
in some cases, even thrive. American citizens were remarkably free as individuals to create or
join organizations of most types without having to hide from the government. As Richard Brooks
and Timothy Guinnane explain in their chapter for this volume, however, there is an important
distinction between the right of individuals to associate and the right of associations to a
collective legal identity. To use their terminology, the early United States offered extensive
rights to individuals to associate in loosely defined groups and even to aggregate in ones with
mutually understood rules.11 At the same time, however, the government significantly restricted
associations’ access to the benefits that came from being legal entities and legal persons. These
associational rights depended primarily on access to the state-conferred right to incorporate (and,
secondarily, in the special case of bequests, on judicial definitions of charity). Nineteenthcentury legislators and judges in most parts of the country routinely extended such rights to large
numbers of voluntary associations they regarded as politically neutral or benign, including
churches and other religious societies, educational institutions like schools and libraries, and
traditional charities providing aid to the poor. By contrast, organizations that were viewed by
officials as socially or politically disruptive found themselves at a significant legal disadvantage
– especially when their members wished to acquire or protect property in order to advance their
cause.
Our argument that the government systematically withheld valuable associational rights
from politically controversial groups raises fundamental questions about the Tocquevillian
portrait of the early United States as an “open access” civil society.12 Tocqueville famously

11

Richard Brooks and Timothy W. Guinnane, “The Right to Associate and the Rights of Associations:
Civil-Society Organizations in Prussia, 1794-1908.”
12
Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, trans. Henry Reeve and Francis Bowen (New York: A.A. Knopf,
1945), I: 198-205, II: 114-128. See also Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere,

5
marveled at the effervescence of American voluntary associations and relished their wideranging purposes. In his view, the state had no hand in their success. Unlike governments
“established by law,” these associations were “formed and maintained by the agency of private
individuals” exercising a “natural” “right of association … almost as inalienable in its nature as
the right of personal liberty.”13 For Tocqueville, this freedom from the state enabled voluntary
associations to provide a crucial check on the despotism he regarded as inherent in democratic
government.
The basic Tocquevillian perspective continues to dominate scholarship on the role of
voluntary societies in democratic polities. Modern theorists of civil society not surprisingly take
a more positive view of democracy than Tocqueville – often, for example, highlighting the
constructive role played by egalitarian groups that challenge the government – but they, too,
locate voluntary associations “outside the state.”14 American historians of social and political
movements similarly reinforce Tocqueville’s view of an unfettered civil society by focusing on
the agency of dissident activists and limiting their descriptions of government intervention to
instances of criminalization or forcible repression.15 Historians of philanthropy and religion

trans. Thomas Burger (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989). On the United States, in addition to Tocqueville, the now
classic articulation of this view is Arthur M. Schlesinger, “Biography of a Nation of Joiners” American Historical
Review 50 (Oct. 1944): 1-25.
13
Tocqueville, Democracy, vol. 1, pp. 198, 203.
14
See, in this volume, Jacob T. Levy, “Corps Intermédiares, Civil Society, and the Art of Association.” Levy’s
useful typology distinguishes between the integrative, competitive, and oppositional roles that democratic theorists
commonly attribute to voluntary associations. This paper concentrates on their oppositional role, but it might be
possible to argue that their competitive and integrative roles were similarly compromised by the selective allocation
of associational rights.
15
This literature, encompassing much of the subfield of social history, is far too vast to summarize in a footnote.
Efforts to “bring the state back in” have simulated legal histories documenting the government’s treatment of
subjugated and oppositional groups, but these almost never focus on voluntary associations as organizations. Our
work builds on a few recent exceptions that, however, offer interpretations that differ in important respects from our
own, including William J. Novak, "The American Law of Association: The Legal-Political Construction of Civil
Society." Studies in American Political Development 15 (Oct. 2001): 163-188; Christopher L.Tomlins, Law, Labor,
and Ideology in the Early American Republic (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993); Douglass C. North,
John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast, Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting
Recorded Human History (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009).

6
acknowledge the benefit of early incorporation in the United States, but they rarely depict it as a
privilege denied to disfavored groups. 16 A few recent histories of voluntary associations
highlight a degree of government intervention, but they, too, either overlook the discriminatory
dispensation of charters or maintain that the discrimination had largely ended by the time
Tocqueville arrived.17 Historical sociologists and political scientists vary widely in their value
judgments about the social impact of voluntary associations.18 Whether they view them as
beneficial or destructive to American democracy, however, these researchers still join
Tocqueville in regarding nineteenth-century voluntary associations as private, civil society
organizations separate from the state.
In contrast to this scholarship, we contend that the voluntary associations so admired by
Tocqueville never really operated independently of the state.19 Instead, nineteenth-century
lawmakers systematically discriminated against certain groups by constraining their access to
16

For example: Conrad Edick Wright, The Transformation of Charity in Postrevolutionary New England (Boston:
Northeastern University Press, 1992); Peter Dobkin Hall, Inventing the Nonprofit Sector and Other Essays on
Philanthropy, Voluntarism, and Nonprofit Organizations (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992);
Kathleen D. McCarthy, American Creed: Philanthropy and the Rise of Civil Society, 1700-1865 (Chicago:
Unitersity of Chicago Press, 2003); Sarah Barringer Gordon, "The First Disestablishment: Limits on Church Power
and Property Before the Civil War," University of Pennsylvania Law Review 162 (2013-14): 307-372.
17
For example: John L. Brooke, Columbia Rising: Civil Life on the Upper Hudson from the Revolution to the Age of
Jackson (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010); Johann N. Neem, Creating a Nation of Joiners:
Democracy and Civil Society in Early National Massachusetts (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008);
Albrecht Koschnik, "Let a Common Interest Bind Us Together:" Associations, Partisanship, and Culture in
Philadelphia, 1775-1840 (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2007); Kevin Butterfield, The Making of
Tocqueville's America: Law and Association in the Early United States (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2015).
18
For example: Robert D. Putnam, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 2000); Theda Skocpol, Marshall Ganz, and Ziad Munson, “A Nation of Organizers: The
Institutional Origins of Civic Voluntarism in the United States,” The American Political Science Review 94 (Sept.
2000): 527-546; Jason Kaufman, For the Common Good? American Civic Life and the Golden Age of Fraternity
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
19
In this chapter we use the term “voluntary association” synonymously with “nonprofit group,” with both terms
referring to any association organized by private citizens for non-business purposes whether incorporated or not.
This use seems to us most consistent with today’s ordinary speech. In the nineteenth century, however, both terms
possessed much narrower legal meanings: “voluntary association,” which appeared frequently in case law and
treatises, usually referred to an unincorporated group (whether for business or non-business purposes); “nonprofit,”
“not for profit,” and “not-pecuniary” were adjectives coined in late nineteenth-century statutes to distinguish nonbusiness corporations from business corporations. The word “philanthropy” rarely appears in our study because
“charity,” as a legal term, is more pertinent to our argument, and because its positive valence obscures the
distinctions we make between favored and disfavored organizations.

7
valuable entity and personhood rights. The net effect of this process was that the political
judgments of government officials skewed the development of American civil society towards
conservative and acquiescent groups at the expense of oppositional ones.
Our account of this history draws on the hundreds of legislative acts and court rulings
between 1750 and 1900 that shaped this lopsided allocation of rights.20 We divide the chapter
into chronological sections that highlight major changes and continuities over time: 1) the
American Revolution’s opening of access to corporate rights to churches, evangelical societies,
conventional charities, private schools, educational institutions like libraries and museums, and
fraternal lodges; 2) the restriction of these rights, nonetheless, to essentially same kinds of
noncontroversial organizations that had already enjoyed privileges in the colonial period; 3) the
manner in which post-revolutionary state legislatures and courts used their powers to grant and
interpret charters to curb the rights of potentially dissident organizations composed of artisans
and ethnic minority groups; 4) the transition in the mid-nineteenth century from special charters
to general incorporation laws that increased access to new categories of politically acceptable
organizations like social clubs and recreational groups; 5) the simultaneous mid-century
expansion of the range of rights held by associations that received charters, including greater
autonomy from judicial supervision; and 6) the state’s persistent denial of access to corporate
rights to voluntary associations with politically controversial goals, like radical reform societies,
trade unions, and political parties. This denial is especially noteworthy in light of the increased
opening of access to politically favored ones. It is the goal of this chapter to tell both sides of this
history.

20

One reason scholars have largely missed the importance of the government’s role in dispensing these rights is that
the national picture was virtually impossible to investigate until the advent of large electronic databases since the
process took place by means of piecemeal statutes and scattered judicial decisions on the state level.

8
Expanding Access to Traditionally Favored Groups, 1750-1820
The impact of the American Revolution on the legal rights of voluntary associations was
much more mixed than scholars generally recognize. On the positive side, American citizens
largely won a de facto right to associate despite its absence from the Constitution. Ordinary
people could immediately create numerous types of voluntary associations, including
oppositional political parties as early as the 1790s. A significant subset of these associations also
began to acquire the more explicit rights belonging to corporations – rights to entity and
personhood status that went beyond the individual right of their members to associate. On the
negative side, access to these corporate rights remained highly restricted for political reasons.
The power to issue and enforce charters, previously held by Parliament and the King, shifted to
state legislators and judges, who tended to favor the same types of associations as those
previously favored under colonial law. This significant degree of continuity with British rule has
gone largely unnoticed by celebrants of American voluntarism.
It is well known that political associations that challenged the state during the colonial era
were considered illegal, and authorities often used force to repress them. Elites with connections
in Parliament or the colonial provincial governments could usually make their criticisms heard,
but inasmuch as they coalesced into associations, they were, in the parlance of the day, factions
shrouded in secrecy rather than legitimate organizations. On the popular level, traditionally
limited protests like bread riots enjoyed a partial legitimacy, but officials treated most public
demonstrations of antagonism to government policies as criminal.21 A few of the most prominent
examples of political repression during the late colonial period include the jailing of Baptists

21

On the tradition of extra-legal crowd actions, see Pauline Maier, “Popular Uprisings and Civil Authority,” William
and Mary Quarterly 27 (Jan.1970): 3-35; Edward F. Countryman, “‘Out of the Bounds of the Law:’ Northern Land
Rioters in the Eighteenth Century,” in Alfred F. Young, ed., The American Revolution: Explorations in the History
of American Radicalism (DeKalb, Ill.: Northern Illinois University Press, 1976), pp. 37-69.

9
who refused to defer to the Church of England in Virginia; the mobilization of militias against
the North Carolina Regulators and the Paxton Boys in Pennsylvania; and, of course, the use of
royal troops to suppress the Sons of Liberty in Boston.22
What has been less often perceived is the extent to which British law recognized other
kinds of privately organized voluntary associations as legitimate. The Elizabethan law of
charitable uses endorsed the creation and support of parish churches, schools, workhouses for the
poor, and other local organizations serving the indigent or disabled. These types of organizations
were founded in the colonies as well as in Great Britain, supported both by the 1601 statute and,
in some colonies, by extra laws passed by provincial legislatures.23 The Glorious Revolution in
the late seventeenth century extended legal toleration, if not equal rights, to dissenting Protestant
churches. In addition, the King and Parliament granted corporate charters to especially favored
organizations, such as the Church of England’s missionary wing, the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, and a similar Presbyterian Scottish evangelical group, both of which operated in
America but were seated in Britain.24
These types of legally recognized groups had an important characteristic in common:
they performed functions regarded by authorities as useful. No clear line divided public and
private: some of these state-sanctioned enterprises were founded or funded by donors who freely
22

On these instances of repression, see Rhys Issac, The Transformation of Virginia, 1749-1790 (Chapel Hill: North
Carolina University Press, 1982) pp. 146-177; James P. Whittenburg, “Planters, Merchants, and Lawyers: Social
Change and the Origins of the North Carolina Regulation,” William and Mary Quarterly 34 (Apr.1977): 215-38;
Brooke Hindle, “The March of the Paxton Boys, “ William and Mary Quarterly 3 (Oct., 1946): 461-86; Edmund S.
Morgan and Helen M. Morgan, The Stamp Act Crisis: A Prologue to Revolution (Chapel Hill: North Carolina
University Press, 1953).
23
The Records of the Governor and the Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, 1661-1674, ed.
Nathaniel B. Shurtleff (Boston: William White, 1854) Vol. 4, pt. 2, p. 488; Acts and Laws of the State of
Connecticut in America (Hartford: Hudson and Goodwin, 1796), pp. 252-53. In the 1820s, the Pennsylvania jurist
Henry Baldwin unearthed many examples of the British law of charities being used in colonial America, an
argument that helped to persuade the United States Supreme Court in 1844 to change its earlier negative position of
1819. On Baldwin’s scholarship and its impact, see Irwin G. Wyllie, “The Search for an American Law of Charity,
1776-1844,” The Mississippi Valley Historical Review 46 (Sept 1959): 203-21.
24
Joseph Stancliffe Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of American Corporations (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1917), vol. 1, p. 38.

10
contributed their own property; some were administered with minimal oversight by the
government. Ultimately, however, what justified the privileged legal status of all of them was
that they were seen as instruments, or extensions, of the state.25 The Elizabethan statute and
royal charters in effect functioned as official licenses that allowed groups organized by private
persons to acquire property and have standing in courts as long as their goals were specifically
endorsed by the government. By contrast, other kinds of voluntary associations, like elite social
clubs and fraternal groups, possessed no legal status at all.26
In comparison to England, the legal standing of early American voluntary associations
suffered in one important respect: the imperial government was loathe to charter organizations
created by colonists, largely for fear of their becoming independent of British control. The few
exceptions tended either to be related to the Church of England, like William and Mary College,
or to receive strong support from royal and proprietary governors whose authority derived from
the King. Otherwise, legal protection for property held by colonial groups came from charitable
uses law or from charters issued by provincial legislatures without royal approval. The
reluctance of the Crown to incorporate organizations based in America produced friction already
in the seventeenth century when defiant Puritan legislators issued acts of incorporation for
Harvard College, and later Yale, without sending them to England for review.27 Tensions over

25

Gareth Jones, History of the Law of Charity, 1532-1827 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1969);
W.K. Jordan, Philanthropy in England, 1480-1660 (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1959) and David Owen,
English Philanthropy, 1660-1960 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,1964). On the spread of private
charities and private schools in mid-eighteenth-century America, see Carl Bridenbaugh, Cities in the Wilderness:
The First Century of Urban Life in America, 1625-1742(New York: Oxford University Press, 1938), pp. 392-98,
448-51.
26
Craft-based fraternities had traditionally been considered corporations with monopoly rights, but guilds had lost
virtually all their medieval legal privileges by the late seventeenth-century guilds. For examples of early American
social clubs and fraternal societies, see Bridenbaugh, Cities in the Wilderness, pp. 36-6, 295, 303, 394-97, 436, 437440, 457-464; David Shields, Civil Tongues and Polite Letters in British America (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1997), pp. 175-208; Steven C. Bullock, Revolutionary Brotherhood: Freemasonry and the
Transformation of the American Social Order, 1730-1840 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996),
Chs. 1-2.
27
Davis, Essays, vol. 1, pp. 19-22.

11
the issue of incorporation resurfaced in the late colonial period with several unsuccessful
attempts by colonists to gain official approval. The College of New Jersey (later Princeton) and
Eleazar Wheelock's missionary school (later Dartmouth) failed to secure charters, forcing their
founders to postpone the projects until more sympathetic royal governors agreed to them.28 In
1763, the imperial Board of Trade rejected the incorporation of a Congregationalist missionary
society because the Massachusetts charter required too little government supervision and the
group threatened to interfere with British policy towards Native Americans.29
The American Revolution gave rise to new rights of association. First and most
importantly, the fight against British repression paved the way for the recognition of a de facto
right to associate. As Arthur Schlesinger, Sr. long ago emphasized, the political organizations
formed by the revolutionaries themselves had the practical effect of enhancing the legitimacy of
oppositional political groups.30 Similarly, the upheaval of the Revolution emboldened dissident
churches and radical sects that had been previously suppressed by officials supporting the
colonial ecclesiastical establishments.31 This revolutionary context shaped the interpretation of
the fundamental rights declared in the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution: the rights of
free worship and a free press, also proclaimed by virtually all state constitutions; and the rights
of free speech and assembly, proclaimed by over half of them.32 Although none of these
documents explicitly provided for a right of association, they nonetheless provided legal
28

Davis, Essays, vol. 1, pp. 25, 46, 85-6.
Davis, Essays, vol. 1, pp. 80-81. For the purposes of this paper we are not including instances of colonial
governments chartering public corporations like townships (or the churches of the ecclesiastical establishment). For
an emphasis on the importance of such colonial precedents on the prevalence of the corporate form after the
Revolution, see Jason Kaufman, “Corporate Law and the Sovereignty of States,” American Sociological Review 73
(June 2008): 402-25.
30
Schlesinger, “Biography of a Nation of Joiners.”
31
Isaac, Transformation of Virginia, pp. 243-295; Stephen A. Marini, Radical Sects of Revolutionary New England
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982).
32
Of the state constitutions ratified before 1820, six lacked the right of speech (Massachusetts, New Jersey,
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina) and five lacked assembly (New York, New Jersey, Maryland,
Virginia, and South Carolina). NBER State Constitutions Project, http://www.stateconstitutions.umd.edu/texts/.
29

12
grounding for the idea that Americans were free to form associations whose purposes did not
otherwise break the law.
This background did not, however, immediately or completely secure the right of citizens
to associate for political purposes. In the 1790s a decisive setback occurred when leaders of the
Federalist Party tried to suppress Democratic-Republican clubs and the Jeffersonian oppositional
press. Seventy Democratic-Republicans were jailed and fined under the notorious Alien and
Sedition Acts of 1798, and after the Jeffersonians gained power, they briefly attempted to
retaliate by prosecuting a few prominent Federalists under the common law of seditious libel.33
Nonetheless, the expiration of the Alien and Sedition Acts in the early 1800s opened up a new
era of increasingly accepted partisanship, and by the 1820s, organized political conflict had
become widely recognized as an inevitable feature of popular rule.34 Even so, the extent of the de
facto American right to associate in the early republic should not be exaggerated. Laws passed
in the South routinely denied free blacks and slaves the right to congregate for virtually any
purpose, and Northern courts soon re-introduced the common-law doctrine of criminal
conspiracy in order to curtail strikes by labor unions.35

33

Only two of the nine known libel prosecutions against Federalists yielded convictions. Seymour Martin Lipset,
The First Nation: The United States in Historical and Comparative Perspective (New York: W.W. Norton, 1963),
pp. 40-43; Leonard W. Levy, Freedom of Speech and Press in Early American History: Legacy of Suppression
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1960), pp. 296-309.
34
Richard Hofstadter, The Idea of a Party System; the Rise of Legitimate Opposition in the United States, 17801840 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969). On the conflicts of the 1790s and the moderate Jeffersonian
endorsement of free association, see Johann N. Neem, “Freedom of Association in the Early Republic: The
Republican Party, the Whiskey Rebellion, and the Philadelphia and New York Cordwainers’ Cases,” The
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography,” 127 (July 2003): 259-290; Butterfield, Making of Tocqueville’s
America, pp. 31-54.
35
As is also noted in this volume by Brooks and Guinnane, “The Right to Associate.” Other examples from later in
U.S. history include: Southern laws against abolitionists in the 1830s; the Congressional ban on polygamy against
Utah Mormons in the 1880s; and the anti-conspiracy and anti-espionage acts used against Communists in the
twentieth century. Laws against nineteenth-century trade unions are discussed later in this chapter; also see:
Margaret Levi, Tania Melo, Bar, and Frances Zlotnick, “Opening Access, Ending the Violence Trap: Labor,
business, Government and the National Labor Relations Act,” in this volume.

13
Secondly, the American Revolution gave rise to new associational rights by widening
access to incorporation. State legislatures assumed the power to issue charters that previously
had been reserved to the King and Parliament, and in many states elected representatives reacted
against the former stinginess of the British by passing acts of incorporation in large numbers.
Whereas the right to associate was at best a de facto right possessed by individual citizens, the
entity and personhood rights of corporations were at once formal and possessed by organizations.
They were particularly important for organizations that aspired to last indefinitely, consisted of
many members, and experienced high turnover in membership. At a time when the small size of
most businesses enabled them to manage their property as partnerships and single
proprietorships, voluntary organizations had more need for the form and therefore became
corporations more often than businesses.36 To be sure, not all eligible associations bothered to
apply for charters; those that were small, ephemeral, or propertyless had little incentive to do
so.37 Once post-revolutionary legislatures increased the availability of charters, however,
voluntary associations that had common property to safeguard frequently took advantage of the
greater opportunity to use the corporate form.
Another reason that numerous voluntary associations became corporations was that
American revolutionary ideology undermined the British law of charitable uses that had

36

Pauline Maier, "The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation," William and Mary Quarterly 50 (Jan.
1993): 53-55; Jason Kaufman, “Corporate Law and the Sovereignty of States,” American Sociological Review 73
(June 2008): 415, 417. This contrasts sharply with Prussia and France, where businesses received legal entity and
personhood rights before nonprofit groups. See Brooks and Guinnane, “The Right to Associate and the Rights of
Associations.”
37
Historians have tended to overestimate the proportion of voluntary groups that procured charters because the
kinds of well-established, propertied groups that became corporations are so heavily represented in printed sources
(including charters). We found that only four (less than 5%) of 219 Massachusetts groups founded between 1807
and 1815 identified as broadly “charitable” (including evangelical, fraternal, mutual aid, poor relief, medical, and
educational organizations) had received charters by 1816. This figure was produced by cross-checking the
Massachusetts subset of the groups listed in the exhaustive appendix of Conrad Edick Wright ‘s The Transformation
of Charity in Postrevolutionary New England (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1992), pp. 244-260, with the
acts of incorporation reported in The Public and General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, from Feb
28, 1807 to Feb 16, 1816, volume 4 (Boston: Wells and Lilly, 1816).

14
previously protected private donations to churches, schools, and local charities. Republican
sensibilities were offended by traditional charitable law for two reasons: first, it left jurisdiction
over bequests to the juryless, inefficient, and often corrupt chancery courts (think Bleak House);
and second, it gave perpetual control over donated property to trusts with inflexible mandates
that potentially tied up wealth for generations without serving a useful purpose. Although some
states continued to recognize British charitable law, others rejected it, which made incorporation
by state legislatures the only viable route to legal status.38
The sorts of organizations that followed this route were generally the same sorts that the
British had previously permitted to hold legal rights either as recipients of royal charters or as
beneficiaries of charitable trusts.39 Although the years between 1780 and 1840 witnessed a
veritable explosion of voluntary groups, ranging from unorthodox churches to fraternal orders,
from political parties to utopian communities, the states mostly limited charters to those whose
purposes were religious, educational, or conventionally charitable (either in the sense of aiding
or uplifting the poor or, like hospitals, tending to the sick or disabled).40 Churches and other

38

James J. Fishman, “The Development of Nonprofit Corporation Law and an Agenda for Reform,” Emory Law
Journal 34 (Summer 1985): 617-83. In Britain, popular hostility to charitable use law culminated with the passage
of reform legislation in the 1820s that eliminated the worst abuses and enabled the basic law to persist. Gareth Jones,
History of the Law of Charity, 1532-1827 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1960), pp. 160-68. On the
initial American rejection, see Howard S. Miller, The Legal Foundations of American Philanthropy, 1776-1844
(Madison, Wisc.: State Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1961).
39
We thank Jason Kaufman for giving us access to his database of corporate acts collected from the 1780-1800
session laws of Massachusetts, Vermont, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, and
Tennessee for the period (with variations by state). Many of our generalizations about the numbers and types of
corporate acts before 1825 are based on searches within recently digitized compilations of state laws contained in
Readex, “Archive of Americana”: Early American Imprints, Series I: Evans, 1639-1800; Early American Imprints,
Series II: Shaw and Shoemaker (1801-1825), and in HeinOnline, Session Laws Library.
40
This conclusion is derived both from searches in annual sessions and from later lists of corporations published by
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, South Carolina, and Ohio, as follows: [Pennsylvania], Proceedings and Debates of the
Convention of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to Propose Amendments of the Constitution, Commenced and
held at Harrisburg on the Second Day of May, 1837 (Harrisburg, PA, 1837-1839), vol. 3, pp. 213-368;
[Massachusetts] The Public and General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, from Feb 28, 1807 to Feb
16, 1816, Volume 4 (Boston: Wells and Lilly, 1816); [Massachusetts], Private and Special Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, for the Years 1830-1837, Volume 7 (Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, 1837);
[Massachusetts], Private and Special Statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, for the Years 1849-1853,
Volume 9 (Boston: William White, 1860); [South Carolina], Statutes At Large of South Carolina, ed. David J.

15
Protestant religious organizations, which often owned property acquired before the Revolution
and comprised the majority of first applicants for charters, became the first beneficiaries of the
general incorporation laws passed in the 1780s and 90s.41 General laws facilitating the
incorporation of other traditionally privileged groups were not far behind. Indeed, Pennsylvania
and the U.S. Congress, acting for the Northwest Territory, passed general incorporation acts not
just for churches but also for charitable and literary societies already in the 1790s.42 By the
1830s several other states had passed one or more general incorporation acts for specific types of
voluntary groups, ranging from fire companies to social libraries to medical societies.43 Even
without general legislation, legislatures in most states incorporated great numbers of such
organizations by individual acts. Massachusetts had already issued so many special charters to
“charitable” societies that in 1817 the state’s weary legislators resorted to a barebones template

McCord, Vol. 8 (Columbia, S.C.: A.S. Johnston, 1840), pp. 1-484; [Ohio, Secretary of State], Annual Report of the
Secretary of State, to the Governor of the State of Ohio, For the Year 1885 (Columbus: Westbote Co., 1885), pp.
147-225 (containing a list for 1803-1851).
41
Fishman, “Development of Nonprofit Corporation,” p. 632. The Revolution’s support for ecclesiastical
disestablishment led states to issue charters to churches as a sign of official religious toleration. Even in
Massachusetts, where the Congregationalists continued to receive state support, the government offered to liberally
incorporate dissenting churches and bristled when uncooperative Baptists and Universalists refused to take
advantage of the opportunity. The state’s strategy of attaching corporate rights to ecclesiastical rights (most
importantly the rights to tax exemption and licensed marriage ceremonies) ironically backfired as a gesture of
religious inclusion. See John D. Cushing, “Notes on Disestablishment in Massachusetts, 1780-1833,” William and
Mary Quarterly 26 (Apr. 1969): 172-85.
42
[Pennsylvania], Laws, Statutes … 1700-1800, in Laws of the Commonwealth, 4 vols. (Philadelphia: Bioren, 1810),
3:20; [United States], Laws of the Territory of the United States North West of the River Ohio (Cincinnati, OH:
Edmund Freeman, 1798), pp. 3-7. In Pennsylvania, a judicial opinion of the 1830s insisted on a narrow construction
of the 1791 general law, claiming that “literary” never included institutions of higher learning and that “charitable”
had always applied only to organizations “affording relief to the indigent and unfortunate.” Case of Medical College
of Philadelphia, 3 Whart. 454 (1838), quote at 18.
43
We found twelve additional general incorporation laws for specific types of voluntary associations passed
between 1780 and 1830 (in addition to the many others for religious groups): Virginia Session Laws, October
Session, 1787, Ch. 35, p. 25 (fire companies); New York Session Laws, 10th leg., 1787, Ch. 82, pp. 524-531
(colleges and academies), 19th leg., 1796, Ch. 43, pp. 695-699 (public libraries), and 36th leg., 1813, Ch. 40. Vol. 2,
pp. 219-224 (medical societies); New Jersey Session Laws, 19th General Assembly, 1794, Ch. 499, pp. 950-952
(societies for the promotion of learning), 24th General Assembly, 1799, Ch. 827, p. 644-45 (library companies), and
54th General Assembly, 2nd Sitting, 1829, pp. 19-25 (medical societies); Massachusetts Session Laws, January
1798, Ch. 65, pp. 200-201 (social libraries); January 1819, Ch. 114, pp. 181-183 (agricultural societies) and January
1829, pp. 219-220 (lyceums); Kentucky Session Laws, 6th General Assembly, 2nd Session, 1798, Ch. 42, pp. 78-79
(fire companies); Vermont Session Laws, October 1800, pp. 11-15 (social libraries). Here and throughout, the
references to “Session Laws” are to HeinOnline’s Session Laws Library, noted above.

16
conferring, in one short phrase, “all the privileges usually given.”44 In addition, when
conventionally acceptable voluntary groups applied for charters, most states in most parts of the
country took a pluralistic approach to incorporating them. Even elite institutions with colonial
charters that established monopoly privileges, like Harvard College, fought losing battles in state
legislatures to prevent rival organizations from becoming incorporated.45
Because the power to incorporate resided within state governments, however, local
political considerations inevitably affected the distribution of charters in different regions. In
general, the South incorporated fewer organizations than the North, both for nonprofit and for
business purposes. The rural spread of the population and the slave-based economy discouraged
the formation of the kinds of charitable organizations that, in Northern cities, served lower-class
groups. Added to this was an especially virulent anti-corporatism among Jeffersonians that
stemmed from the revolutionary struggle to disestablish the Church of England and later legal
battles to invalidate the colonial charters of institutions tied to the former religious
establishment.46 So extreme was Virginia’s hostility to ecclesiastical corporations that the state
forbade the incorporation of all churches, an example that was later followed by West Virginia,

44

For example, “An Act to Incorporate the Master, Wardens and Members of the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts,”
Massachusetts Session Laws, 1817, p. 408; and “An Act to incorporate the British Charitable Society,”
Massachusetts Sessions Laws, January 1818, pp. 547. These barebones charters were a sharp contrast to the detailed
1786 and 1790 charters reprinted in The Act of incorporation, regulations, and members of the Massachusetts
Congregational Charitable Society (Boston: John Eliot 1815), pp. 3-6 and Rules and Articles of the Massachusetts
Charitable Society (Boston: Adams and Rhoades, 1803), pp. 3-7.
45
On the debates in the early 1820s over the Republican-sponsored charters for Berkshire Medical College and
Amherst College, both of which threatened Harvard’s monopoly, see Creating, pp. 75-77. Similarly, the University
of Virginia corporation was founded by Democratic Republicans to compete with the older Anglican monopoly,
William and Mary College (whose charter the Jeffersonians first tried to destroy).
46
Key cases are: The Rev. John Bracken v. The Visitors of Wm. & Mary College (VA 1790). 7 Va. 573 (John
Marshall defended the College); Terrett v. Taylor (1815) 13 U.S. 43 (a precedent for Dartmouth). James Madison
blasted “the excessive wealth of ecclesiastical Corporations” and used his power as president in 1811 to veto a
Congressional bill incorporating the Protestant Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C.. See Bruce Campbell, “Social
Federalism,” p. 154.

17
Arkansas, and Missouri.47 South Carolina, by contrast, issued many charters to local churches
but otherwise chartered few voluntary groups that ordinary people joined. Even as the Bible Belt
stretched over the South during the Second Great Awakening, the large national evangelical
organizations that elsewhere enlisted numerous Protestant ministers and lay activists
incorporated few Southern state chapters or auxiliary societies (exceptions were the Virginia and
North Carolina Bible Societies and the American Colonization Society chartered in Maryland).48
Apart from local churches, the Southern voluntary associations that received the most
charters either catered to the elite, like Masonic lodges, literary societies, and private academies,
or existed primarily to protect property, like fire companies.49 This narrow granting of charters,

47

A Virginia law of 1799 declared the incorporation of religious group to be “inconsistent” with religious freedom
(a position written into the state’s Constitution of 1851). See Thomas E. Buckley, S.J., “After Disestablishment:
Thomas Jefferson’s Wall of Separation in Antebellum Virginia, The Journal of Southern History, 61 (Aug., 1995),
esp. pp. 449-51. Also see Campbell, “Social Federalism,” p. 154; and Anon., “Permissible Purposes for Nonprofit
Corporations,” Columbia Law Review 51(Nov. 1951), p. 894. In 2002 a case brought by Jerry Falwell on First and
Fourteenth Amendment grounds finally forced Virginia to change its constitution. Falwell v. Miller (U.S. Western
District of Virginia 2002) 203 F. Supp. 2d 624; 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 6481. On anti-corporatism in Virginia (and
among Republicans more generally), see Peter Dobkin Hall, Inventing, pp. 22-23; and Hall, The Organization of
American Culture: Private Institution, Elites and the Origins of American Nationality (New York: New York
University Press, 1982), p. 85.
48
For an introduction to the so-called Benevolent Empire, see Clifford S. Griffen, Their Brothers’ Keepers: Moral
Stewardship in the United States, 1800-1865 (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1960). On the Virginia
Bible Society, chartered in 1814, and its auxiliary organizations, see Sadie Bell, The Church, The State, and
Education in Virginia (orig. pub. Philadelphia: Science Press, 1930; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1969), pp. 2445. North Carolina Session Laws, 1813, p. 26. Three local chapters of the Bible Society were incorporated in
Maryland (Baltimore, 1813) and South Carolina (Union, 1825; Charleston, 1826). Maryland incorporated the
American Colonization Society, discussed further below, in 1831. Maryland Sessions Laws, General Assembly, Dec
Session, 1830, pp. 201-2. Our searches for interdenominational bible and missionary societies prior to 1830
produced one result in Maryland (the Female Domestic Missionary and Education Society in Hagerstown, 1831) and
no results in the Session Laws of Georgia, West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi and
Louisiana.
49
The cities of Baltimore and Charleston conformed more to a Northern pattern in having several incorporated
charitable organizations. On the early general law incorporating Virginia fire companies, also see Joseph Stancliff
Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of the American Corporation, vol. 2, p.17. On Virginia incorporated
academies, see Bell, Church, State, and Education, p. 168. South Carolina passed almost 450 acts of incorporation
for voluntary groups between 1775 and 1835, of which 50% were churches and denominational organizations;
14.5% academies, seminaries, and colleges; 11% library, literary, and other cultural societies; 7% Masonic and other
fraternal mutual aid associations; 5.5 % militia and fire companies; 4% free schools and charities for the poor; 3%
professional, agricultural, and commerce societies; and 5% other or unknown. [South Carolina] Statutes At Large,
Vol. 8 (1840), cited in footnote 34. Our sampling of Georgia’s Session Laws between1789-1810 and 1820-1830
reveals much the same pattern. On Masonic lodges, our surveys found that seven of the thirteen states to incorporate
Grand Lodges by 1825 were Southern: South Carolina (1791, 1814, 1818); Georgia (1796; 1822); North Carolina
(1797); Louisiana (1816); Mississippi (1819); Maryland (1821); and Alabama (1821). The Northern states were

18
especially when taken together with Virginia’s and Maryland’s repudiation of British charitable
law (which traditionally enabled religious, educational, and charitable groups to receive bequests
without needing to be incorporated) may help to explain why so few Southern charitable and
religious voluntary associations amassed resources and perpetuated themselves over time.50
Within the terms of Jeffersonian ideology, political hostility to corporations was justified on
high-minded egalitarian principles. But the reluctance of the South to grant extra associational
rights to churches and charities probably served the interests of the elite more than those of
ordinary citizens. By retaining state control over poor relief and curbing the rights of evangelical
groups, the planter class effectively reduced the potential of organized opposition to its social
and political dominance.
In the North, the chartering of colleges, academies, and cultural institutions founded by
wealthy Federalists bred popular resentment just like the Federalist control of banks.51
Jeffersonian anti-corporate ideology lost much of its force, however, once the Democratic
Republicans gained power and were able to incorporate voluntary associations of their own. In
New York, the Democratic Republican ascendency in the early 1800s shifted the pattern of
incorporation more towards fraternal groups of recent immigrants and artisans largely populated
by their partisans.52 These groups satisfied the standard expectation that corporations be socially

Massachusetts (1817); New York (1818); New Hampshire (1819; 1821); Maine (1820; 1822); Connecticut (1821);
and Vermont (1823).
50
Among historians of philanthropy, the term “Virginia Doctrine” refers to the reluctance of several states,
especially in the South, to encourage private charities (especially by invalidating charitable bequests). See Kathleen
D. McCarthy, American Creed: Philanthropy and the Rise of Civil Society, 1700-1865 (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2003), p. 87; Miller, Legal Foundations of American Philanthropy, pp. xii, 50; and [Edward S.
Hirschler], "Note: A Survey of Charitable Trusts in Virginia," Virginia Law Review 25 (Nov. 1938): 110.
51
Neem, Creating a Nation of Joiners; Brooke, Columbia Rising. On the politics of banking, see in this volume,
Qian Lu and John Wallis, “Banks, Politics, and Political Parties: From Partisan Banking to Open Access in Early
Massachusetts;” and, on New York, Eric Hilt, “Early American Corporations and the State,” in Corporations and
American Democracy, ed. Naomi R. Lamoreaux and William Novak (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2017), forthcoming.
52
In addition to the mechanics societies discussed below, the Caledonian Society (Scottish) and the Hibernian
Provident Society (Irish), both incorporated in 1807, were particularly known for their history of partisanship.

19
useful by pledging themselves to the “charitable” assistance of fellow members and their
families in need. Even the notoriously partisan Tammany Society of New York received a
charter in 1805 shortly after the Democratic Republicans won control of both houses of the state
legislature.53 Incorporated under terms that granted more freedom of self-governance than usual
for the period, the Tammany Society easily withstood an 1809 challenge to its charter by a
former member who accused the organization of betraying its official “charitable purpose” by
becoming “perverted to the worst purposes of faction.”54 Tammany’s leadership in turn
indignantly denounced this effort “to cancel its long list of good actions and wrest from it its
charter of incorporation, the basis of its stability and existence.”55 Far from consistently
opposing corporations, powerful Democratic Republicans regarded a thin veneer of charity as
sufficient to qualify an organization for a charter if enough lawmakers supported it on political
grounds. Revolutionary-era hostility towards corporations never entirely disappeared, but as
Democratic Republicans in the North jumped on the corporate bandwagon, the partisan quality
Young, Democratic Republicans, pp. 401-402. Our sample of New York Session Laws indicates that most of the
European ethnic societies incorporated prior to 1820 received their charters in 1804-07, during the early years of
Democratic Republican rule.
53
Session Laws, New York, 28th leg, 1804, p. 277-279. The distinction between the “fraternal” Tammany Society
and the partisan Tammany Hall (the General Democratic Republican Committee of New York, which met in the
building owned by the Society) enabled the political machine in its heyday to dispense “charity” and raise private
funds without government oversight. See Mushkat, Tammany, pp. 10, 366. The Tammany charter was unusual in
this period in three important ways: in giving carte blanche to the group’s own constitution and by-laws to
determine the mode of elections, types of officers, and admissions requirements; in containing no term limit; and in
allowing the corporation to “take” and “receive” property as well as to purchase and hold it. The only significant
restriction was a $5000 property limit, which was an average amount for fraternal benefit societies of the period.
According to a 1807 New York almanac, the society had a two-part constitution, one “public,” relating to external
matters, the other “private,” relating to “all transactions which do not meet the public eye, and on which its code of
laws are founded.” Quoted from Longworth’s American Almanac, New York Register and City Directory for the
Thirty-Second Year of American Independence (New York: David Longworth, 1807), p. 78, as cited by Gustavus
Myers, The History of Tammany Hall (New York: Published by the Author, 1901), p. 24.
54
“Another Denunciation! From the Nuisance of last Night,” The American Citizen, vol. 10 ( March 1, 1809), p. 2.
Myers, History of Tammany Hall, pp. 31-32; Jerome Mushkat, Tammany: The Evolution of a Political Machine,
1789-1865 (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press,1971), pp. 37-38. The 1805 charter was unusual in containing no
term limit and in allowing the corporation to “take” and “receive” property as well as to purchase and hold it; the
only restriction was a $5000 property limit. An 1872 petition to the New York legislature to revoke Tammany’s
charter similarly died in committee. Journal of the Senate of the State of New York at their Ninety-Fifth Session
(Albany: Argus Company, 1872), p. 175.
55
As quoted in Myers, History of Tammany Hall, p. 32.

20
of their objections to incorporation started to lose traction. In response to chronic demand,
legislators issued more and more charters to nonprofit groups, as well as to businesses, regardless
of which party or faction was in power.56
Few organizations as blatantly partisan as the Tammany Society managed to secure
charters.57 Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century, most of incorporated voluntary
groups fit into the conventionally privileged categories of religious, educational, and charitable
groups.58 To be sure, the stretched definition of “charity” now included fraternal associations
whose charitableness mainly consisted of offering financial benefits to their own members, but
even they could be regarded as contributing to the wider society by easing pressure on public
poor relief. The traditional view that chartered groups benefited the general welfare continued to
safeguard the legitimacy of the chartering process despite the political twists and turns of state
legislators. Indeed, suspicions that corrupt officials rewarded their partisan allies only reinforced
the widespread conviction socially and politically divisive groups should be ineligible for
corporate grants from the government. The Tammany Society, the glaring exception, received its

56

A comparison of the numbers of special charters issued by New York and Massachusetts in the two years before
and after the state first had both a Democratic-Republican governor and legislative majority shows that that no
overall cutback occurred. In New York, where the Federalists lost power in 1802, the number remained constant for
businesses and rose by 400% for nonprofits (from 1 to 4: the small total number of nonprofit special charters is due
to New York’s general incorporation acts for churches, libraries, and academies); and in Massachusetts, where the
Democratic-Republicans seized control temporarily in 1810-11, chartering rose by 28.5% for businesses and 81%
for nonprofits (from 21 to 38). Averaging the numbers of special charters per year for 1800-05 and 1834-35, the
overall increase in incorporated voluntary associations between the two periods was120% in Massachusetts (from 12
per year to 26), 800% in New York (from 2 to18), and 100% in South Carolina (from 4 to 8).
57
Other political groups in the early republic built on Tammany’s fraternal model, including the dozens of
Washington Benevolent Societies organized by young Federalists starting in 1808, but our searches in the
HeinOnline data base of state sessions laws and in published lists of Massachusetts and New York corporations
produced no evidence of their incorporation (contrary to Butterfield, Making of Tocqueville’s America, p. 50). As
we show below, partisan organizations became corporations in a few states at the end of the century.
58
Fire companies and mutual aid associations (both loosely considered “charitable”) were the only sizable
exceptions to these traditional categories. There was minimal change in the percentages of special charters for
groups whose purposes were not either religious, educational, traditionally charitable (in the sense of aiding the poor
or disabled), mutual aid, or fire protection. In Massachusetts, these exceptional types – the most common of which
were agricultural and medical societies --constituted only 3% in 1800-1805 (out of a sample totaling 73) and 2% in
1834-35 (out of 53); in New York, 11% in 1800-1805 (out of 18) and none in 1834-1835 (out of 37); and in South
Carolina, 4% in 1800-1805 (out of 24) and 6.5 % in 1830-1835 (out of 46).

21
charter early enough in the political battle between Federalists and Democratic Republicans to
slip under the wire, and even it professed a charitable purpose when its charter came under fire.
In theory, if not always in practice, corporations were from the outset supposed to stay out of
politics.

Legislative Constraints on the Corporate Rights of Disfavored Groups, 1790-1820
The notion that religious, educational, and charitable associations served the public good
also justified a measure of governmental control over them. Even in the case of Protestant
churches and other highly favored organizations, acts of incorporation often included limits on
the amount of property they could own or the number of years their charters remained valid.59
New York’s 1784 general act of incorporation for churches contained such detailed prescriptions
about ecclesiastical governance -- including procedures for democratically deciding which
church members could vote, how corporate trustees would be elected, and how to determine the
salaries of clergymen -- that leaders of Episcopal and Dutch Reformed churches mounted a
thirty-year campaign for changes that would accommodate their more hierarchical church
polities.60 Charitable and educational corporations serving the general public were typically
subject to additional governmental constraints. Massachusetts General Hospital, for example,
was required to offer free admission to the indigent, and many private colleges including
59

On the limits typically placed on early corporations, see Pauline Maier, “Revolutionary Origins,” pp. 76-77. On
property limits for church corporations, see Sarah Barringer Gordon, "The First Disestablishment: Limits on Church
Power and Property Before the Civil War," University of Pennsylvania Law Review 162 (2013-14): 307-372. A few
of many other types of examples include: Beaufort Library Society (income limited to $5,000 and a term limit of 14
years), South Carolina Session Laws, 1807, pp. 244-45; American Antiquarian Society (income limited to $1,500
and personal property to $7,000), Massachusetts Session Laws, 1812, Ch. 69, pp. 142-42; Baltimore Bible Society
(income limited to $3000), Maryland Session Laws, 1813, p. 15; Humane Society in New York (income limited to
$3,000), New York Session Laws, 37th sess., 1814, Ch. 9, pp. 12-14; Handel and Hayden Society (personal property
and real estate each limited to $50,000), Massachusetts Session Laws, 1816, Ch. 78, pp. 85-86.
60
The initial act is contained in New York Session Laws, 7th Session (1784), Chap. 18, pp. 613-618. Churches that
did not conform to the law in the meantime received special charters. For the successive revisions, see New York
Session Laws, 16th Session (1793), Ch. 40, p. 433; New York Session Laws, 36th Session, 1813, Chap. 60, Vol. 2,
pp. 212-19.

22
Harvard and Yale needed to reserve seats on their boards for public officials until the 1860s and
1870s.61
Legislatures subjected the charter applications of associations run by socially and
politically marginal people to far more discriminatory treatment. Regardless of which party
dominated the state government, lawmakers often saw such organizations as raising the specter
of social disorder and were reluctant to extend the same entity and personhood rights that they
routinely granted to mainstream associations with similar goals. Catholic churches, for
example, were routinely compromised by the Protestant bias towards lay ecclesiastical control
that prevented high-ranking clergy from organizing as “corporations sole” -- a corporate form
that in Europe had long made it possible for bishops to rule over their dioceses.62 Instead,
Catholic parishes in the United States that incorporated were forced to entrust church property to
local groups of trustees who lacked official religious authority.63 More direct forms of
discrimination undercut the efforts of laborers, blacks, ethnic minorities, and women who formed
organizations to pursue otherwise acceptable educational and charitable purposes. For several
decades beginning in the 1790s, members of socially subordinate groups submitted a growing
number of petitions for charters. The Northeastern state legislatures ruling on these petitions
often either rejected them outright or attached special provisions to reduce the corporate rights
that charters ordinarily conferred.
61

“An Act to Incorporate Certain Persons by the Name of the Massachusetts General Hospital,” in Laws of the
Commonwealth, from February 28, 1807 to …1814 (Boston: Thomas and Andrews, 1814); John S. Whitehead, The
Separation of College and State: Columbia, Dartmouth, Harvard and Yale, 1776-1876 (New Haven: Yale UP, 1973,
pp. 191-240.
62
F.W. Maitland, “The Corporation Sole,” The Law Quarterly Review 16 (October1900): 335-54.
63
Bruce A. Campbell, “The Constitutional Position of Nonprofit Corporations in Nineteenth-Century America,”Law
and History Review 8 (Fall 1990), pp. 155-56. In one Pennsylvania case of 1822, this situation even gave rebellious
lay members of St. Mary’s Church an opening to try, albeit unsuccessfully, to revise the corporate charter to
altogether exclude priests. Case of the Corporation of St. Mary’s Church (Roman Catholic) in the City of
Philadelphia (PA 1822) 7 Serg. & Rawle 517. In antebellum Massachusetts, where Irish immigration inflamed
Protestant nativism in the 1840s and 50s, a legislative investigation also led to the rejection of a Jesuit college’s bid
for incorporation in 1849. For a scathing contemporary attack on the negative report, see Brownson’s Quarterly
Review, New Series, vol. 3, no. 3 (1849) pp. 372-97.

23
From the time of the Revolution, for example, labor groups experienced exceptional
difficulties procuring charters because of longstanding worries by public officials about their
potential to control wages. Two organizations of artisans formed in the late eighteenth century,
one in Boston to prevent apprentices from quitting before their contracts expired and the other in
New York to regulate the members’ “affairs and business,” were repeatedly denied charters on
the grounds that they were “combinations” aiming to set “extravagant prices for labor.”64 A
newspaper article written in 1792 by “A Friend to Equal Rights” bemoaned the fact that banks
received “every attention” whereas the mechanics’ “wish to be incorporated [has] been treated
with contempt and neglect.”65 It soon became clear that corporate status for these and other
labor organizations, as well as many associations of ethnic minorities, depended on persuading
state lawmakers, regardless of the party in power, that they were exclusively “charitable” mutual
benefit societies dedicated to providing aid to sick or impoverished members (or, when deceased,
their widows and children), and, occasionally, to offering instruction in their trades.66 In 1816,
when the New York Typographical Society attempted to deviate from this formula by adding to

64

The Council of Revision of the State of New York, ed. Alfred B. Street (Albany: William Gould, 1859), pp. 261264; quotes on pp. 261, 263; and Joseph T. Buckingham, Annals of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic
Association (Boston: Crocker and Brewster, 1853), esp. pp. 8-9, 50,57-58, 95-96. The quote is from a later edition,
Annals of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, 1795-1892 (Boston: Rockwell and Churchill, 1892),
p. 2). Charters of these two organizations were finally granted in 1792 (New York) and 1806 (Boston). Alfred F.
Young, The Democratic Republicans of New York, pp. 201-202, 250; New York Session Laws, 15th leg session,
1792, Ch. 26, pp. 300-303; Buckingham, Annals, pp. 57, 95-96; Massachusetts Session Laws, February, March
Session, 1806, p. 91.
65
Young, Democratic Republicans, p. 201, quoting from the New York Journal, March 30, 1791.
66
For citations to other New York labor charters granted between 1790 and 1820, see below. Our systematic
analysis focuses on New York since that state granted labor groups the most charters, but other states also
periodically passed restrictive charters for them in this period, for example: The Newburyport Mechanick
Association, in Massachusetts Session Laws, January Session, 1810, pp. 139-140 (“for charitable purposes; but …
for no other purpose whatsoever”); The Stanton Benevolent Mechanic Society, in Virginia Session Laws, 1818,
December Session, Ch. 93, pp. 138-139 (forbidden to pass bylaws “for regulating trade, or the wages of labor”). In
Pennsylvania, where the Bricklayers’ Company was incorporated in 1797 under the general law as a “charitable
society,” the group’s unpublished bylaws deviated from its charter by including “some general rules for measuring,
and standard prices for valuation,” suggesting a surreptitious purpose concealed from official view. See George L.
Wrenn III, “The Bricklayers Company of the City and County of Philadelphia,” Bulletin of the Association for
Preservation Technology, Vol 3, No. 4 (1971), pp. 73-75.

24
its list of objectives the goal of improving conditions of labor, the legislature rejected the bill,
passing it only two years later when this provision had been removed.67
When labor groups managed to secure charters, the acts of incorporation often contained
threats of dire consequences should they stray from their declared purposes of mutual aid and
education. In New York, where the largest number of “mechanics” and journeymen groups were
incorporated before 1820 (largely owing to the power of Democratic Republicans), the three
earliest acts up to 1805 included the unusual requirement that the groups report to the Chancellor
to prove that funds were not being diverted to other purposes.68 A little later this reporting
requirement was dropped, but six of the thirteen New York charters issued between 1807 and
1818 contained extra provisions that specifically forbade the enactment of bylaws or rules
“respecting the rate of wages, or relative to [their] business.”69 In addition, virtually every
corporate grant made by the state to a labor group before 1820 imposed extreme punishments for
the pursuit of unapproved objectives. Whereas it was normal for states to reserve the right to

67

George A. Stevens, History of New York Typographical Union No. 6 (Albany: J.B. Lyon, 1913), p. 78. Stevens
states that the initial bill contained a “provision permitting the association to regulate trade matters.” The official
records of New York’s Assembly, which contain few specifics, report that the problem lay in the “first enacting
clause” and that the revised petition contained a “modification” as to the corporation’s “intention.” Journal of the
Assembly of the State of New York, at their Fortieth Session (Albany: J. Buel, 1817), p. 260; Journal of the Assembly
of the State of New York, at their Forty-First Session (Albany: J. Buel, 1818), p. 195. In the Senate, the 1818 vote to
accept the revised bill was still close (12 to 10). Journal of the Senate of the State of New-York, at their Forty-First
Session (Albany: J. Buel, 1818) pp.87-88. In 1816, the Senate also rejected another labor group’s petition for
incorporation, for reasons that are not clear. Journal of the Senate of the State of New-York, at their Thirty-Ninth
Session (Albany: J. Buel, 1816) p. 235.
68
Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of New York City (1792), New York Session Laws, 15th leg session, 1792,
Ch. 26, pp. 300-03; Albany Mechanics Society (1801), General Index of the Laws of the State of New York, 17771857, ed. T.S. Gillett (Albany: Weed, Parsons & Company, 1859), p. 171; Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of
Kings County (1805), New York Session Laws, 1804, 28th legislative session, Ch. 86, pp. 208-11.
69
New-York Masons’ Society (1807), New York Session Laws, 30th leg., 1807, Ch. 9, pp. 8-10.; New-York Society
of Journeymen Shipwrights (1807), New York Session Laws, 30th leg., 1807, Ch. 116, p. 130-32.; Mutual Benefit
Society of Cordwainers of New York (1808), New York Session Laws, 31st leg., 1808, Ch. 20, pp. 10-15; General
Society of Mechanics in Poughkeepsie (1808), New York Session Laws, 31st leg., 1808, Ch. 235, pp. 254-57;
Butchers’ Benevolent Society of New –York (1815), New York Session Laws, 38th leg., 1815, pp. 59-60; New York
Typographical Society (1818), New York Session Laws, 41st Session, 1818, Ch. 17, pp.13-15.

25
dissolve corporations that exceeded their mandates, the charters given to labor groups stipulated
that the state could, in addition, confiscate all corporate property.70
These unusually constricting conditions of incorporation imposed on artisans reflected a
more pervasive hostility towards organized labor that pervaded early nineteenth-century
American law. In response to several strikes by journeymen, American courts drew on
repressive features of the British common law to indict members of unincorporated labor groups
on charges of “criminal conspiracy” to fix wages.71 Although no state legislature outlawed
“combinations” of workmen by statute, as Parliament did in the 1790s, the acceptance of
criminal conspiracy law by the judiciary amounted to the denial of the basic right to associate.
The reluctance of legislators to incorporate labor groups left them more vulnerable to the court’s
hostility. When a lawyer for striking Philadelphia cordwainers during the first conspiracy trial of
1806 claimed that workers’ organizations had the same collective rights to make rules for their
members as a corporation, the argument went nowhere, nipped in the bud by prosecutor’s
rejoinder that “this body of journeymen are not an incorporated society [italics in original]
whatever may have been represented,” because corporate status depended upon having
“benevolent purposes.”72
Charitable and educational associations organized in the Northeast by European ethnic
groups, African Americans, and women also encountered resistance when they attempted to
incorporate, albeit to a lesser extent, and they received similarly restrictive charter provisions.
Most of the New York charters granted to mutual benefit groups formed by recent immigrant

70

This language was written into the charters of 85% (11 out of a total of 13) laborers’ fraternal benefit groups
incorporated between1790-1819.
71
Christopher L.Tomlins, Law, Labor, and Ideology in the Early American Republic (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1993).
72
The Trial of the Boot & Shoemakers of Philadelphia on an Indictment for a Combination and Conspiracy to Raise
their Wages (Philadelphia: B. Graves, 1806), p. 8.

26
groups and free blacks in the first decades of the nineteenth century contained the same threat of
property confiscation commonly directed at labor groups. If the group were to pursue any
“purposes other than those intended and contemplated by this act,” the bills stipulated, the
corporation would “cease” and its “estate real and personal” would “vest in the people of this
state.”73 The 1808 act that incorporated the New York Society for Promoting the Manumission
of Slaves for the purpose of facilitating the funding of its charity school for black children and
other “benevolent purposes” contained this provision as well.74 A report issued by the New
York’s Council of Revision was unusually explicit in expressing anxiety about chartering
immigrant groups. Explaining the veto of an act of incorporation for a German mutual aid
society, the councilors proclaimed that “it will be productive of the most fatal evils to the State”
to encourage “foreigners differing from the old citizens in language and manners, ignorant of our
Constitution and totally unacquainted with the principles of civil liberty” and would “establish a
precedent under which the emigrants from every nation in Europe, Asia, and Africa, who incline
to seek an asylum in this State …[will] claim similar establishments.”75
An analogous fear of social disorder underlay the initial hesitation to charter charities run
by middle-class women. The Boston Female Asylum, founded in 1800, at first met frustration
when seeking to incorporate in 1803. In the vitriolic words of a newspaper critic, “the

73

77% (7 out of 9) of European ethnic and all (2 out of 2) of free black fraternal benefit groups incorporated prior to
1820 contained this language. A comparison to other types of New York “religious and charitable” corporations,
1780-1848, based on a random sample of 71 organizations from the General Index, pp. 171-174, found this
provision in 60% of other (non-labor, non-ethnic) fraternal groups; 60% of non-fraternal charities; and in none of the
religious or educational societies. A word search in HeinOnline sessions laws found this language in many state
franchises like turnpikes which operated on public land. Otherwise, the provision was virtually nonexistent in
charters of business corporations. At least one early charter of an ethnic benefit association, the German Society in
New York City, incorporated in 1804, included in addition a reporting requirement like those in the first charters
granted to labor benefit groups. New York Session Laws, 27th leg., 1804, Ch. 64, p. 609.
74
“Act to incorporate the Society, formed in the State of New-York, for promotion the Manumission of Slaves, and
protecting such of them as have been or may be liberated,” New York Session Laws, 31st Legislature, 1808, Chap.
19, pp. 256-58.
75
The Council of Revision of the State of New York, ed. Alfred B. Street (Albany: William Gould, 1859), p. 273.

27
consequences, which will naturally result from it, must be hostile to the peace of society, and to
the regularity and harmony of families.”76 When the charter was finally secured, it contained a
passage compensating for the fact that married women could not be sued, requiring that wives
who handled organizational funds procure their husbands’ consent and that their husbands take
responsibility for any property of the organization they handled. Another section held that the
treasurer always be a single woman with enough personal resources to “give bond, with
sufficient surety or sureties” to cover “all money and property of said society coming to her
hands.” 77 Charters of women’s charitable groups in Massachusetts contained this language
routinely for decades.78 Pennsylvania charters of the period similarly stipulated that only single
women could serve as treasurers, a provision that protected husbands from suits but also
prevented wives from assuming positions of fiscal leadership.79 But the corporate rights of
women depended on the specific language of charters, and states did not always so readily defer
to the law of coverture. In New York, the acts that incorporated women’s organizations between
1800 and 1840 typically exempted the husbands of members from financial responsibility, an
approach that contrasted with Massachusetts and Pennsylvania and presumably meant to
encourage men to allow wives to participate.80 Either way, lawmakers remained convinced for

76

As quoted in Wright, The Transformation of Charity, p. 114.
Massachusetts Session Laws, January Session, 1803, Ch. 64, pp.122-24 (relevant sections on p. 123).
78
As stressed by Lori D. Ginzburg, Women and the Work of Benevolence (New Haven: Yale University Press)
1990), pp. 51-53; and McCarthy, American Creed, p. 41. All five of the Massachusetts charters we identified
between 1803 and 1816 contained this provision. See also: Massachusetts Session Laws, May Session, 1804, Ch. 23,
pp. 517-18; January Session, 1805, Ch. 62, pp. 619-620; January Session, 1811, Ch. 70, pp. 229-300; November
Session, 1816, Ch. 63, pp. 294-97.
79
McCarthy, American Creed, p. 41.
80
See, for example, the charters of the following New York organizations issued between 1802 and 1838: The
Society for the Relief of Poor Widows with Small Children, New York Session Laws, 25th sess., 1802, Ch. 99, p.
158; The Association for the Relief of Respectable, Aged, Indigent Females in the City of New-York, New York
Session Laws, 38th sess., 1814, Ch. 69, pp. 74-76; The Female Assistance Society, New York Session Laws, 40th
sess., 1816, Ch. 207, p. 245; and The Association for the Benefit of Colored Orphans in the city of New York, New
York Session Laws, 61st sess., 1838, Ch. 232, p. 213).
77

28
decades that husbands required an extra layer of protection from the distinctive risks posed by
incorporated associations of women.81
Despite the legal disadvantages of marriage, middle-class women in most places quickly
overcame the initial resistance to their organizing. Aided by emergent cultural assumptions about
the superiority of female virtue, women’s groups that stuck to activities like the distribution of
Bibles and the care and moral uplift of indigent mothers and children secured charters in large
numbers during the first half of the nineteenth century.82 By the 1830s, the provisions designed
to protect husbands from suits had, moreover, largely been dropped.83 State legislatures
concerned about the inadequacy of public poor relief not only welcomed the help of respectable
women but also became more likely to give charters to working-class and immigrant mutual-aid
societies without attaching special restrictions.84 The socially stabilizing effects of charitable
and self-help organizations largely overrode the initial fears of lawmakers that artisans, ethnic
minorities, and women would use corporate rights to subvert the social order. This is not to say
81

It is puzzling why states included these various provisions at all. The rule of limited liability for members of
corporations was gradually becoming an established feature of American law during this period and presumably
would have offered husbands automatic protection against suits by corporate creditors. Many charters for business
corporations specified the liability of members, thereby overriding the rule, but none of these charters did so. One
possible explanation for the provisions is that coverture raised extra doubts about the sufficiency of the rule to
protect husbands, particularly since American courts did not fully establish it until the mid-1820s. The phrasing of
some of the charters also suggests another concern not covered by limited liability: that a wife’s possible
mishandling of funds risked a suit by the corporation itself (rather than a suit by a creditor against the corporation).
Charters addressing a wife’s possible “neglect or malfeasance” include the New York charters, cited above, and in a
charter for the Savannah Female Asylum, in Georgia Session Laws, 1809, Annual Session, Section 6, p. 60. On the
rise of limited liability in the early U.S., see Oscar Handlin and Mary F. Handlin, “Origins of the American Business
Corporation,” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 5, No. 1 (May, 1945), pp. 8-17; Edwin J. Perkins, American
Public Finance and Financial Services, 1700-1815 (Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press, 1994), pp. 37376.
82
Ginzburg, Women and the Work of Benevolence, pp. 48-53; Cott, Bonds of Womanhood, pp. 52-53. On the rise in
perceptions of female virtue, see Ruth H. Bloch, Gender and Morality in Anglo-American Culture, 1650-1800
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
83
The Massachusetts provisions, which appeared consistently in at least five charters between 1803 and 1816, were
eliminated for seemingly the first time in a charter of 1821 (Massachusetts Session Laws, May Session, 1821, Ch.
11, pp. 577-578). They thereafter appeared intermittently, apparently ceasing altogether in 1838. Massachusetts
Session Laws, January Session, 1829, Ch. 115, pp. 188-89; January Session, 1834, Chs. 30 and 163, pp. 30-31 and
228; and January Session, 1836, Ch. 133, p. 814-15.
84
The last highly restrictive charter we found was New York’s 1818 charter for the Typographical Society (New
York Session Laws, 41st Session, 1818, Ch. 17, pp.13-15).

29
that government officials had altogether lost their distaste for chartering organizations that
professed beneficial purposes and yet stirred public controversies.85 But the barriers to
incorporation that previously stood in the way of otherwise acceptable organizations composed
of low status members largely, if not fully, came down.

Judicial Constraints on the Corporate Right of Self-Governance, 1800-1850
In the early nineteenth century courts, as well as legislatures, had powers over
corporations that they could use to constrain the rights of politically suspicious voluntary
associations. Virtually all the suits involving incorporated groups that rose to the appellate level
during this period originated in internal conflicts over matters of governance. They were brought
by members (or ex-members), not creditors or outside purveyors, whose complaints were about
organizational rules, not debts or damages. States routinely gave corporations the right to enact
bylaws that were legally binding on members, but charters rarely offered explicit guidance on
governance apart from mandating the election of officers. Judges therefore had room to interpret
whether an organization’s right to self-governance permitted the enactment of a particular
regulation or procedure. As virtually all of these cases reveal, courts proved particularly inclined
to take an aggrieved member seriously when the complaint touched on issues of wider political
significance or the organization’s activities threatened to disturb the status quo.86 Whereas

85

Our discussion of the late nineteenth century will return to the subject of ethnic discrimination. In the 1830s and
40s, the best examples of states’ political use of their chartering powers are decisions by Vermont, Rhode Island,
and Massachusetts to revoke or revise charters previously given to Masonic lodges at the peak of the Anti-Masonic
crusade; and Massachusetts’ shelving of a petition for incorporation by a Jesuit college in the midst of Protestant
nativist reactions against the Irish immigration of the 1840s. On the Masonic charters, see Neem, Creating, pp. 11213; Vermont Session Laws, 1830, Ch. 42, p. 54; and Rhode Island Session Laws, January, 1834, pp. 54-56. On the
the Jesuit college, see Brownson’s Quarterly Review, New Series, vol. 3, no. 3 (1849) pp. 372-97.
86
Of the eight early appellate cases we found in which judges overturned the internal governance procedures of
voluntary associations (most of them in the 1800’s and 1810’s), seven involved either New England church-state
controversies or disputes within politically controversial Pennsylvania and South Carolina religious and fraternal
corporations. The only case we found with no evident political significance was Commonwealth v. Pennsylvania

30
voluntary associations without charters were usually free to govern themselves unless they
advocated breaking the law, suspect voluntary groups that became incorporated traded the upside
of other corporate benefits, like property ownership, for the downside of potential judicial
interference.
Despite the constitutional guarantee of freedom of worship, the conviction that
corporations were accountable to the government even threatened the autonomy of churches. In
New England, where the colonial ecclesiastical establishments hung on for decades, the idea that
the state should oversee the governance of church corporations died especially hard. The
Massachusetts Supreme Court in 1807 went so far as to overturn the people of Tyringham’s
decision to fire the minister of their incorporated church because they no longer adhered to his
orthodox beliefs. The bench forbade the removal of a minister without proof that he had grossly
violated his office, despite the state’s 1780 constitutional provision giving “all societies
incorporated for religious purposes” the right to elect clergymen.87 In Connecticut, court
decisions in 1793 and 1816 similarly sought to protect the Congregational Standing Order by
restricting the corporate right of parish majorities to run their own churches.88
Ecclesiastical disestablishment in New England soon eliminated the official privileges of
Congregationalists, but corporate status nonetheless continued to offer a justification for judges

Beneficial Institution, 2 Serge. & Rawle 141 (1815). A contrasting interpretation of judicial intent is offered in
Kevin Butterfield’s Making of Tocqueville’s America, in which Binns and several Philadelphia mutual aids cases of
the 1810s are described as examples of courts protecting the individual rights of members. See Butterfield, Making
of Tocqueville’s America, pp. 68-76,151-162. Apart from Binns, however, only two of the cases resulted in actual
verdicts, with notably mixed results: Commonwealth v. Pennsylvania Beneficial Institution, noted above, favored the
individual, but the decision in The Commonwealth vs. The Philanthropic Society, 5 Binn. 486 (1813) favored the
corporation. This chapter not only underscores the political nature of the early judicial interventions but also argues,
contrary to Butterfield, that American courts in later decadesp increasingly deferred to the governance rights of
associations, not individuals.
87
Avery v. Inhabitants of Tyringham (MA 1807) 3 Mass. 160. In a slightly later case the Massachusetts Court
similarly held that a town could not fire its established minister without the consent of a customary “council”
consisting of ministers from other towns. See Cochran v. Inhabitants of Camden (MA 1818) 15 Mass. 296.
88
Howard v. Waldo (CT 1793) 1 Root 538; Chapman v. Gillet (CT 1816) 2 Conn. 40.

31
who favored Congregationalism to intervene in religious disputes. The best example is the wellknown Vermont case Smith v. Nelson of 1846, in which the Vermont’s Supreme Court refused to
enforce the Presbyterian synod’s dismissal of a minister chosen by a local Presbyterian church.89
Reversing a contrary lower court ruling, the justices defended the preferences of the church
against the decision of the higher ecclesiastical body on the grounds that the church was a
“corporate body” in which members were entitled to elect their own leaders. In the eyes of the
court, the synod possessed no legal governance power despite the denomination’s own rules. The
description of the local church as a corporation apparently derived from New England custom
rather than from any concrete evidence of registration. Technically, the battles over
disestablishment were over, but behind the justices’ distaste for the Presbyterian organizational
hierarchy, and its reflexive support for local church autonomy, clearly lurked a lingering
Congregationalist bias.
Even in Pennsylvania, where religious freedom had prevailed since the colony’s
founding, the corporate status of churches provided an opening for state intervention. Two
church cases decided in 1815 and 1817 stand out as particularly egregious examples of judicial
meddling in the internal governance of nonprofit corporations. Whereas the examples from New
York and New England reflected longstanding rivalries between denominations over matters of
church polity, these Pennsylvania cases reflected conflicts over race and ethnicity that extended
well beyond ecclesiastical disputes. The growth of Philadelphia’s population of free blacks and
the arrival of Irish and German immigrants exacerbated deep-seated social tensions that played
out in the religious organizations formed by minority groups. In 1794 the African American
members of Philadelphia’s Methodist Church formed their own house of worship, the Bethel

89

Smith v. Nelson (VT 1846) 18 Vt. 511. For a similar ruling against a higher unincorporated body of the Methodist
Church, see Methodist Church v. Remington (PA 1832) 1 Watts 218.

32
Church of African Methodists, in response to acts of discrimination such as being forced to sit in
the back. White leaders in the original church corporation continued, however, to control the
church’s property and the selection and pay of its visiting preachers.90 Under the leadership of
its minister Richard Allen, Bethel tried in 1807 to amend its loosely worded charter of 1796, but
when an expelled member, Robert Green, petitioned for a writ of mandamus to restore him to
membership (a legal action specific to corporations), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court treated the
church as subject to the corporate bylaws of the original Methodist Church “by which the
African society is governed.”91 Green had been thrown out of the church by Allen and Bethel’s
deacons for breaking a standard Methodist rule against suing another member. Since
Pennsylvania gave basic corporate rights to all churches, including the power “to make rules,
bylaws, and ordinances and to do everything needful for the good government and affairs of the
said corporations,” the legality of the rule was not itself in doubt.92 Rather, Green and his white
allies maintained that Bethel’s officers lacked the authority to enforce the church’s rules. Only if
the majority of the parent corporation’s membership had explicitly transferred the power of
expulsion “by the fundamental articles, or some by-law founded on these articles,” the court
agreed, would the decision by “a select number” be legal.93

90

A short first-person account is in The Doctrines and Discipline of the African Methodist Episcopal Church
(Philadelphia: Richard Allen and Jacob Tapsico, 1817), pp. 4-9. Gary B. Nash, Forging Freedom: the Formation of
Philadelphia’s Black Community, 1720-1840 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988); Sarah Barringer
Gordon, "The African Supplement: Religion, Race, and Corporate Law in Early National America," William and
Mary Quarterly, 3d ser., 72, no. 3, July 2015): 385-422.
91
Green v. African Meth. Society 1 Serg. & Rawle 254 (PA 1815), at 254. Richard S. Newman, Freedom’s Prophet:
Bishop Richard Allen, the AME Church, and the Black Founding Fathers (New York: NYU Press, 2008), pp. 159160. A year after this negative ruling Bethel Church finally received a special charter, and a later ruling in a similar
case endorsed the church’s own disciplinary procedures.
92
For the general law, see Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania from … [Oct. 14, 1700 to March 20, 1810],
4 vols. (Philadelphia: John Bioren, 1810), vol. 3, p. 21.
93
Green v. African Meth. Society, quote at 255. In a reference to English corporate law, the concurring opinion
stressed failure of the Bethel leadership to “set forth the particular facts precisely upon an amotion out of a
corporation.” (at 255).

33
In 1817, the Pennsylvania Court went to similarly remarkable lengths to sort out the
irregularities in a disputed election within Philadelphia’s German Lutheran church that caused an
eruption of “tumult and violence.”94 Once again, the church was split between bitterly opposed
factions and the conflict reflected deep social divisions within the city. German immigrant
members who wanted church services conducted in their native language had won the election,
and the more assimilated, English-speaking members enlisted a state prosecutor to challenge the
legality of the vote. The lower court issued a blatantly anti-immigrant ruling, contending that
unnaturalized foreign residents had no more right to vote in church corporations than they did in
the wider polity. Upon appeal, the justices in the Supreme Court rejected that argument by
noting the essential difference between “religious and political incorporations,” but they, too,
ruled against the immigrants. Rather than rely on any specific provision of the church’s charter,
which called for elections but said nothing about voting procedures, the court ruled that the
election had in principle violated the terms of incorporation. The justices, deriving their notion
of a fair election from other corporations as well as political life, especially objected to the fact
that the immigrant faction had distributed marked ballots to their constituency (a practice that,
ironically, American political parties would make standard within two decades). Had the church
not been incorporated, it is clear that the case would never have found its way into court. The
same bench dismissed a similar case brought by a faction of Methodists because their church had
not become a corporation sufficiently in advance of the suit.95
The use of corporate status to justify intervention can also be seen in early nineteenthcentury cases involving controversial fraternal associations. Like churches, fraternal societies

94

Commonwealth v. Woelper (PA 1817)) 3 Serg. & Rawle 29.
Commonwealth v. Murray (PA 1824) 11 Serg. & Rawle 73. This opinion cites Woelper and another Pennsylvania
case of 1820, Commonwealth v. Cain, 5 Serg. & Rawle 510, in which the court intervened within a church
corporation to settle a dispute over pews.
95

34
were more fully private than most other types of nonprofit corporations in this period. Not only
were their benefits directed primarily to their own members rather than a wider public, but,
unlike churches, their selective admissions policies and secret practices meant that their internal
affairs were almost entirely removed from outside scrutiny. Both their exclusiveness and their
visible displays of high-minded patriotism upon civic occasions conferred social status to those
who belonged, and, in most parts of the country, Masonic lodges and numerous smaller
fraternities attracted growing numbers of elite and upwardly mobile middle-class men. Their
pledges of mutual assistance gave a charitable dimension to their purposes that frequently
enabled them, like groups of artisans, to secure charters. But along with corporate status came
the ability of disgruntled members who disagreed with the leadership to bring their grievances
into courts.96
Oaths of secrecy kept such suits to a minimum, but at least two cases about the internal
governance rights of fraternal associations rose to the level of state supreme courts, one in
Pennsylvania in 1810 and one in South Carolina in 1813. As in the cases involving church
corporations, the courts conceived of their role as enforcing corporate charters. The involvement
of the legal system was, once again, socially and politically charged because the trials
jeopardized the reputations and relationships of prominent citizens.
In Commonwealth v. St. Patrick’s Society, John Binns, a member of an Irish fraternal
group in Philadelphia who had been thrown out in 1807 for “vilifying” another member, went to
court to challenge his expulsion.97 The man whom Binns had insulted was no less than the
96

On the early American Masons, see Steven C. Bullock, Revolutionary Brotherhood: Freemasonry and the
Transformation of the American Social Order, 1730-1840 (Chapel Hill: University of North Caroline Press, 1996);
Steven C. Bullock, Revolutionary Brotherhood: Freemasonry and the Transformation of the American Social
Order, 1730-1840 (Chapel Hill: University of North Caroline Press, 1996). By 1825, at least thirteen states had
incorporated either state or local Masonic lodges. At the height of the Anti-Masonic movement in the early 1830s,
three New England states temporarily revoked or revised their charters, but had by the 1860s reinstated them.
97
Commonwealth v. St. Patrick’s Society (PA 1810) 5 Binn. 486.

35
society’s president, William Duane.98 As the editor of Philadelphia’s leading Jeffersonian
newspaper, The Aurora, Duane had long been a leader of Philadelphia’s Irish radicals and
frequently spoke out against the Federalist judiciary and the English common law. Binns, a
recent Irish immigrant, was allied with rural Republicans and had recently challenged Duane’s
authority by moving to Philadelphia and founding a rival newspaper supporting the aspiring
“country” candidate for governor, Simon Snyder. As tensions mounted, Duane and his allies
successfully ousted Binns from several other Irish associations without charters, but since St.
Patrick’s was a corporation, Binns possessed legal leverage to retaliate. By 1810, when the case
finally came before the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, Binns’ political fortunes had risen with
Snyder’s election in 1808, and Duane’s campaign against the court system had petered out after
the government enacted a few minor reforms.99 Technically, the justices’ decision to adjudicate
this dispute stemmed from the society’s limited rights as a corporation, not from Duane’s hostile
stance towards the bench or Binns’ increased influence. Even though St. Patrick’s members had
approved a bylaw forbidding rude behavior long before the expulsion of Binns, the justices
adhered to a narrow, literal reading of the corporation’s right to self-governance and reinstated
Binns’ membership.100 Any expulsion was invalid, the court held, unless the offending member
broke the law of the state, violated a rule that explicitly appeared in the charter, or interfered
directly with the objects of the society. Rejecting the corporation’s argument that cooperation
among members was essential to the group’s mission, the opinion declared that “vilifying a
98

Kim T. Phillips, “William Duane, Philadelphia's Democratic Republicans, and the Origins of Modern Politics,”
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 101 (July 1977): 365-387; David A. Wilson, United Irishmen,
United States: Immigrant Radicals in the Early Republic (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1998), pp. 72-76; and
Butterfield, Making of Toqueville’s America, pp. 68-76. Butterfield’s view of the case as a prime example of courts
granting members of associations increased individual rights is at odds with our stress on the politics of legal
intervention and the growing rights of uncontroversial associations (often at the expense of individual rights), as we
elaborate below.
99
Wilson, United Irishmen, p. 74; Elizabeth K. Henderson, "The Attack on the Judiciary in Pennsylvania, 18001810," Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 61 (April 1937): 113-136.
100
[Anon.], The Constitution of the St. Patrick Benevolent Society (Philadelphia: no publisher, 1804). pp. 5-6.

36
member, or a private quarrel, is totally unconnected with the affairs of the society, and therefore
its punishment cannot be necessary for the good government of the corporation.”101
For decades, the Binns precedent carried considerable weight in court decisions about
expulsions from incorporated voluntary associations. The same Pennsylvania court upheld an
expulsion for fraud in 1813, distinguishing the facts from the Binns precedent in part because the
group’s charter -- rather than merely its bylaws -- explicitly forbade “scandalous and improper”
behavior.102 Perhaps in response to Binns, New York’s General Society of Mechanics and
Tradesmen also added such a provision when renewing its 1792 charter in 1811, declaring that
“notorious, scandalous, wicked practice” was subject to expulsion.103 In Connecticut, an
expulsion case of 1827 similarly hinged on the precise terms of incorporation. The court
reinstated an ousted trustee of a private school corporation because its charter had not authorized
expulsion for “disrespectful and contemptuous language towards his associates.”104
In a South Carolina case, which, like Binns, involved a prominent fraternal association
whose members were closely tied to the political world, the Chancery Court enforced a charter
belonging to the Grand Lodge of South-Carolina Ancient York Masons in a manner that
similarly overrode its internally chosen leadership. 105 South Carolina at the time contained two
competing Grand Lodges, the consequence of a mid-eighteenth-century split within international
Masonry. Both lodges incorporated shortly after the Revolution. At the root of the case was an
agreement by the rival Grand Masters to mend the schism by merging the two organizations
101

Commonwealth v. St. Patrick’s Society, at 450.
The Commonwealth vs. The Philanthropic Society (PA 1813) 5 Binn. 486. The last case to directly follow the
precedent of Binns seems to have been Evans v. Philadelphia Club (PA 1865) 50 Pa. 107. Many other case reports
erroneously described the 1810 decision as chiefly involving financial issues. As noted below, courts increasingly
refused to reverse expulsions from fraternal associations unless the former member had lost promised death or sick
benefits and the organization had violated its own governance rules.
103
New York Session Laws, 34th session, 1811, Ch. 113, p. 195.
104
Fuller v. Trustees School Plainfield, (CT 1827) 6 Conn. 532; quote at p. 546.
105
Smith v. Smith (SC 1813) in Henry William DeSaussure, Reports of Cases argued and determined in the Court of
Chancery of the State of South-Carolina (Columbia, S.C.: Cline & Hones, 1817), vol. 3, pp. 557-84.
102

37
under the name the Grand Lodge of South-Carolina. The leaders polled all the subordinate
lodges, which unanimously approved the merger, and then petitioned the state to repeal both the
earlier acts of incorporation and issue a new one. In the meantime, however, a group of lodges
affiliated with the Ancient York Masons bristled at the top-down enactment of “inauthentic”
practices and defected from the consolidated body. The dissidents reorganized themselves into a
separate body and appropriated the name of their former Grand Lodge, the South-Carolina
Ancient York Masons. With the controversy intensifying, the state legislature voted against
dissolving the old corporations and incorporating the new Grand Lodge, but since the continuing
existence of the umbrella group did not require a new charter, each of the two groups claimed to
be the legitimate successor of one or both of the original corporations.
The conflict came to a head when a debt originally owed to the Ancient York Masons
was ordered by a lower court to be paid to the new Grand Lodge of South Carolina. The
dissident Ancient Yorks launched a suit contesting this decision, and the Chancery Court saw
this occasion as a chance to test the legitimacy of the merger. Going far beyond the matter of the
debt, the Chancellor evaluated the contested rules and rituals within the terms of Masonry itself,
taking care to refer to arcane texts like the Ahiman Rezons in his written decision.106 His
attention to such minutia suggests the seriousness with which he took the Masonic split (it is
reasonable to suspect that he, like others in the South Carolina elite, had a personal stake in the
controversy). The opinion, whose logic is largely incomprehensible to an outsider, landed
firmly on the side of the Ancient Yorks, concluding that the referendum organized by the Grand
Masters had been based on deception. The original corporation of the Ancient York Masons had

106

Ibid., pp. 566-71.

38
never been legally dissolved, and the new Grand Lodge had no right to collect the debt because it
was “not a corporate body known to the law.”107
As these examples indicate, the incorporation of voluntary associations during the early
decades of the republic could be both a blessing and a curse. Incorporation gave organizations
valuable entity and personhood rights, but it also required them to submit to the state’s definition
and enforcement of charter rights. Justices adjudicating suits could take issue with the decisions
of internally chosen leaders on matters ranging from personal behavior to electoral procedures to
institutional tradition. Voluntary associations that were not incorporated were rarely, if ever,
subjected to this kind of judicial scrutiny, unless, like labor groups, their members could be
accused of committing crimes. At a time when individual citizens enjoyed an increasing right to
associate and officials generally lacked the administrative capacity to monitor groups on a
routine basis, the government wielded little power over associations. It was the entity right of
corporations to legal standing that brought them into the courts and gave justices an opportunity
to discipline them.
These cases of judicial intervention also underscore the special vulnerability of voluntary
associations regarded as socially or politically controversial.108 Courts were most inclined to
interfere with the self-governance rights of groups posing threats to the status quo because of the
traditional view of corporations as creatures of the state. Especially when a dispute between
members of an organization reflected broader social divisions, a judicial decision to curb the

107

Ibid., pp. 576-82 (quote on p. 581). The Grand Lodge of South Carolina was incorporated in 1815.
Controversial business corporations like banks were, of course, also widely perceived as violating the public
good, but for a variety of reasons too complex to pursue here, business corporations were not as vulnerable to
judicial scrutiny as nonprofit ones. On New York courts’ tendency to ignore business violations of charter terms, see
Hilt, “Early American Corporations and the State,” pp. 20, 32. Our own research for a book in progress suggests that
courts entertained complaints by minority stockholders against corporate managers only in cases of egregious
financial fraud.
108

39
power of corporate leaders could be justified as a defense of the general welfare. This was true
even in the case of corporations that authorities ordinarily viewed as publicly beneficial, like the
South Carolina Masonic Lodges or the German Lutheran Church, when complaints against
internal procedures bore on larger conflicts that authorities wished to contain.
Controversial voluntary associations thus needed to overcome three sets of state-imposed
obstacles before they could exercise the entity and personhood rights ordinarily received by
conventionally acceptable voluntary associations that became corporations. First, they needed to
surmount the legislative barriers blocking access to incorporation; second, they needed to secure
charters without unusually restrictive provisions; and third, they needed to avoid judicial
decisions that curbed their right to self-governance. These obstacles prevented the very groups
that were the most likely to challenge the government from competing on an equal basis with
groups that enjoyed the unreserved approval of courts and legislatures.

Widening of Access Combined with Persistent Constraints, 1830-1900
Over the course of several decades around the middle of nineteenth century, American
lawmakers significantly widened access to the entity and personhood rights of corporations.
Most states in the Northeast, Midwest, and West ended their nearly exclusive reliance on special
charters by enacting more general incorporation laws making it easier for designated categories
of businesses and voluntary associations to become incorporated and removing the taint of
favoritism by giving the same set of rights to organizations within each category.109 The general
109

The South, which had always incorporated fewer voluntary associations, for the most part stuck to special
charters. Of the seventeen states we have identified that passed multi-purpose general acts for nonprofit groups
between 1840 and 1860, twelve were in the Northeast or Midwest and one in the West (California, one of only two
Western states at that time). Alabama and North Carolina were the only states to join the eleven-state Confederacy
that had passed such an act before 1860; the non-Confederate border states of Maryland and Kentucky did so as
well. References to the acts, listed in chronological order, are included in the following footnotes. There was less
regional variation in the case of businesses: for example, general laws for manufacturing firms had been passed

40
laws of this period also moved beyond the earlier focus on narrow types of associations such as
churches and libraries to pull together broader categories like “religious,” “educational,”
“benevolent,” and “charitable” into single pieces of legislation. Despite this general easing of
access, however, the types of groups included within these privileged categories still conformed
to the earlier pattern. Oppositional groups pursuing social and political change generally
experienced the same difficulties acquiring corporate rights as they had in the era of special
charters.
In 1848, New York set the new standards for incorporation by enacting the most
sweeping general act to date. Passed in response to a provision in the Jacksonian-inspired
Constitution of 1846 that mandated general laws for all corporations, it allowed for the
incorporation of “benevolent, charitable, scientific and missionary societies.”110 Before this, the
state’s general incorporation laws covered only a few specific types of voluntary organizations
other than churches -- most notably, colleges and academies, libraries, bible societies, and
medical societies. The state had required special charters for all charities, mutual aid societies,
and fraternal orders, as well as most kinds of religious associations, educational and cultural
groups, and scientific and professional organizations. The loosely defined categories covered by
the general law of 1848 therefore made incorporation much easier for an enormous range and
number of voluntary associations. Nonetheless, because New York’s Constitution still permitted
the legislature to issue special charters if “the objects of the corporation cannot be attained under

throughout the country by 1860. See, in this volume, Eric Hilt, “General Incorporation and the Shift toward Open
Access in the Nineteenth-Century United States.”
110
New York Session Laws, 1848, 71st Legislature, Chap. 319, pp. 447- 449. For the context see Stanley N. Katz,
Barry Sullivan, and C. Paul Beach, “Legal Change and Legal Autonomy: Charitable Trusts in NY, 1777-1893,” Law
and History Review 3 (Spring 1985): 51-89. Other states that also passed general acts in the 1840’s were
Pennsylvania (amending its earlier act), Indiana, and Maine: “An Act relating to Orphans’ Court and Other
Purposes,” Pennsylvania, 1840, Act No. 258, Sections 13-16, pp. 5-7; “An Act to authorize the formation of
Voluntary Associations,” Indiana, 1846, 31st Session, Chap. 45, pp. 97-99; “An Act to Authorize the incorporation
of Charitable and Benevolent Societies,” Maine, 1847, 4th Session, Chap. 1, pp. 27-28.

41
general laws,” the state continued to reward politically favored groups by granting them
permission to exceed the property limits written into the 1848 law.111 Despite this loophole, the
sheer comprehensiveness of the New York law became an important model for other states to
follow. Between 1850 and 1860, California, Ohio, Maryland, North Carolina, New Jersey,
Kentucky, Massachusetts, Iowa, Kansas, Illinois, and Wisconsin passed similarly multi-pronged
incorporation laws encompassing a vast number of acceptable nonprofit groups.112
A handful of these states for the first time even used the generic term “voluntary
associations” in the titles of acts to signal their wide breadth.113 In 1874, Pennsylvania moved
still farther in this direction, dividing its law of corporations into two sections: those “for profit”
and those “not for profit.”114 The not-for-profit category consolidated under one heading a
uniform set of rules for ten different types of organizations ranging from charities to yacht

111

New York, Constitution of 1846, Article 8, Section 1. On the continuance of special charters, see Katz, Sullivan,
and Beach, “Legal Change and Legal Autonomy,” pp. 71, 81-82.
112
"Act Concerning Corporations," California Session Laws, 1st session, passed April 22, 1850; “To Provide for the
Incorporation of Religious and Other Societies.” (including “any religious sect, denomination, or association, fire
company, or any literary, scientific, or benevolent association,” Ohio, Session Laws,1852, pp. 293-294;: “An Act to
provide for the formation of Corporations for Moral, Scientific, Literary, Dramatic, Agricultural or Charitable
purposes…,” Maryland Session Laws, January 1852, chap. 231(no page number); “An Act to Incorporate Literary
Institutions and Benevolent and Charitable Societies,” North Carolina Session Laws, 1852, Chapter 58, pp. 128-129;
“An Act to incorporate benevolent and charitable associations,” New Jersey Session Laws, 77th Legislature, 1853,
Chapter 84, pp. 355-358. “An Act for the incorporation of voluntary associations [approved 1854],” Kentucky,
1853, vol. 1, Chap. 879, pp. 164-165; “An Act to authorize the incorporation of Benevolent and Charitable
Associations,” Alabama Session Laws, 4th Biennial Session, 1854, pp. 282-283; “An act relating to the organization
of Corporations for Educational, Charitable and Religious Purposes,” Massachusetts Session Laws, Acts and
Resolves, January Session, 1856, Chap. 215, pp. 126-27; “An act for the Incorporation of Benevolent, charitable,
scientific or missionary societies,” Iowa Session Laws, 7th General Assembly, 1858, Chapter 131, pp. 253-255; “An
Act to authorize the formation of Voluntary Associations,” Kansas Session Laws, 1858; 4th Session, Chap. 1, pp.
27-28; An Act to Provide for the Incorporation of Benevolent, Charitable, Scientific, and Literary Societies,”
Wisconsin Session Laws, 1860, 13th session, Chapter 47, pp. 131-133. “An Act for the incorporation of Benevolent,
Educational, Literary, Musical, Scientific and Missionary Societies …” Illinois Session Laws,1859, pp. 20-22; “An
Act to incorporate benevolent and charitable associations,” New Jersey Session Laws, 77th Legislature, Chapter 84,
pp. 355-358.
113
Indiana (1846); Kentucky (1853); Kansas (1858).
114
Illinois already in 1872 used the term “not for pecuniary profit” to designate corporations that were neither
businesses nor religious organizations. Illinois Session Laws, 27th General Assembly, 1871, pp. 303-305.

42
clubs.115 Only a glimmer of the earlier notion that corporations should contribute to the public
good still survived. Now it was permissible to form corporations for purely private purposes,
and judges needed merely to verify that a corporation’s purpose was legal and “not injurious to
the community.” This trend towards greater generality and greater permissiveness continued in
most states well into the twentieth century, facilitating the registration of more and more kinds of
American voluntary associations as nonprofit corporations.116
But it is still crucial to recognize that this wider access to corporate rights never
benefitted all types of voluntary associations equally. The seemingly inclusive terms that the
general laws used to define eligibility, like “charitable,” still embraced only a subset of voluntary
associations, and because the laws never stipulated which types they disqualified, the excluded
groups remained largely hidden from view. The anti-Catholic bias against “corporations sole”
silently remained a part of American corporate law for decades.117 States also persisted in
denying corporate rights to a great number of activist voluntary associations outside the social
and political mainstream, including labor unions and radical reform organizations. Laws like
New York’s of 1848 that offered easy incorporation to seemingly broad categories of

115

“An act to provide for the incorporation and regulation of certain corporations” Pennsylvania Session Laws,
General Assembly, 1874, pp. 73-74. An amendment in 1876 expanded the list to include both commercial and trade
organizations and militia companies. Pennsylvania Session Laws, General Assembly, 1876, p. 30.
116
Another early example was Ohio’s revised statutes of 1879 making incorporation possible “for any purpose for
which individuals may lawfully associate themselves, except for dealing in real estate, or carrying on professional
business.” [Ohio], The Revised Statutes and Other Acts … of the State of Ohio, in force January 1, 1880, Vol. I
(Columbus: H.W. Derby and Company, 1879), § 3235, p. 837. On the mid-20th-century culmination of these trends,
see [Anonymous Note], “Permissible Purposes for Nonprofit Corporations,” Columbia Law Review 51 (1951): 88998; James J. Fishman, “The Development of Nonprofit Corporation Law and an Agenda for Reform,” Emory Law
Journal 34 (1885): 617-83.
117
Campbell, “The Constitutional Position of Nonprofit Corporations,” pp. 55-6. Not until 1879 did the
Massachusetts general law for religious organizations finally provide for the indefinite service of high-ranking
Catholic clergymen on the incorporated boards of trustees of Catholic churches and guarantee that their successors
in ecclesiastical office would automatically replace them. The Public Statutes of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts (Boston: Rand, Aberg, and Company, 1882) Part I, Title IX, Ch. 38, § 48, p. 287. As late as 1899, a
Wisconsin ruling held that the Catholic diocese in Milwaukee was subject to taxes because the archbishop held the
land as an individual rather than as a corporation. Katzer v. City of Milwaukee (Wis. 1899) 104 Wis. 16.

43
“charitable,” “benevolent,” and “educational” groups implicitly left out oppositional ones. This
tacit exclusion meant that such groups still needed to submit to the political judgments of elected
officials by petitioning for special charters when they sought corporate rights.
The exclusion of antislavery groups provides an especially telling example of persistent
political discrimination. In addition to being excluded from the categories covered in general
incorporation laws, they also had difficulty acquiring and utilizing special charters. Several
antislavery societies in the North successfully petitioned for acts of incorporation shortly after
the Revolution, but, as we have seen, legislators made sure that their main goals of assisting
newly freed blacks fell squarely under the rubrics of education and charity. 118 The first national
antislavery organization, the American Colonization Society founded in 1816 and incorporated
by Maryland in 1831, never espoused a program of legal change but instead sought to send
voluntarily manumitted slaves to Africa.119 Despite the Society’s conservative, evangelical
purposes, Southern states in the 1830s began to challenge its corporate status as part of the
backlash to the Nat Turner Rebellion. In 1837, following a spirited debate, the U.S. Congress
refused to incorporate the group within Washington D.C.; and Virginia similarly denied its bid
for incorporation the same year. 120 Although Maryland reaffirmed its support in 1837 by
reissuing a charter significantly raising the group’s property limit, the standing of the Maryland
charter in other slave states continued to come under assault in a series of court cases questioning
the validity of wills in which masters bequeathed their slaves to the Society rather than passing

118

For example, the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery, incorporated in 1789; the
Providence Society for the Abolition of Slavery, incorporated in 1790; and the New-York Manumission Society,
incorporated in 1808.
119
“An Act to Incorporate the American Colonization Society, passed Feb 24, 1831.” Maryland Sessions Laws,
General Assembly, Dec Session, 1830. Chap. 189, pp. 201-2.
120
The African Repository and Colonial Journal (published by the American Colonization Society) 13 (June 1837),
pp. 41-48.

44
them onto their heirs.121 Until the 1850’s, Southern appellate courts generally upheld the
organization’s corporate right to receive the slave property, but the grounds of these decisions
became progressively narrow as the Northern antislavery movement gained ground and Southern
states resorted to enacting statutes that specifically outlawed the bequest of slaves for the
purposes of emancipating them.122 In a ruling of 1857, the Georgia court argued definitively that
a corporation could not inherit slaves like a natural person and that a state was not obligated to
honor the rights of a “foreign” corporation whose aims were “repugnant to its policy [and]
prejudicial to its interests.”123 This string of pro-slavery decisions is particularly notable for
occurring after the Supreme Court’s 1844 Girard Will decision of 1844 establishing the validity
of charitable bequests even if the recipient was not a corporation.
At the same time as slave-holding states were thwarting the corporate rights of the
American Colonization Society, the Northern antislavery groups advocating immediate
emancipation almost never received charters. The only two abolitionist groups to surface in our
searches of session laws in Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio fell squarely
under the rubric of education and religion: the Infant School Association in Boston “for the
education of colored youth,” incorporated by Massachusetts in 1836 (an effort planned but never
executed by Garrisonian abolitionists); and an avowedly anti-slavery Baptist Church in
Columbus, Ohio chartered in 1851 under the state’s general law for the incorporation of

121

“An Act to Incorporation the American Colonization Society, passed March 14, 1837.” Maryland Session Laws,
General Assembly, December Session, Chap. 274, pp. cccv-cccvii in HeinOnline (not paginated in original).
122
Maund's Adm'r v. M'Phail (VA 1839) 37 Va. 199 (the ACS allowed to receive the legacy); Ross v. Vertner (Miss.
1840) 6 Miss. 305 (same); Cox v. Williams (NC 1845) 39 N.C. 15 (same); Wade v. American Colonization Society
(Miss. 1846) 15 Miss. 663 (same, but on narrow grounds, noting that the testator died before the passage of the the
1842 bstatute); Lusk v. Lewis, 32 Miss. 297 (1856) (the ASC may not receive bequest because it violated the
statute); Lusk v. Lewis, 35 Miss. 696 (1858) (reversing the 1856 decision because it was not an explicit condition in
the will that the Society emancipate the slaves).
123
American Colonization Society v. Gartrell (GA 1857) 23 Ga. 448, at 449 (citing Justice Taney’s opinion in Bank
of Augusta vs. Earle, 13 Peters 519, which defended the rights of a foreign corporation “unless” they were repugnant
to a state’s policy and interests.)

45
churches.124 Other churches with abolitionist leanings undoubtedly incorporated as well, of
course, without broadcasting their antislavery views in their names. How often other kinds of
abolitionist associations tried to incorporate and failed is virtually impossible to determine, since
few examples of failed applications surface in documents. When they do, however, the extent of
legislative opposition becomes apparent. For example, the diary of an agent employed by the
Free Will Baptists reveals that in 1833 the New Hampshire legislature denied a petition to
incorporate the denominational publishers who produced a highly successful newspaper
(subscriptions had rapidly grown to nearly 5,000) because a majority of the state’s legislators
regarded the paper as “a vehicle of abolitionism.” That the group running the press was a
religious denomination, whose church and evangelical associations received charters without
difficulty, was not enough to convince hostile lawmakers.125 The Free Will Baptist Printing
Establishment’s trustees “regularly presented their petition every year” and met “the same
repulse, for the same reason” until 1846, when the balance of political power in New Hampshire
shifted towards the antislavery cause.126

124

“Massachusetts Session Laws, 1836, Chap. 9, p.653; Ohio Session Laws, 49th General Assembly, Local Acts, p.
70. In addition to employing word searches in annual sessions laws contained in HeinOnline, we examined these
compilations of corporate charters covering the first half of the century: [Pennsylvania], Proceedings and Debates of
the Convention of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to Propose Amendments of the Constitution, Commenced and
held at Harrisburg on the Second Day of May, 1837 (Harrisburg, PA, 1837-1839), Vol. 3, pp. 213-368;
[Massachusetts] The Public and General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, from Feb 28, 1807 to Feb
16, 1816 , vol. IV, (Boston: Wells and Lilly, 1816); [Massachusetts], Private and Special Statutes of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, for the Years 1830-1837, Volume 7 (Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, 1837)
[Massachusetts], Private and Special Statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, for the Years 1849-1853,
Volume 9 (Boston: William White, 1860); [Ohio, Secretary of State], Annual Report of the Secretary of State, to the
Governor of the State of Ohio, For the Year 1885 (Columbus: Westbote Co., 1885), pp. 147-225 (containing a list
for 1803-1851).
125
For example, New Hampshire Session Laws, 1825, November Session, Ch. 80, p. 335 (Free Will Baptist
Church); 1835, June Session, Ch. 15, pp. 230-231 (Free Baptist Meeting House Society); 1838, June Session, Ch. 3,
pp. 382-382 (Free Will Baptist Home Missionary Society).
126
David Marks, Memoirs of the Life of David Marks, Minister of the Gospel, ed. Marilla Marks (Dover, N.H.:
William Burr, 1846), pp. 352-53; for the act itself, see New Hampshire Sessions Laws, June Session 1846, Chap.
407, p. 409.

46
Ordinarily, abolitionists and other radical activists may have had little reason to
incorporate their associations. They amassed only small amounts of property from contributors
and hardly ever received legacies.127 Nor did they have much occasion to benefit from the
corporate right to legal standing since their organizations rarely, if ever, had occasion to be
parties in civil suits; and corporate status was irrelevant in criminal prosecutions since the
charges were against individuals.128 Yet the few exceptional charters granted to antislavery
groups between the 1830s and 50s indicate that incorporation was occasionally valuable. More
striking, the protracted failure of the Free Will Baptist publishers to receive a charter
demonstrates that lawmakers, even in relatively liberal New England, deliberately refused to
incorporate politically controversial groups. That states passed only a small number of acts of
incorporation for abolitionists and other radicals needs to be attributed to resistance as much as
to apathy.
Instances of failed attempts to incorporate become even harder to trace after state
legislatures ceased having control of the process. Under general incorporation laws, the review
of applications usually fell to administrative officials at the level of counties rather than states.
In New York and Pennsylvania, however, where general incorporation laws required judicial
approval, unsuccessful groups at times appealed their rejections in the states’ highest courts.129
Scholars have uncovered a significant number of these cases in the late nineteenth and early

127

Benjamin Quarles, “Sources of Abolitionist Income,” The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 32 (June 1945):
63-76. “No abolitionist society had a permanent fund or endowment.” (63). The American Anti-Slavery Society,
which had over a thousand auxiliaries by the late 1830’s, raised more than $150,000 over a six year period, but still
struggled to meet operating expenses. It received only one sizeable bequest, depleted in five years. The only bequest
to be legally challenged was litigated after the Civil War, and, as in the Henry George case, the Massachusetts court
directed the money away from William Lloyd Garrison’s paper and women’s rights advocates because their
purposes were politically radical rather than charitable. Jackson v. Phillips, 96 Mass. 539 (1867).
128
For example, Virginia Session Laws, 1835-36, Ch. 66, p. 44.
129
Close to 200 appellate cases in New York and Pennsylvania between 1890 and 1955 are included in the Note,
“Judicial Approval as a Prerequisite to Incorporation of Non-Profit Organizations in New York and Pennsylvania,”
Columbia Law Review 55(March 1955), especially pp. 388-89.

47
twentieth centuries, and their outcomes indicate an ongoing pattern of discrimination,
particularly against immigrant and religious minority groups. In Pennsylvania, for example,
where the general law still contained a long list of eligible categories, courts in 1891 rejected the
bid for incorporation of one social club on the grounds that its all-Chinese board of directors
might not adhere to its declared purposes and of another because “the law has not provided for
corporate capacity” to assist in “the cultivation and improvement of German manners and
customs.”130 By 1897, a series of such rulings had established the precedent that all groups
incorporated in the state had to conduct their affairs in English.131 A judge in Pennsylvania also
rejected the application of Christian Scientists on the grounds that their church’s opposition to
medical treatment posed a hazard to public health.132 In New York, after the 1895 Membership
Corporations Law repealed nearly a hundred state laws passed between 1796 and 1894 and
generously covered virtually any nonprofit group, judges typically resorted to seemingly
technical reasons for denying the applications of disfavored groups.133 A panel ruling in 1896,
for example, refused to incorporate a Jewish organization because it proposed meeting on
Sundays, despite the fact that other corporations in the city already did so with impunity.134
The denial of applications for incorporation submitted by controversial groups remained
a remarkably persistent (if poorly documented) practice in many parts of the country into the
mid-twentieth century. As late as 1957, nine states with broadly written laws still made

130

As discussed in “Judicial Approval,” pp. 388-99. For another such case of 1893 involving Russians, see William
Wood, “What are Improper Corporate Purposes for Nonprofit Corporations?” Dickinson Law Review 44 (Oct. 1939
- May 1940): 266.
131
A case of 1900, Societa Italiana di Mutui Socoerso de Benefieinza , 24 Pa. C.C. 84 (C.P. 1900) cited as precedent
on this point the 1897 case In re Society Principesso Montenegro Savoya 6 Pa. Dist. 486 (C.P. 1897).
132
First Church of Christ Scientist, 205 Pa. 344, 55 Atl. 184 (1903).
133
New York Session Laws, 1895, Vol. 1,Chap. 559, pp. 329-67.
134
Matter of Agudath Hakehiloth (NY 1896) 18 Misc. 717, 42 N.Y. Supp. 985. For a detailed analysis of several of
the New York appellate cases, stressing the social and political biases of judges into the middle of the twentieth
century, see Norman I. Silber, A Corporate Form of Freedom: The Emergences of the Modern Nonprofit Sector
(Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 2001), pp. 31-82.

48
applications subject to the review of judges or administrative officials who could withhold
certification at their discretion.135 According to Norman Silber’s history of nonprofit
corporations, which concentrates on the twentieth century, rejected applications were rarely
appealed except in Pennsylvania and New York, but cases “were reported occasionally in many
states, including Alabama, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Indiana, Iowa,
Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, Louisiana, New Jersey, Tennessee,
Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin, and more numerously in Illinois [and] Ohio.”136
In addition to the evidence provided by sporadic court rulings, documentation of the
persistently selective granting of corporate rights in the late nineteenth century can be found in
the long lists of nonprofit corporations published by the states of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New
York, and Ohio.137 Compared to the lists produced in the era of special charters prior to the Civil
War, the only significant change was a greater number of incorporated recreational and social
clubs. Otherwise, despite the progressive liberalization of general laws and the granting of more
and more charters, the overwhelming majority of nonprofit corporations continued to fit into the
same limited categories as before: Protestant religious organizations; charities assisting the poor

135

Judges had the power to review applications in six states (New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Missouri, Georgia,
and Maine) and state administrators in three states (Massachusetts, Iowa, and Mississippi). Note, “State Control over
Political Organizations: First Amendment Checks on Powers of Regulation,” Yale Law Journal 66 (Feb. 1957), p.
551, footnote 41.
136
Norman I. Silber, A Corporate Form of Freedom: The Emergences of the Modern Nonprofit Sector (Boulder,
Colo.: Westview, 2001), p. 67 (Ch. 3, endnote 2). His evidence comes from his investigation of the legal reference
book American Legal Reports. However, he provides no other details on these cases, many of which may be from
the twentieth century. Our own effort to dig into the nineteenth century records of Missouri, one of the states that
mandated review by county court judges, produced documents from St. Louis County with lists of successful
applications but not failed ones.
137
These and the following generalizations about types of charters in these four states are based on the following
sources, which contain lists of groups incorporated both by special acts and by general laws: Calvin G. Beitel, A
Digest of Titles of Corporations Chartered by the Legislature of Pennsylvania …1700 [to] 1873 (Second Revised
and Enlarged Edition, Philadelphia: John Campbell & Son, 1874); [New Jersey] Sessions Laws, every five years,
1820-1870; [New Jersey, Secretary of State] Corporations of New Jersey. List of Certificates filed in the
Department of State from 1846 to 1891, inclusive (Trenton, N.J.: Naar, Day, & Naar, 1892); [New Jersey] Sessions
Laws, every five years, 1820-1870; [Ohio], Sessions Laws, every five years, 1820-1870).

49
and disabled; educational, cultural, and medical institutions; civic organizations like fire
companies; and the major fraternal orders.
Even though it is well known that many social and political reform groups were active in
the second half of the century, temperance organizations were the only ones to attain corporate
status with any frequency. Their disproportionate success reflects both their close ties to
Protestant churches and the weakness of their largely Catholic and immigrant opponents. Ethnic
divisions over the consumption of alcohol were at play in an 1880 Michigan case, for example,
in which a man who had borrowed money from a German society successfully argued that its
suit to recover the debt was invalid because any organization that opposed the state’s temperance
law had no right to corporate legal standing.138 In several states, general laws of incorporation
added extra regulations to ensure that social clubs would not slip through the cracks of laws
restricting the sale of alcohol.139 The size, respectability, and political clout of the temperance
movement, qualities that made it virtually unique among the many activist groups seeking social
and political change, go a long way towards explaining its success at achieving corporate rights.
Because states could differ in their assessment of which reform groups were dangerous,
organizations seeking incorporation at times succeeded in one state and then attempted to operate
in more hostile territory. Despite the negligible representation of politically controversial groups
on state rosters, we know that some received charters from cases in state supreme courts where
the opponents of a “foreign corporation” sought to block its local activities.140 The American
138

Detroit Schuetzen Bund v. Detroit Agitations Verein (MI 1880), 44 Mich. 313; 6 N.W. 675; 1880 Mich. LEXIS
554.
139
For example, Massachusetts Session Laws, 1890, Chap. 439, Sects. 1,2, pp. 481-482.
140
Most foreign corporation cases involving voluntary associations did not reflect serious objections to the purpose
of the organization as much as territorial competition between it and a rival organization or conflicts over resources
between parts of the same organization. When in 1882, for example, a member of a Michigan chapter of a national
fraternal organization refused to pay an assessment levied by its “supreme lodge” incorporated in Kentucky, the
1882 Michigan Court overturned his expulsion and warned the Michigan Grand Lodge not to “subject itself, or its
members to a foreign authority in this way.” See Lamphere v. Grand Lodge 47 Mich. 429 (1882), quote at p. 430.

50
Colonization Society’s legal battles in Southern states in the antebellum period, discussed earlier,
partly revolved around disagreements about whether, as a Maryland corporation, the
organization could wield corporate rights elsewhere. The best known instances of this kind of
repressive use of state corporate law occurred in the next century, in the context of escalating
racial conflict in the 1920s and 1950s. State courts in Kansas and Virginia in the mid-1920s
denied the right of the Ku Klux Klan to operate in their states because it was a foreign
corporation incorporated in Georgia. In Virginia, the court determined that the Klan’s sale of its
paraphernalia constituted commercial transactions, forcing the corporation to pay a fine and
relinquish the nonprofit status it had acquired in Georgia.141 The Kansas attorney general
attempted to prevent the organization from organizing local chapters by refusing to register it as
a Kansas corporation, an effort that cost him his reelection (his successor gave it permission). 142
Southern states fighting desegregation in the 1950s similarly sought to oust the NAACP and
CORE, both chartered in New York.143 By then, the Supreme Court had come to view arguments
about foreign corporations as antiquated. But for over a century, despite the passage of
seemingly liberal general incorporation laws, the strategic refusal by legislatures, courts, and
government officials to incorporate voluntary associations supplied a weapon to repress
politically polarizing activist groups – even when other states had already incorporated them.
In the case of these kinds of activist reform groups, the political motivations behind state
restrictions of their entity and personhood rights seem quite clear. Less obvious, perhaps, are the
political assumptions behind the thousands of legislative decisions to charter groups that could

Also see National Council, Junior Order American Mechanics, and Others v. State Council, Junior Order United
American Mechanics 104 VA. 197 (1905).
141
Ku Klux Klan v. Virginia, 138 Va. 500, 122 S.E. 122 (1924).
142
Kansas ex rel. Griffith v. Ku Klux Klan, 117 Kan. 564, 232 Pac. 254 (1925). Charles William Sloan, Jr., “Kansas
Battles the Invisible Empire: The Legal Ouster of the KKK from Kansas, 1922-1927,” Kansas Historical Quarterly
40 (Fall 1974): 393-409.
143
See Bloch and Lamoreaux, “Corporations and the Fourteenth Amendment,” p. #.

51
be unequivocally viewed as “religious, educational, and charitable.” As Justice Bird knew when
he defended the 1888 decision to impede the advocacy of Henry George’s ideas, much hinged on
the question, “What is a charity?” For him and other authorities at the time, groups promoting
social equality fell on one side of this dividing line, whereas groups viewing the sale of alcohol
as a sin fell on the other. That the line itself was politically drawn must have been evident to the
losing parties in isolated court cases. The dominant conservative consensus, however, was that
“charity” was politically neutral (as were religion and education) and that corporations should be
so as well, an assumption that conveniently buried the political judgments behind the use of these
categories.144

Stronger Rights for Favored Groups, 1840-1900
The politically acceptable groups that typically benefited from greater access to
incorporation also benefited from another mid-century development: the growth of corporate
independence from governmental control. States not only facilitated the formation of nonprofit
corporations by passing general laws, but also loosened the strings previously attached to the
corporate form. Whereas legislatures and courts in the first decades of the century often
disciplined suspect organizations by setting limits on the rights that charters conferred, states in
the late nineteenth-century relied more exclusively on denying access to incorporation altogether.
The growing numbers of voluntary associations that acquired entity and personhood rights under
the general laws enjoyed these rights more fully and more freely than before. This change is
particularly apparent in relation to the associational right of self-governance, which, as we saw
144

By contrast, property tax exemptions, which benefited the same kinds of groups and directly cost taxpayers,
elicited outspoken criticism at various times in the nineteenth century. The fact that these critics repeatedly failed to
sway lawmakers is another example of the political intransigence of these categories. On these efforts, see Stephen
Diamond, "Efficiency and Benevolence: Philanthropic Tax Exemptions in 19th-Century America,” in Evelyn Brody,
ed., Property-Tax Exemption for Charities (Washington, D.C.: Urban institute Press, 2002), pp. 115-144.

52
earlier, judges routinely overrode when thwarting the leaders of controversial groups. Starting
around the middle of the century, judges almost always left matters of internal governance to the
corporations themselves.
The shift away from government oversight of incorporated voluntary associations can
partly be seen in the altered language of legislative acts. Previously, in the era of special
charters, states mandated a number of governance rules. For example, they often required
voluntary associations, like businesses, to hold annual elections of officers. At times, charters
also set the month of elections, demanded that members be notified, and stipulated the specific
titles and responsibilities of the officers. These electoral requirements remained standard
throughout the century for business corporations but gradually faded away for nonprofit groups.
Already in the 1820s New Jersey’s and New York’s general laws specifically exempted religious
and library corporations from following the standard rules about the election of boards and
officers that applied to business corporations.145 Ohio in 1852 similarly exempted religious, fire,
literary, and benevolent corporations from requirements to issue public reports.146 By the 1870s
Massachusetts had lifted the requirement that nonprofit corporations, like business corporations,
annually elect a board of directors. A long list of nonprofit groups, ranging from temperance
associations to sports clubs, were permitted to shift what had earlier been “the power of
directors” to “a board of trustees, managers, executive committee, prudential committee,

145

“Act to prevent fraudulent election by incorporated companies,” New Jersey Session Laws, 50th session, 1825,
p.83. Subsequent revisions of this New Jersey law retained the proviso excluding literary and religious societies
until at least 1877. New York’s Revised Statutes (1829), Vol. 1, Ch. 18, Title 4, stated that many specific rules
about elections and other matters did not apply to incorporated libraries and religious societies (Sect. 11, p. 605). Of
the four Titles within this Chapter on the regulation of New York corporations, only the most general one, Title 3,
applied to all incorporated voluntary associations. It was notably looser in all its requirements than Title 1 (on
turnpikes), Title 2 (on banks and insurance companies), and Title 4 (which focused mostly on stock companies).
Religious societies and schools were similarly made exceptions to another set of New York rules guiding
corporations in equity suits and dissolutions (Revised Statutes (1829), Vol. 2, Ch. 8, Title 4, Articles 1-3).
146
Ohio Session Laws, 50th Assembly, General Acts, 1852, §72, p. 294.

53
wardens and vestry, or other officers.”147 Even the pioneering regulatory board created in 1867
by New York to oversee the state’s charities left the vast majority of private religious and secular
charitable enterprises free of supervision, restricting its oversight to groups that received
government funding.148 Ceilings on income and property remained the only common constraints
on the rights of incorporated voluntary associations, and by the end of the nineteenth century
some states had eliminated even those.149 Significantly, at a time when states and the federal
government were beginning to impose industry-wide regulations on railroads and other types of
businesses, the vast majority of nonprofit groups, whether incorporated or not, entered what was
virtually a laissez-faire zone.150
The stronger governance rights that legislatures granted to incorporated voluntary
associations were steadily reinforced by a series of nineteenth-century judicial decisions. In 1826
the eminent jurist James Kent wrote that the Dartmouth decision had already thrown “an
impregnable barrier” around the rights of “literary, charitable, religious, and commercial

147

[Massachusetts] Public Statutes of the Commonwealth … Enacted November 19, 1881 (Boston: Rand, Aberg,
and Company, 1882), Ch. 115, § 6, p. 655. The more restrictive requirements for businesses are contained in Ch.
106, pp. 574-76.
148
Stanley Katz, et al, “Legal Change and Legal Autonomy: Charitable Trusts in New York, 1777-1893,” Law and
History Review 3 (Spring 1985): 83.
149
For example, with the exception of cemeteries and agricultural societies, New York’s 1895 “Act relating to
Membership Corporations” contained no property limits. See N.Y. Laws of 1895, Vol. 1, Chap. 559, pp. 329-67.
Between the 1850s and the 1880s, Massachusetts raised its property limit for virtually all incorporated nonprofit
groups from $100,000 to $500,000. [Massachusetts], General Statutes of the Commonwealth … 1859 (Boston:
William White, 1860), Ch. 32, p. 207; [Massachusetts] Public Statutes of the Commonwealth … Enacted November
19, 1881 (Boston: Rand, Aberg, and Company, 1882), Ch. 115 § 7, p. 656.
150
In this respect, the United States presents a striking contrast with Germany, where the rights of voluntary
associations continued to be far more restrictive than the rights of businesses. See Brooks and Guinnane, “The Right
to Associate and the Rights of Associations.” General incorporation acts for American businesses often contained
governance rules and other prescriptions that were missing from acts for nonprofit groups. See Naomi R.
Lamoreaux, “Revisiting American Exceptionalism: Democracy and the Regulation of Corporate Governance in
Nineteenth-Century Pennsylvania,” in Enterprising America: Businesses, Banks, and Credit Markets in Historical
Perspective, ed. William J. Collins and Robert A. Margo (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), pp. 25-72;
and in thise volume, Hilt, “General Incorporation,” pp. 2, 17-18. On the late nineteenth-century shift towards
regulating businesses by passing general laws applying to each industry (in contrast to the earlier reliance on
incorporation acts), see Daniel A. Crane, “The Dissociation of Incorporation and Regulation in the Progressive Era
and the New Deal," in Corporations and American Democracy, ed. Naomi R. Lamoreaux and William Novak
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2017), forthcoming.

54
institutions” by guaranteeing their charters’ “solidity and inviolability.”151 Despite the frequent
insertion of reservation clauses meant to enable legislatures to alter charters (thereby getting
around Dartmouth), legislatures almost never tried to change the charters of private nonprofit
corporations, and courts in the 1830s and 40s defeated their few attempts to do so.152 As time
went on, moreover, judges came to regard the self-governance rules made by associations as
inviolable as the language of their charters. The Pennsylvania Court in 1837 swung decisively
away from the 1810 Binns decision when it upheld the right of a mutual benefit society to oust a
member for violating its bylaw against intoxication on the simple grounds that, as “a private
corporation,” it was authorized to follow its own rules.153 The application of the Binns precedent
contracted to a narrow defense of individual contractual rights. Only when membership came
with promised insurance benefits that were lost upon expulsion did judges became concerned
about the rights of members whose group had expelled them for offensive conduct, and they
ruled on behalf of an expelled member only when they could prove that the disciplinary
procedure that took away his benefits deviated from the common practice of the group.154
Otherwise, American courts recognized camaraderie as a justifiable condition of continued
151

James Kent, Commentaries on American Law (New York: O. Halsted, 1826), Vol. 4, p. 392.
Campbell, “Social Federalism,” pp. 158-63.
153
Black and White Smiths' Society v. Vandyke (PA 1837) 2 Whart. 309.
154
This process was gradual. Kevin Butterfield identifies a similar shift towards contractualism as early as the
1830’s; Making of Tocqueville’s America, pp. 81-4, 151, 173-180, 219-220. This process was gradual. As late as the
1860’s at least two cases still awarded reinstatement to expelled members: Evans v. Philadelphia Club (PA 1865) 50
Pa. 107 (a late use of the Binns precedent, stating that expulsion was not necessitated by the purpose of the
corporation); The State ex rel. of James J. Waring v. The Georgia Medical Society (GA 1869) 38 Ga. 608 (a
Reconstruction case overturning the Georgia Medical Society’s expulsion of a doctor whose activities on behalf of
blacks had been deemed “ungentlemanly.”) For a few selected cases from across the country that exemplify the shift
towards contractualism, see the citations here and in the following notes: Anacosta Tribe v. Murbach (MD 1859) 13
Md. 91 (refusing the right of a member to sue his incorporated tribe since it had conformed to its own rules); Gregg
v. Massachusetts Medical Society (MA 1872) 111 Mass. 185 (upholding the expulsion of homeopathic doctors
because the internal tribunal of the medical society was itself recognized to be a “court”). State ex. re. Shaeffer v.
Aurora Relief Society (OH 1877) 1877 Ohio Misc. [no number in original; LEXUS 120] (district court upholding an
expulsion based on implicitly understood rules); Bauer v. Samson (Ind 1885) 102 Ind. 262 (defending the
contractual right of a member to sue a fraternal organization on a matter of money as opposed to discipline);
Commonwealth ex rel. Burt. v. Union League of Philadelphia (PA 1890) 135 Pa. 301 (upholding an expulsion, with
Binns cited only by the losing counsel); Beesley v. Chicago Journeymen (Ill 1892) 44 Ill. App. 278 (expulsion
upheld on the grounds that, unlike Binns, the corporation had incurred injury).
152

55
participation and supported decisions to terminate membership for misbehavior even when
valuable benefits were lost. In a notable case of 1896, an Illinois court upheld the expulsion of a
disagreeable member of the Women’s Catholic Order of Foresters despite her potential loss of
financial benefits, reasoning that property interests were not sufficient justification for suits by
expelled members because many mutual benefit organizations were also “social and fraternal in
their nature.”155 In 1897, the U.S. Circuit Court in D.C. declared that social and benevolent clubs
had the right to expel members for “conduct unbecoming a gentleman” as long as the provision
appeared in their bylaws.156
These late nineteenth-century expulsion cases almost always concerned corporations, but
corporate status became notably less central to the decisions of American courts once judges
backed away from supporting abused members and took the same hands-off approach to the
governance of corporations that had always been taken with respect to unincorporated groups.
Justices also began to insist that the equity action of mandamus, traditionally available to a
member of a corporation wishing to overturn an expulsion, could no longer be used as a way to
regain benefits.157 A former member of the Chicago Board of Trade was denied the right to
contest his ouster because the organization was not a business but a “voluntary association.” “It
is true,” the court conceded, that the Board was a corporation like “churches, Masonic bodies,
and odd fellow and temperance lodges; but we presume no one would imagine that a court could
take cognizance of a case arising in either of those organizations, to compel them to restore to
membership a person suspended or expelled from the privileges of the organization.”158
155

People ex rel. Keefe v. Women's Catholic O. of F. (Ill 1896) 162 Ill. 78..
United States ex rel. De Yturbide v. Metropolitan Club of Washington (DC 1897) 11 App. D.C. 180. The same
principle was confirmed in later cases, e.g.: Commonwealth ex rel. v. Union League 135 Pa. 301 (PA 1890);
Brandenburger v. Jefferson Club Association (MO 1901) 88 Mo. App. 148.
157
Instead, “the property remedy” for a cheated member became an ordinary common law suit. Lamphere v. Grand
Lodge (MI 1882) 47 Mich. 429, at 431. Many later cases cited this decision to affirm this point.
158
People ex. rel. Rice v. Board of Trade (IL 1875) 80 Ill. 134, quote at 136.
156

56
Nonprofit corporations could now discipline their members for violating internal rules with little
fear of state scrutiny (as had always been the case for unincorporated groups). Contrary to the
experience of socially and politically suspect groups in the first half of the century, corporate
status no longer meant accepting a potential loss of control over internal governance in return for
the advantages of other associational rights, like property ownership, that charters routinely
secured.
As a corollary to this growing right of self-governance, incorporated voluntary
associations gained several additional rights in the nineteenth century that further enhanced their
autonomy. A few of these rights, moreover, including the right of limited liability, extended
beyond the ones granted to business corporations. By 1830, the default common-law rule that
members of corporations enjoyed protection from liability for corporate debts had become wellestablished in American courts, but states could override this common-law rule by passing
statutes to the contrary.159 In the case of business corporations, special charters and general
incorporation laws often imposed significantly higher levels of shareholder liability (for
example, double or triple the par value of their shares).160 In the case of nonprofit corporations,
however, special charters generally overlooked the issue of liability entirely, implicitly
defaulting to the common law rule. General incorporation laws that covered both businesses
and nonprofit groups similarly left the common law rule intact by stating that their sections on
liability applied only to businesses. The laws of Missouri and Kansas made it clear, for example,
that “none of the provisions of this article, imposing liabilities on the stockholders and directors
159

Shaw Livermore, "Unlimited Liability in Early American Corporations," Journal of Political Economy 43 (Oct.
1935): 674-87; Handlin and Handlin, “Origins of the American Business Corporation,” pp. 8-11; Perkins, American
Public Finance, pp. 373-76. A1844 Connecticut case involving a bank’s attempt to recover a debt owed by a church,
clarifies the lack of liability of its members by comparing them to the members of “incorporated academies,
colleges, and other literary institutions.” Jewett v. The Thames Bank 16 Conn. 511 (1844), at 515.
160
Morton J. Horwitz, The Transformation of American Law: 1870-1960 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1992), p. 94; Phillip I. Blumberg, “Limited Liability and Corporate Groups,”Journal of Corporation Law
11(Summer 1986): 573-631, (on liability, especially pp. 587-604).

57
of corporations, shall extend to literary or benevolent institutions.”161 In our survey of the general
acts passed in the middle of the century for nonprofit corporations, we found only four states
(less than a quarter of the total) that imposed liability on members or directors. Two of them
(New Hampshire and Florida) had reversed themselves by 1870, and the other two, Ohio and
New York, made only trustees or directors, not ordinary members, liable.162
In 1876, the right of nonprofit corporations to shield themselves from damaging suits was
reinforced by the introduction of the doctrine of “charitable immunity” into American law. In
the landmark case McDonald v. Massachusetts General Hospital, the Massachusetts Supreme
Court invalidated the suit of a patient who had been injured during surgery performed by an
unauthorized hospital employee. In the words of the opinion, “A corporation, established for the
maintenance of a public charitable hospital, which has exercised due care in the selection of its
agents, is not liable for injury to a patient caused by their negligence.”163 The English precedents
for this ruling dated back to the 1840s, but whereas in England these decisions had already begun
to lose traction by the 1870s, the doctrine of charitable immunity began to spread rapidly across
the United States. In cases that for the most part concerned hospitals, courts repeatedly ruled that
shielding charities from tort suits at once served the public interest and prevented charitable
funds from being diverted from their intended use. According to the scholars Bradley C. Canon
161

Missouri Session Laws, 1845, 12th General Assembly, Revised Statutes, Chapter 34, p. 235; Kansas Session
Laws, 1855 (Territory), lst session, Ch.28 Section 21, p. 190.
162
[New Hampshire] The General Statutes of the State of New Hampshire (Manchester: John B. Clarke, State
Printer, 1867), Ch. 137, p. 286 (changes a provision of Revised Statutes of 1842 to apply only to shareholders);
Florida Session Laws, 1868, Ch. 1641, pp. 131-32 (eliminating a provision of 1850 making trustees, if not members,
“jointly and severally liable for all debts due.” 1850, 5th Session, 1850, Ch. 316, p 36); Ohio Session Laws, 50th
Assembly, General Acts, 1852, §79, p. 295; New York, Session Laws, 1848, §7, pp. 448-449. New York’s
reiterated the 1848 provision as late as 1895 in the New York Membership Corporation Law, § 11 (trustees “jointly
and severally liable for all debts” contracted for society while they were trustees, provided debts payable within one
year of when they were contracted; in 1853 this was modified so that the trustees must be shown to have acquiesced
in the debt.). Since New York is the focus of so many studies, its importance has been magnified. For the 1926
elimination of this law, see James J. Fishman, “The Development of Nonprofit Corporation Law and an Agenda for
Reform,” Emory Law Journal 34 (Summer 1985): 649.
163
McDonald v. M.G. Hospital (MA 1876) 120 Mass. 432. Also see Haas v. Missionary Society of the Most Holy
Redeemer, 6 Misc. 281; 26 N.Y.S. 868 (1893).

58
and Dean Jaros, “seven state high courts had accepted it by 1900, 25 had by 1920, and 40 had by
1938.”164 Only in 1942 did the tide of legal opinion begin to shift the other way.165
Another example of the wide latitude given to nonprofit corporations was their
exceptional right to hold stock of other corporations. This form of investment was usually denied
to business corporations (the major exception being insurance companies) until New Jersey
radically broke from precedent and permitted it for all corporations in 1889-90. Nonprofits had,
however, routinely bought stock of other corporations since the middle of the century. By 1855,
this development had become significant enough for Joseph Angell and Samuel Ames to observe
in the fifth edition of their classic treatise, “There are large classes of corporations which may
and do rightfully invest their capital or funds in the stock of other corporations, for the purpose
of secure and profitable investment.” These classes, the passage went on, consisted primarily of
“religious and charitable corporations, and corporations for literary and scientific purposes.”166
Certain nonprofit corporations, unlike business corporations, also gained the right to
control subsidiary corporations. Grand lodges of fraternal orders routinely exercised power over
their lower affiliate lodges, a practice that dated back to the supremacy of the Masonic Grand
Lodge of London in the eighteenth century. The early acts of incorporation for Masons passed by
South Carolina, Georgia, Louisiana, and Alabama explicitly authorized Grand Lodges to assume
jurisdiction over their affiliated local lodges.167 Even the states that did not mandate the
subordination of local lodges tacitly deferred to the order’s top-down governance structure by

164

Bradley C. Canon and Dean Jaros, “The Impact of Changes in Judicial Doctrine: The Abrogation of Charitable
Immunity,” Law and Society 13 (Summer 1979): 969-86. Quote at 971.
165
Ibid; also see Note, “The Quality of Mercy: 'Charitable Torts' and Their Continuing Immunity,” Harvard Law
Review 100 (Apr. 1987): 1382-99.
166
Joseph Kinnicut Angell and Samuel Ames, A Treatise on the Law of Private Corporations Aggregate, 5th ed.,
rev., corr., and enl. (Boston: Little Brown, 1855), § 158, p. 143.
167
South Carolina Session Laws, 1814, pp. 34-36; Georgia Session Laws, Jan. Session, 1796, p.16 (no pagination in
original); Louisiana Session Laws, 2nd leg, 2nd session, 1816, pp. 98 and 100 [confirmed in Louisiana Session
Laws, 4th leg., 1st sess., 1819, pp. 16 and 18]; and Alabama Session Laws, 3rd session, 1821, pp. 22-23.

59
allowing corporations to establish their own rules. Although the eruption of the Anti-Masonic
movement in the late 1820s led to the temporary revocation of Masonic charters in Vermont,
Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, all three states reincorporated them by 1860, and general
incorporation acts passed between 1846 and 1858 by many Midwestern and Southern states -including Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Kentucky, and Georgia – contained specific
provisions for the incorporation of Masons, Odd Fellows, and Sons of Temperance that
implicitly sanctioned the rule of the state-level bodies over local ones.168 In a Massachusetts case
of 1880 involving two rival lodges of the Royal Arch Masons, the state Supreme Court firmly
upheld the right of Grand Lodge corporations to exercise power over their lesser chartered
affiliates.169 Grand Lodges that lacked corporate status, by contrast, could not count on legal
recognition of their right to rule subordinate lodges. Important rulings in New York in 1857 and
Indiana in 1885 prohibited unincorporated Grand Lodges of the Odd Fellows and the Knights of
Pythias from appropriating property owned by local lodges that had split off or been kicked out
of the order by their superiors.170
Over time, some organizations without charters gained a few of the entity and
personhood rights ordinarily held only by corporations. Unincorporated local churches had long
exercised the right to receive and hold at least limited amounts of property in perpetuity, and
landmark court cases in the 1870s established that higher church bodies did not need to be

168

Indiana Session Laws, 31st Session (1846 [Approved 1847]), Chap. 45, pp. 97-99; Illinois Session Laws, 1855,
19 General Assembly, pp. 182-184; Kansas Session Laws, 4th Session (1858), Chap. 1, pp. 27-28; Missouri Session
Laws, 1851, 16th General Assembly (1850 [approved 1851]), lst Session, pp. 56-57; Kentucky, Session Laws (1853
[Approved 1854]), vol. 1, Chap. 879, pp. 164-165; Georgia Session Law, “Public Laws” (1855-1856) Title 34
“Charitable Societies”, p. 272.
169
Chamberlain v. Lincoln 129 Mass. 70 (MA 1880) 129 Mass. 70.
170
Austin v. Searing (New York 1857) 16 N.Y. 112; Bauer v. Samson Lodge, Knights of Pythias (Ind 1885) 102 Ind.
262.
th

60
corporations to secure their governance powers over lower ones.171 In the middle of the
nineteenth century, a growing number of states further extended the property rights not only of
churches but also of other conventional religious, educational, and charitable groups even if they
lacked corporate charters. The main catalyst for this development was the 1844 decision by the
United States Supreme Court in the Girard’s Will Case that recognized British charitable trust
law as part of American common law, thereby according these kinds of groups the right to
receive bequests and build permanent endowments in states without statutes to the contrary.172
Several states after 1850 in addition gave all voluntary associations, whether or not they were
incorporated, an associational right to stand as parties in suits.173
Despite these late nineteenth-century developments, voluntary associations without
corporate status continued to suffer important comparative disadvantages under American law.
Most states at the end of the century still did not give unincorporated groups the right to sue and
be sued, and in places that did, legal standing could prove a double-edged sword to controversial
groups, such as labor unions, by making them more vulnerable to judicial repression. Nor did the
great access to charitable bequests automatically benefit unincorporated associations, as we saw

171

By the 1840s, states often gave churches corporate rights whether they were incorporated or not. See, for
example, Christian Society in Plymouth v. Macomber, 46 Mass. 155 (1842) (confirming a longstanding statutory
rule in Massachusetts); Cahill v. Bigger, 47 Ky. 211 (confirming that in Kentucky an unincorporated church had
equity rights to property deeded originally to individual deacons). For church cases affirming the authority of
denominational rules (and thereby narrowing or disputing the decision in the 1846 case Smith v. Nelson discussed
above), see especially: Watson v. Jones (U.S. Supreme Court 1871). 80 U.S. 679; and Connitt v. Reformed
Protestant Dutch Church (NY 1873) 54 N.Y. 551. Even Virginia, which passed statutes in the post-revolutionary
period disallowing charitable bequests, passed laws in the 1840s designating churches and fraternal lodges as
property-holding trusts. The Code of Virginia (Richmond: Ritchie, 1849), Title 22, Chs. 76-77, pp. 357-369.
172
Vidal v. Girard's Executors 43 U.S. 127 (also known as the Girard’s Will Case). On the history of charitable trust
law in nineteenth-century America, see Miller, Legal Foundations. Virginia, which did not allow charitable bequests
and incorporated few voluntary groups, passed laws in the 1840s designating churches and fraternal lodges as
property-holding trusts. The Code of Virginia (Richmond: Ritchie, 1849), Title 22, Chs. 76-77, pp. 357-369.
173
Connecticut Session Laws of 1867, p. 77; Wyoming Session Laws of 1890-1891, Ch. 76, § 2, p. 328; Maine
Session Laws of 1897, Ch. 191, p. 224; Michigan Session Laws of 1897, No. 15, p. 25; Rhode Island Session Laws
of 1906, Ch. 1348, pp. 66-67. New York in 1851 passed a similar law extending to any unincorporated “company or
association” the right to sue and be sued in the name of its treasurer or president (New York Session Laws of 1851,
Ch. 455, p. 654).

61
in the case of Henry George’s book fund. Other important rights acquired by nonprofit
corporations during this period never extended to unincorporated groups, including the right to
charitable immunity and the right to control subsidiary organizations. On balance, the legal
changes of the late nineteenth century compounded the advantages of corporations while only
partly increasing the advantages of other associations. Not only did corporations gain new
rights, but they also shed previous constraints on their rights, such as low property limits and
judicial threats to self-governance. The extraordinarily wide latitude the government now gave to
nonprofit corporations therefore made the inability of disfavored groups to qualify for corporate
status all the more discriminatory.

Constraints on the Associational Rights of Labor Unions and Political Parties, 1860-1900
For the most part, the politics behind the unequal dispensation of associational rights in
the late nineteenth century remained hidden from public view. Decisions by officials to deny
corporate rights were buried inside of hundreds of obscure state statutes and court rulings, and
the groups damaged by them tended to be small and marginal. In the case of two exceptionally
visible and contentious groups, however, the politics behind these decisions behind became
glaringly evident around the turn of the century. For a brief period of time, both labor unions
and political parties straddled the political fence dividing voluntary associations that received
corporate rights from those that did not.
With rare exceptions, political parties and labor unions did not become corporations in
the nineteenth century, and they still do not today. Indeed, since 1900 several ways that the
government treats them differently from nonprofit corporations have been written into federal
laws dealing with tax exemptions, campaign regulations, and collective bargaining. But what is

62
clear today was not so clear in the late nineteenth century. As states became more permissive in
granting corporate status to voluntary groups, the longstanding prohibition on incorporating
political parties and labor unions was, for a few decades, thrown into doubt.
For labor organizations, like other voluntary associations, increases in membership and
financial resources enhanced the appeal of corporate legal and property rights. When unions
began to confront interstate railroads and other national business corporations after the Civil
War, they rapidly expanded beyond specific trades and localities, amassed substantial strike
funds, and branched out to run co-operative shops and stores. Between the 1860s and 1880s
several of the largest labor unions made political demands to incorporate alongside their other
(now far better-known) legislative goals like the eight-hour day and the exclusion of Chinese
workers.174 Longstanding resistance finally gave way with the support of several prominent
elected officials. At the instigation of the legislative committee of the Federation of Organized
Trades and Labor Unions, which had in 1883 elected Samuel Gompers its president,
Congressman Thompson Murch, a pro-union politician from Maine, shepherded an 1886 bill
through Congress enabling the incorporation of national trade unions in the District of
Columbia.175 Among the allowable corporate purposes listed in the statute was “the regulation of
[members’] wages and their hours and conditions of labor” and any “other object or objects for
which working people may lawfully combine.”176 Within a few years, several states enabled the
incorporation of unions by enacting similar general laws: Maryland (1884), Michigan (1885),

174

John R. Commons, et al., History of Labor in the United States, Vols. 1-4 (New York: MacMillan, 1918-1935),
Vol. 2, pp. 24, 66-67, 140, 165, 314, 325-26. On the repeated demands for incorporation between 1865 and 1885 by
the New York Workingmen’s Assembly, the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions, and, in 1884, the
Knights of Labor, see Victoria C. Hattam, Labor Visions and State Power: The Origins of Business Unionism in the
United States (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993), pp. 131-34.
175
Commons, History of Labor, Vol. 2: 329-30.
176
“An Act to legalize the incorporation of National Trade Unions.” U.S. Statutes at Large, 49th Congress, 1886,
Session 1, Ch. 567, p. 86.

63
Iowa (1886), Massachusetts (1888), Pennsylvania (1889), and Louisiana (1890).177
Massachusetts still imposed more stringent conditions on unions than on other nonprofit
corporations, but most of these states allowed unions to incorporate on the same terms as other
nonprofit groups (as did New York, the following decade, in its sweeping Membership
Corporation Law).178
No sooner had they gained permission to incorporate, however, than most unions
changed their position and declined to do so. The main reason for this change of heart was the
series of anti-union decisions by American courts that occurred between 1885 and 1900. These
rulings effectively gutted the influential 1842 decision in Commonwealth v. Hunt that had
repudiated the British law of conspiracy and regarded labor unions as similar to other kinds of
voluntary associations.179 Emboldened by the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 and the
Sherman Act of 1890, conservative judges devised a new version of conspiracy doctrine that
applied, if not to organizing per se, to basic union strategies like picketing, boycotting, and even,
most broadly, the calling of strikes leading to “restraint of trade.”180 Corporate status did not help
in these cases. Justices used their equity power of injunction to order the arrest and

177

Maryland Session Laws, January 1884 Session, Ch. 267, p. 367 (adding unions to 1868 list of “of educational,
moral, scientific, literary, dramatic, musical, social, benevolent [etc.] societies”); Michigan Session Laws, Public
Acts, Regular Session, 1885, Act No. 145, pp. 163-165 (supplementing a 1869 law allowing labor unions to
incorporate only for “chartable” purposes); Iowa Session Laws, 21st General Assembly, 1886, Ch. 71, p. 89 (adding
unions to 1873 general law of incorporation for non-pecuniary purposes); Massachusetts Session Laws, 1888, Ch.
134, sects 1-5, pp. 99-100 (a self-contained law with unusual special provisions); Pennsylvania Session Laws,
Regular Session, 1889, No. 215, pp. 194-196 (a self-contained law declaring that employees ought to have the same
privileges as “associations of capital”); (adding unions, along with Knights and Farmers Alliances, to its 1886
general law for “literary, scientific, religious and charitable” corporations).
178
Massachusetts Session Laws, 1888, Ch. 134, § 2, p. 99 (requiring the state commissioner of corporations to
verify the lawfulness of a union’s purposes).
179
Tomlins, Law, Labor and Ideology, pp. 209-216.
180
Christopher L. Tomlins, The State and the Unions: Labor Relations, Law, and the Organized Labor Movement in
America, 1880-1960 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 46-51; Herbert Hovenkamp, “Labor
Conspiracies in American Law, 1880-1930,” Texas Law Review 66 (April 1988) 949-57. Victoria Hattam stresses
the resurgence of conspiracy prosecutions against labor already in the late 1860s, and the use of these indictments in
combination with anti-labor injunctions in the 1880s and 1890s. See Hattam, Labor Visions and State Power, pp.
112-79.

64
imprisonment of labor activists, whether their unions were incorporated or not. Moreover,
several court decisions of the 1890s showed how the legal standing of corporations could
backfire by making unions more vulnerable to crippling lawsuits.181
It soon became clear that unincorporated unions had distinct advantages in states that
stuck to the old common law rule that groups needed corporate status to stand as parties in court.
In Massachusetts, for example, the state Supreme Court in 1906 invalidated a conspiracy suit
against unions of bricklayers and masons because “there is no such entity known to the law as an
unincorporated association, and consequently it cannot be made a party defendant.” For a suit
against an unincorporated voluntary association to have standing, the Court went on, every
member “must be joined as a party defendant” or, following equity rules, several members could
be named as the party as long as the plaintiff could show that these individuals were
representatives of the entire group.182 The requirement to identify everyone in a union who
supported a strike or else demonstrate that a group of leaders had the consensual support of every
member was, from a practical point of view, nearly impossible.
Even though several other states had by then passed laws granting unincorporated
voluntary associations the legal personhood rights to sue and be sued, cases involving the illegal
actions of only a subset of individual members still foundered if the suit was against the
organization. A stream of decisions by the New York Supreme Court beginning in 1892 held
that the state’s 1880 statute enabling unincorporated associations to be parties in suits did not
supersede the requirement that every member be equally liable as an individual – a condition
181

For example: Lucke v. Clothing Cutters & T. Assembly, No. 7507, K. of L. (MD 1893): 77 Md. 396; Meurer v.
Detroit Musicians’ Benevolent & Protective Ass’n (MI 1893). 95 Mich. 451; Lysagt v. St. Louis operative
Stonemasons’ Association (MO 1893) 55 Mo. App. 538; People v. Musical Mutual Union (NY 1899) 118 N.Y. 101;
Weiss v. Musical Mutual Protective Union (PA 1899) 189 Pa. 446.
182
Picket v. Walsh (MA 1906) 192 Mass. 572. Quotes at 589-590. Also see Reynolds v. Davis (MA 1908) 198
Mass. 294. For similar examples elsewhere, see: Union Pacific Railroad v. Ruef et al. (U.S. Circuit Court, 1902) 120
F. 120; St. Paul Typothetae and Another v. St. Paul Bookbinders’ Union No. 27 and Others (MN 1905) 94 Minn.
351; Indiana Karges Furniture Co v Amalgamated Woodworkers Union (Ind 1905) 165 Ind. 421.

65
requiring such detailed knowledge about specific actions and identities that large unions in New
York were effectively immune from lawsuits for over a century.183 Other states, however, such
as New Jersey, Connecticut, Ohio, and Michigan, decided this question differently, either by
court rulings or by passing more explicit laws imposing corporate-like liability on
unincorporated groups.184 Whether or not they incorporated, unions in the late nineteenth century
apparently lost more than they gained when they acquired an associational right to legal
standing. In this respect, they experienced the same disadvantages as the controversial nonprofit
corporations in the first half of the nineteenth century whose rights to self-governance were
subverted by conservative courts. Making matters still worse, Congress in 1898 added to the
judicial damage by mandating that unions incorporating under the federal law of 1886 expel
workers who used “violence, threats, or intimidation” to prevent others from working during
strikes, boycotts, or lockouts.185 Not surprisingly, when Louis Brandeis sought to persuade
Samuel Gompers that the labor movement should seize the opportunity of acquiring corporate
rights, Gompers responded without hesitation, “No, thank you!”186
183

Mitchell H. Rubinstein,“Union Immunity from Suit in New York,” New York University Journal of Law &
Business 641 2(Summer 2006): 641-682. The case that initiated this line of interpretation did not involve a union but
another type of nonprofit group: McCabe v. Goodfellow (NY 1892) 133 N.Y. 89.
184
E.g., New Jersey Session Laws, General Public Acts, 1885, pp. 26 -27 [applied to labor unions in Michael Mayer
et al. v. The Journeymen Stonecutters’ Association et al. (NJ 1890); Barr vs. Essex Trades Council (NJ 1894)]; Ohio
Session Laws, 50th General Assembly, 1852, vol. 51, § 37. p. 62 [applied to labor unions in Hillenbrand v. Building
Trades Council et. al. (OH 1904) 14 Ohio Dec. 628]; “An Act relating to Voluntary Associations” Connecticut
Session Laws, January Session, 1893, Ch. 32, p. 216; Michigan Session Laws, 1897, No,. 15, p. 25 [applied to labor
union in United States Heater Co. v. Iron Molders’ Union of North America (Mich 1902)]. Similar rulings were
Another example is Nevada: L. C. Branson v. The Industrial Workers of the World (NV 1908) [citing “Section 14 of
the civil practice act of Nevada (Comp. Laws, 3109)”]; and, in a federal circuit court, American Steel & Wire Co. v.
Wire Drawers’ & Die Makers’ Union Nos. 1 and 3 et. al. (U.S. District Court, 1898) [citing U.S. Rev. St. § 954].
The key case establishing that unions were suable under federal law was United Mine Workers v. Coronado Coal
Co., 259 U.S. 344 (1922). By 1980 only four states – Massachusetts, Illinois, Mississippi, and West Virginia -- still
followed the common law rule that unincorporated associations could not sue or be sued (as reported in the case in
which Massachusetts finally abandoned the rule, DiLuzio v. United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers 435
N.E. 2d 1027(Mass. 1982)).
185
“An Act concerning carriers engaged in interstate commerce and their employees,” U.S. Statutes at Large, 55th
Congress, Session 2, pp. 424-428, § 8, p. 427.
186
“The Incorporation of Trade Unions,” 1 Green Bag 2d 306 (Spring, 1998), quote at 306. Gompers’ reply
originally appeared in The Boston Globe, December 5, 1902.

66
For political parties, like unions, the widening access to incorporation during the second
half of the nineteenth century briefly opened up an opportunity to expand their associational
rights that ended up being decisively closed. During the period of expansion, New York, long
the home of the Tammany Society corporation, unsurprisingly went the farthest in granting
corporate rights to politically partisan groups. Tammany’s leaders, by then at the heart of the
Democratic political machine, were able in the 1850s and 1870s to brush off renewed questions
about the legitimacy of the Society’s 1805 special charter as a charitable group, and in 1867 they
even successfully petitioned the legislature to increase the corporation’s property limit.187
Around the same time, New York extended similar rights to other groups. In 1875 it revised its
general incorporation law in 1875 to include “political, economic, patriot” societies and clubs
along with athletic, social, musical and other recreational ones.188 Then it followed with a
separate act in 1886 allowing for the incorporation of “political clubs” that omitted an earlier
provision for visitorial powers by the Supreme Court that applied to other nonprofit groups.189
The New York Membership Corporations Law of 1895 revoked these earlier laws and
abandoned the long string of adjectives that previously defined corporate eligibility, but its
inclusive language still left open the possibility of parties or partisan organizations
incorporating.190 As we will see, the courts soon cut that remaining possibility off.

187

On the 1850s challenge to the charter, see Jerome Mushkat, Tammany: The Evolution of a Political Machine,
1789-1865 (Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1971), pp. 273, 283. In the 1870s, there were two similarly failed
challenges, a legislative petition to revoke the charter and a law suit: [New York State], Journal of the Senate of the
State of New York at their Ninety-Fifth Session (Albany: Argus Company, 1872), p. 175; and Thompson v. Society of
Tammany, in Marcus Tullius Hun, ed., Reports of Cases Heard and Determined by the Supreme Court of the of the
State of New York, Marcus T. Hun, Reporter, Vol. 24 (New York: Banks and Brothers, 1879), Vol. 24, pp. 305-16.
The 1867 charter revision can be found in New York, Session Laws, Nineteenth Legislature, 1867, Vol. 2, Ch. 593,
p. 1615.
188
“An Act for the Incorporation of Societies or Clubs for certain Lawful Purposes,” New York Session Laws, 97th
and 98th legislatures, 1875, Ch. 267, pp. 264-66.
189
“An Act of the Incorporation of Political Clubs,” New York Session Laws, 109th leg., 1886, Ch. 236, pp. 40911.
190
“An Act relating to Membership Corporations,” New York Session Laws, 1895, Vol. 1, Chap. 559, pp. 329-67.

67
No state other than New York seems to have explicitly included political groups in a
general incorporation law. Nonetheless, scattered evidence suggests that “Democratic” and
“Republican” clubs received special acts of incorporation in several states during the late
nineteenth century, including New Jersey, Maryland, South Carolina, Tennessee and
Kentucky.191 It is not possible to know simply from the names of these groups whether they
were affiliated with political parties -- they could have been educational or civic groups
upholding broader “democratic” and “republican” principles. At least one of them, however, the
Republican State League of Kentucky, stated on its petition for incorporation in 1886 that its
objects were “to advocate, promote and maintain the principles of the Republican Party.”192
This fledgling development of political corporations quickly fell victim to an onslaught of
electoral reforms that changed the legal status of political parties.193 Previously, states had left
parties essentially free of regulatory control. Partisan electoral practices had since the Jacksonian
era regularly included the nomination of candidates at closed party conventions and the
distribution of pre-marked ballots at polling places. At the end of the nineteenth century,
Progressive politicians asserted state regulatory authority over elections, passing laws that
mandated direct primaries and secret ballots in an effort to clip the power of party machines. At
least thirty states had by 1900 specified procedures for the conduct of conventions and primary
elections.194 At the same time, states moved against partisan corporations, either categorically

191

This evidence is based on searches in the HeinOnline Sessions Law data base, which yielded acts of
incorporation for groups with titles that contained “Democrat,” “Democratic,” and “Republican.” For example, in
addition to those cited below, Acts of the Ninety-fourth Legislature of the State of New Jersey (Newark, N.J.: E. N.
Fuller, 1870), pp. 459-60; Maryland Sessions Laws, 1868, pp. 821-23; Tennessee Sessions Laws, 1867-68, p. 385;
Connecticut Session Laws, Special Acts and Resolutions, January, 1897, p. 1243.
192
“An Act to Incorporate the Republican State League of Kentucky,” Kentucky Sessions Laws, 1886, vol. 3, Ch.
1638, p.1128. By contrast, the “Planter’s Republican Society” of South Carolina was listed in the index as a
“benevolent” organization. South Carolina Sessions Laws, 1873-74, p. 6.
193
John W. Epperson, The Changing Status of Political Parties in the United States (New York: Garland, 1986), pp.
46-151.
194
Epperson, Changing Status of Political Parties, p. 51.

68
denying the incorporation of political clubs or tightening their control over nonprofit
corporations with partisan purposes.
In Pennsylvania, courts seized on the legal rationale that the 1874 general act had not
explicitly included political groups in its list of qualified organizations. A precedent-setting
lower court opinion of 1889 held that clubs of Democrats and Republicans could incorporate
only if they described themselves purely as social organizations and not political ones.195 The
suspicion that a purportedly social and educational club was truly a partisan group similarly
thwarted the bid by a Republican club for a charter in 1897, with the judge declaring
emphatically that “the law does not authorize the incorporation of political clubs, and in all
reported cases the courts have refused charters where the articles of association disclosed a
political purpose.”196
In 1900, New York took much the same step. Despite the legislature’s recent passage of
incorporation laws suggesting the contrary, the New York Supreme Court’s interpretation of the
state’s Primary Election Law of 1899 held that parties were no longer to be regarded as private
associations but as parts of the state. Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Parker refused to
allow the Democratic General Committee of Kings County to expel an elected delegate because
he was disloyal to the principles of the party.197 The opinion differentiated the case from another
one tried by the same court in 1890, in which the justices decided that a party committee, as a
voluntary association, was free to conduct itself however it wished.198 The intervening passage

195

In re. Charters of the Central Democratic Association, and Young Republican Club of the Thirtieth Ward 8 Pa.
C.C. R. 392 (1889). Pennsylvania justices cited this case well into the twentieth century. For example: In re Fortyseventh Ward Republican Club, 17 Dist. R. 509 (C. P. Phila., 1908); Fourth Ward Democratic Club (1911) 20 Dist.
R. 841 (Northhampton, 1911); Republican League Incorporation no. 162, Pa. Dist. & Cnty. Dec. (1948).
196
In re Monroe Republican Club, 6 Dist. R. 515 (Allegheny, 1897), quote at 516. This case was also cited in the
1908 and 1911 cases noted above.
197
People v. Democratic General Committee of Kings County. 164 N.Y. 335 (NY 1900). Also see Epperson,
Changing Legal Status of Political Parties, pp. 75-77.
198
McKane v. Democratic General Committee, 123 N.Y. 609 (NY 1890).

69
of the election reform law, however, had rendered that decision irrelevant. As Parker put it, “the
voluntary character of the county general committee has been destroyed.”199 Justice Cullin, who
argued that the Kings County Democratic Committee had the same rights as a corporation, stood
alone in dissent.200 In other states where political party groups retained access to incorporation,
moreover, corporate status lost its characteristic ability to confer autonomy from the state. In
Missouri, political groups still sought corporate status in the early years of the twentieth century,
but the legislature passed a statute in 1907 mandating the strict scrutiny of all “leagues,
committees, associations, or societies” that published material about candidates for public office.
Whether “incorporated or unincorporated,” the law made clear, such political groups had to fully
disclose all their sources of information, submit detailed reports on the amount of money they
raised, and provide the names and addresses of their contributors.201
By the turn of the century, political parties no longer could operate with minimal
interference from the state. They had moved from being unregulated voluntary associations,
typically without corporate status, to being, much like earlier corporations, closely regulated
extensions of the state. Of course, political parties had never been privately organized in the
same way as most other voluntary groups. Politicians stood at their helms, and partisan positions
structured the work of public officials inside the government as well as informing the views of
private citizens within the electorate. Because parties were so deeply intertwined with the
199

People v. Democratic General Committee of Kings County, 164 N.Y. 335 (NY 1900) at p. 342.
People v. Democratic General Committee of Kings County, 164 N.Y. 335 (NY 1900), at pp. 347-48.
201
“An Act to regulate civic leagues and like associations,” Missouri Session Laws, 44th General Assembly, 1907,
pp. 261-62. Special thanks to Michael Everman of the Missouri State Archives, who provided the names of
organizations that filed pro forma papers with the St. Louis county court as part of the process of applying for
incorporation (Missouri, like New York and Pennsylvania, was unusual for requiring judicial approval under its
general act of incorporation for voluntary groups). These applications date back to the mid-nineteenth century, but
explicitly partisan organizations did not request incorporation in significant numbers until 1901 (the state’s general
law of incorporation of 1879 specifically excluded groups with political purposes, but this language was dropped in
the 1889 version. [Missouri] Revised Statutes, 1879, § 978, p. 280; and 1889 Revised Statutes, 1889, Article 10, §
2829, p. 721 )]. The Missouri regulatory law of 1907 coincided with Congressional passage of the Tillman Act
forbidding corporate involvement in political campaigns.
200

70
government, meaningful constraints on their freedom were necessary to lower the high risks of
political corruption (Tammany Society, again, being a case in point). Theoretically, states or the
federal government could have regulated parties as corporations by adding provisions to
incorporation laws, but the state of Missouri proved to be unusual in taking this route. In
Pennsylvania and New York, where the general laws for nonprofit corporations were ambiguous
about the eligibility of partisan groups, justices chose to invalidate political corporations outright.
It was in this context that Congress passed the Tillman Act of 1907 forbidding corporate
involvement in political campaigns.202 The Act was a reaction against corrupt political activities
of business corporations, specifically the insurance industry, not voluntary associations.
Understandably, the political influence of for-profit corporations was perceived as especially
dangerous, both because they commanded greater wealth than nonprofits and because the
government more actively regulated them. But it would be a mistake to think that the resurgence
of anti-corporate feeling that underlay the act was entirely directed towards business. The
Tillman Act expressed the same normative logic as the denial of corporate status to political
parties: corporations and politics should not mix.
In the case of both political parties and labor unions, access to corporate rights widened at
roughly the same time as governments took other legal steps to curb their associational rights.
In some ways, the outcome by the turn of the twentieth century was very different for these two
types of groups. Unions remained unrecognized as legal entities, preferring to negotiate with
businesses without the backing of the state because of the dangers of judicial intervention.
Political parties, by contrast, assumed the legal status of entities through the government’s
enactment of campaign legislation, thereby losing their earlier freedom from state control. At the
202

See Adam Winkler, “Law and Political Parties: Voters’ Rights and Parties’ Wrongs: Early Political Party
Regulation in the State Courts, 1886-1915” Columbia Law Review 100 (April 2000): 873- 900 (drawing a
comparison between parties and business corporations, but not nonprofit ones).

71
same time, however, the common failure of both types of groups to gain the extensive
associational rights ordinarily held by corporations reveals an underlying similarity between
them. Both unions and political parties were socially and politically polarizing. They came
closer to incorporating than many other contentious groups of the period, in large part because of
their wide public acceptance and official support, but each of them ended the period besieged by
politically powerful foes. Their stories illustrate how difficult it was for polarizing groups to
acquire strong associational rights even after the great expansion of access to corporate status. In
the end, both groups acquired a set of associational rights via government regulation – parties
during the Progressive era, and unions during the New Deal – albeit they both still lacked, for
better and worse, the extraordinary degree of autonomy that nonprofit corporations had already
achieved by the end of the nineteenth century.203

Conclusion
From the Revolution to the turn of the twentieth century, public officials generally agreed
that corporations should stay out of politics at the same as they made essentially political
decisions about which voluntary associations could incorporate and what rights corporations
would receive. During the first decades of the nineteenth century, when politicians routinely
rewarded their partisan allies with charters, the nonprofit organizations that succeeded in
becoming corporations needed to appear, at least on the surface, to be nonpartisan. Churches,
colleges, mutual benefit societies, and other “educational or charitable” groups were ostensibly
worthy of charters because they served the common welfare, whereas groups that fostered social
and political change served only a dissident faction. Later in the century, the allocation of

203

On unions, see Margaret Levi, Tania Melo, Barry Weingast, and Frances Zlotnick, “Opening Access, Ending the
Violence Trap: Labor, Business, Government and the National Labor Relations Act,” in this volume.

72
charters generally ceased to be determined either by partisan loyalty or by the requirement that
corporations serve the common welfare. Yet fundamentally political decisions still defined
which groups had access to incorporation, and on what terms.
As we have seen, the largest categories of groups chronically deprived of corporate rights
consisted of political parties, labor unions, and social reform societies. Organizations formed by
(or on behalf of) religious and ethnic minorities also experienced difficulty becoming
incorporated, more frequently at the beginning of the century than at the end. Meanwhile, the
overwhelming majority of voluntary associations that become corporations throughout the
century were uncontroversial, mainstream groups whose access to corporate rights frequently
depended on their acquiescence to the social and political status quo. This distinction between
politically acceptable and politically unacceptable voluntary associations persisted despite the
mid-century widening of access to corporate status; access to the corporate form remained
restricted to uncontroversial categories of associations. Although some organizations without
corporate status became able by the late nineteenth century to claim limited entity and
personhood rights, particularly the right to property, they, too, needed to conform to recognized
definitions of religion or “charity” (like the ones used for and against the Henry George book
fund).
At the same time as this pattern of exclusion persisted, moreover, the rights of acceptable
nonprofit corporations grew even stronger, a development that made corporate status all the more
valuable. By the end of the century, the multiple benefits of incorporation included not only the
legal protections needed to accumulate large amounts of property and avoid membership
liability, but the ability to own stocks and control subsidiary corporations. In addition, the
reduced risk of judicial intervention in internal disputes bolstered the standard corporate right of

73
self-governance. As courts and legislatures paved the way to this enlarged field of potential
advantages, the state’s discriminatory role as gatekeeper still functioned much as it did in the
earlier era of special charters. Tocqueville to the contrary, the widespread freedom of individuals
to associate in American civil society never meant that the associations they formed were equally
free.
This nineteenth-century history might lead one to think that removing the barriers to
corporate status would reduce the politicization of associational rights. Developments since
then, however, suggest otherwise.204 States in the mid-twentieth century eliminated almost all of
the restrictive categories and veto powers built into earlier general incorporation laws. Today,
nonprofit corporations can be organized by virtually anyone for virtually any purpose. The
opening of nearly complete access to incorporation has not, however, completely equalized
access to associational rights. Important vestiges of the nineteenth-century distinctions between
favored and disfavored groups survive, most notably in the federal tax code.205 The same types
of elite and religiously and culturally conservative nonprofit organizations that have always
found it easy to incorporate have disproportionately benefited from the right of their donors to
make tax-deductible contributions – a right that remains out of reach to “political” organizations
as well as to otherwise eligible “charitable” organizations without the resources to comply with

204

Valuable surveys of twentieth-century developments include: Norman I. Silber, A Corporate Form of Freedom:
The Emergences of the Modern Nonprofit Sector (Boulder, Colo.: Westview, 2001); Peter Dobkin Hall, Inventing
the Nonprofit Sector and Other Essays on Philanthropy, Voluntarism, and Nonprofit Organizations (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992); Henry B. Hansmann, “The Evolving Law of Nonprofit Organizations: Do
Current Trends Make Good Policy?” Case Western Law Review 39 (1989): 807-829.
205
On this shift, see especially Silber, A Corporate Form of Freedom. Already in the colonial period many churches
and other privileged categories of voluntary associations (and businesses) benefitted from tax-exempt status,
benefits that persisted through the nineteenth century. Until the inauguration of the federal income tax at the
beginning of the twentieth centuries, tax exemptions typically pertained only to property taxes on a group’s land and
did not confer any benefits to donors.

74
IRS requirements.206 Despite the fact that most nonprofit groups are permitted to claim
exemptions on all or part of the organization’s own income, the qualifications for this benefit still
varies substantially among different types of organizations. A labor union officially recognized
by the NLRB, for example, may take a deduction for its aid to striking workers whereas another
labor organization distributing aid to union members for the same authorized strike cannot.207
More well known is the right of nonprofit groups with political leanings, including organizations
registering in the “social welfare” category that permits legislative lobbying and limited election
spending, to conceal the identities of their donors in their tax filings. Political parties and PACs
classified as “political” (because their activities are “primarily” electoral), however, must
publicly disclose the names of their contributors.208 With these “extra” associational rights of
tax-deductibility and donor anonymity hanging in the balance, it is not surprising that IRS
employees, much like Judge Bird in 1888, struggle to distinguish between “charitable,” “social
206

The most relevant sections of the Internal Revenue Code are sections 501(c)(3) (“Religious and Charitable “),
501(c)(4) (“Social Welfare”), and 527 (”Political”). For an overview of these rules, see
http://www.irs.gov/Charities-&-Non-Profits. For more detailed information, see chapters 2-4 in
http://www.irs.gov/publications/p557/.
207
This rule emerged from a 1976 IRS decision to deny a deduction to a group of workers belonging to “various”
unions who started a strike fund. The disqualification was based on the fact that it was composed of “private
persons” without the “authority” to represent its members in collective bargaining. IRS Publications, “IRC 501(c)(5)
Organizations,” p. J-16, at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-tege/eotopicj03.pdf. Presumably meant to discourage union
members from forming non-union support organizations, seems to contradict the IRS definition of a qualified “labor
organization” as not restricted to unions (p. J-4), as well as other rulings in 1959 and 1974 that enabled non-union
groups to qualify for deductions (pp. J-5 and J-6). For a current treatise confirming that, in practice, “labor
organization” refers only to unions and union-controlled organizations (without explicitly stating that NLRB
certification is necessary), see Bruce R. Hopkins, The Law of Tax-Exempt Organizations, 11th ed. (Hoboken, N.J.:
Wiley & Sons, 2016) § 16.1, pp. 445-48. On the history behind the NLRB’s official recognition of unions, including
its costs to classes of excluded workers, see the chapter in this volume by Margaret Levi, Tania Melo, Barry
Weingast, and Frances Zlotnick, “Opening Access, Ending the Violence Trap: Labor, Business, Government and the
National Labor Relations Act.”
208
IRS Publications, 4221-PC, p. 24, at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4221pc.pdf. Also see
http://www.irs.gov/Charities-&-Non-Profits/Political-Organizations/Political-Organization-Filing-and-Disclosure.
Since the U.S. Supreme Courts Citizen’s United decision in 2011 opened the doors to corporate campaign spending,
groups have extra incentives to file as “social welfare” organizations because they can report donations to
SuperPACs using the names of the organization rather than the names of the original donors. On these currently
controversial issues, see “Left and Right Object to I.R.S. Plan to Restrict Nonprofits’ Political Activity,” New York
Times, February 13, 2014, p. A15; “A Campaign Inquiry in Utah Is the Watchdogs’ Worst Case,” New York Times,
March 18, 2014, p. A1; “Democrats Lean Heavily on PACs in Coordinated Push to Counter G.O.P.,” New York
Times, Oct. 5, 2014 p. A1.

75
welfare,” and “political” purposes. Henry George and his followers could today easily become a
nonprofit corporation with an entity right to receive property, but their association would most
likely still lack the full range of associational rights conferred by the law.
In the century following the American Revolution, access to basic corporate rights clearly
provided advantages to the typically mainstream voluntary associations that most often acquired
them. A corollary of the systematic denial of such rights to politically dissidents and socially
marginal groups was to keep their associations relatively small and ephemeral. Tocqueville
himself may be forgiven for celebrating the liberty of United States citizens to associate. His
failure to perceive the unequal rights granted by the state to the voluntary associations they
formed, however, need no longer obscure our historical understanding of American civil society.

