NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DILEMMA NOT TRILEMMA:
THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CYCLE AND MONETARY POLICY INDEPENDENCE
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 21162
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21162

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015, Revised February 2018

I am grateful to Silvia Miranda Agrippino and to Evgenia Passari for excellent research assistance
and to Richard Portes for discussions. I gratefully acknowledge the ERC (starting grant 210584)
for funding. This paper was presented in the Jackson Hole Symposium. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence
Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 21162
May 2015, Revised February 2018
JEL No. E5,F02,F33,G15
ABSTRACT
There is a global financial cycle in capital flows, asset prices and in credit growth. This cycle co
moves with the VIX, a measure of uncertainty and risk aversion of the markets. Asset markets in
countries with more credit inflows are more sensitive to the global cycle. The global financial
cycle is not aligned with countries’ specific macroeconomic conditions. Symptoms can go from
benign to large asset price bubbles and excess credit creation, which are among the best
predictors of financial crises. A VAR analysis suggests that one of the determinants of the global
financial cycle is monetary policy in the centre country, which affects leverage of global banks,
capital flows and credit growth in the international financial system. Whenever capital is freely
mobile, the global financial cycle constrains national monetary policies regardless of the
exchange rate regime.
For the past few decades, international macroeconomics has postulated the “trilemma”: with free
capital mobility, independent monetary policies are feasible if and only if exchange rates are
floating. The global financial cycle transforms the trilemma into a “dilemma” or an
“irreconcilable duo”: independent monetary policies are possible if and only if the capital account
is managed.
So should policy restrict capital mobility? Gains to international capital flows have proved
elusive whether in calibrated models or in the data. Large gross flows disrupt asset markets and
financial intermediation, so the costs may be very large. To deal with the global financial cycle
and the “dilemma”, we have the following policy options: ( a) targeted capital controls; (b) acting
on one of the sources of the financial cycle itself, the monetary policy of the Fed and other main
central banks; (c) acting on the transmission channel cyclically by limiting credit growth and
leverage during the upturn of the cycle, using national macroprudential policies; (d) acting on the
transmission channel structurally by imposing stricter limits on leverage for all financial
intermediaries.

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
hrey@london.edu

Introduction
If one looks at the evolution of financial integration over the past half‐century in the world economy,
one might conclude that financial openness is an irresistible long run trend, hailed by policy makers
and academic economists alike. Both emerging markets and advanced economies have increasingly
opened their borders to financial flows. The scope for international capital flows to provide welfare
gains or to do harm has widened considerably since the 1990s.
In international macroeconomics and finance we often think within the framework of the
“trilemma”: in a financially integrated world, fixed exchange rates export the monetary policy of the
centre country to the periphery. The corollary is that if there are free capital flows, it is possible to
have independent monetary policies only by having the exchange rate float; and conversely, that
floating exchange rates enable monetary policy independence (see e.g. Obstfeld and Taylor (2004)).
But does the scale of financial globalization and in particular the role of global banks put even this
into question? Are the financing conditions set in the main world financing centres setting the tone
for the rest of the world, regardless of the exchange‐rate regime? Is there a global financial cycle and
if yes, what are its determinants?
Risky asset prices around the globe, from stocks to corporate bonds, have a strong common
component. So do capital flows. Credit flows are particularly procyclical and volatile. As credit
cycles and capital flows obey global factors, they may be inappropriate for the cyclical conditions of
many economies. For some countries, the global cycle can lead to excessive credit growth in boom
times and excessive retrenchment in bad times. As the recent literature has confirmed, excessive
credit growth is one of the best predictors of crisis (Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012), Schularick and
Taylor (2012)). Global financial cycles are associated with surges and retrenchments in capital flows,
booms and busts in asset prices and crises. The picture emerging is that of a world with powerful
global financial cycles characterised by large common movements in asset prices, gross flows and
leverage. It is also a world with massive deviations from uncovered interest parity. There are
interrelations with the monetary conditions of the centre country (the US), capital flows and the
leverage of the financial sector in many parts of the international financial system. The global
financial cycle can be related to monetary conditions in the centre country and to changes in risk
aversion and uncertainty (Bekaert et al. (2012), Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2012), Bruno and Shin
(2013b)).

2

But even if capital flows, especially credit flows, are largely driven by a global factor, they might still
bring important benefits to the world economy. A brief review of the empirical evidence and the
quantification of standard growth models, however, shows how elusive welfare gains to capital
flows appear to be, though it could just be that they are hard to measure.
In part I, I describe the characteristics of capital flows (gross and net), show impressive co‐
movement in gross flows and discuss how they relate to global factors, as proxied in particular by
the VIX. In part II, I show the existence of an important common factor in international asset prices,
which is also closely related to the VIX. I conclude that there is a potent global financial cycle in
gross capital flows, credit creation and asset prices, which has tight connections with fluctuations in
uncertainty and risk aversion. Part III analyses the association of different types of capital flows with
the global financial cycle and reinforces the conclusion that credit flows are particularly connected to
the global financial cycle. In part IV, I hunt for the determinants of the global financial cycle itself
and its transmission mechanism, focusing in particular on the role of monetary policy in the centre
country, on the leverage of financial intermediaries, credit creation and credit flows. Part V argues
that our findings invalidate the “trilemma” and lead to a “dilemma”, an “irreconcilable duo”:
independent monetary policies are possible if and only if the capital account is managed, directly or
indirectly via macroprudential policies. Part VI discusses briefly the findings of the literature on the
gains to capital mobility.

I ) The global financial cycle and international capital flows
A) Characteristics of international capital flows
Figure 1a presents a comprehensive heatmap of capital inflows by asset classes (FDI, portfolio
equity, portfolio debt and credit1) into different geographical regions (North America, Western
Europe, Central and Eastern Europe, Latin America, Asia, Emerging Asia, Africa2). The data are
quarterly 1990Q1‐2012Q4 and come from the IMF International Financial Statistics. The heatmap
colours correspond to the signs of the correlations of capital flows across regions and types of flows
(green when the correlation is positive and red otherwise). As evidenced by the very clear
preponderance of the green colour in the heatmap, most types of capital inflows are positively
correlated with one another and across regions. There is a very strong commonality in liability flows
1
2

Technically we use “other investment” which contains bank loans and trade credit.
For a precise list of the countries included, see Appendix A.

3

across the world. The only exception tends to be FDI inflows in all regions of the world with portfolio
equity flows into Asia and some credit flows into Africa and into Asia. There are in particular strong
positive correlations between all the major flows into North America and Western Europe.
The heatmap of capital outflows by asset classes (Figure 1b) into the same geographical regions
shows an almost equally strong pattern of positive correlations. The only area for which capital
outflows tend to be out of sync is Africa, and this is true across financial assets. Further, some FDI
outflows out of Asia tend also to correlate negatively with other flows. Otherwise, the co‐movement
of flows is also very marked, in particular out of the main financial centres (North America and
Western Europe) for credit, debt and portfolio equity.
On the other hand there are no systematic patterns in the heatmap of the correlations of net flows
(Figure 1c). The commonality in flows is therefore a commonality in gross inflows and outflows and
is particularly marked for Europe, the US ‐ and also Latin America, Emerging Asia and Central and
Eastern Europe ‐ and somewhat less prevalent elsewhere in Asia and in Africa. In terms of types of
assets, FDI does not seem highly correlated with other types of flows. A few questions spring to
mind: does it matter if gross inflows and outflows follow a common pattern world wide if net flows
do not? What are the characteristics of this global cycle? Do we see evidence of a cycle in asset
prices and credit growth?
[Figures 1a,b,c here]

B) Co‐movements with global factors
What is behind those co‐movements in gross flows and are they associated with global credit growth
and asset price fluctuations? It has long been noted that global factors are a major determinant of
international capital flows. As observed by Calvo et al. (1996) “global factors affecting foreign
investment tend to have an important cyclical component, which has given rise to repeated booms
and busts in capital inflows”. The literature has identified cycles in the real rate of interest and in the
growth rate of advanced economies as important “push” factors for capital flows. More recently,
several studies have found that movements in the VIX3 are strongly associated with capital flows.
The VIX is widely seen as a market proxy for risk aversion and uncertainty. The carry trade literature
suggests that carry trade flows tend to increase when the VIX is low and to collapse when the VIX
spikes. More recently, Forbes and Warnock (2012) and Bruno and Shin (2013a) emphasize the surge
in capital flows associated with the lowering of the VIX.
3

The VIX is the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index. It is a measure of the implied volatility
of S&P 500 index options.

4

Figure 2 plots capital inflows disaggregated by asset types (FDI, portfolio equity, portfolio debt and
credit) as a proportion of the world GDP for the period 1990Q1‐2012Q4 and it reports the VIX
(inverted scale) on the same graph. Particularly striking is the prolonged lowering of the VIX during
the period 2002‐2007, during which capital inflows surged. Flows tend to be highly correlated with
one another and negatively correlated with the VIX (except FDI). Credit inflows and portfolio debt
inflows show a high degree of co‐movement over time (correlation of 0.52). Credit flows are the
more volatile and procyclical component of all flows with a particularly dramatic surge in the run up
to the crisis and an equally dramatic collapse during the crisis. Their correlation with the VIX
(inverted scale) is 0.24 on the whole 1990Q1‐2012Q4 sample (quarterly data).
[Figure 2 here]

In Table 1 (a), I present the correlations by regions of each type of inflows with the VIX. Capital
inflows are negatively correlated with the VIX, even at a geographically disaggregated level.
Overwhelmingly, during tranquil periods characterised by low VIX, when uncertainty and risk
aversion are low, capital inflows are larger. In line with aggregate data, the only consistent
exceptions are FDI inflows for which the correlation with the VIX is positive in all geographical areas.
Credit flows into developed economies in Asia are also positively correlated with the VIX.

Table 1 (a): Unconditional correlations of liability flows with the VIX, quarterly, 1990Q1‐2012Q4.
Correlations
inflows / VIX

Equity
FDI
Debt
Credit

North
America

Latin
America

Central
Eastern
Europe

Western
Europe

Emerging
Asia

Asia

Africa

‐0.03

‐0.29

‐0.34

‐0.36

‐0.11

‐0.34

‐0.23

0.09

0.23

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.17

0.06

‐0.23

‐0.17

‐0.28

‐0.16

‐0.29

‐0.08

‐0.23

‐0.22

‐0.10

‐0.14

‐0.21

‐0.24

0.06

‐0.13

If I condition on other “push factors” (world short term real interest rate and world growth rate), a
similar pattern emerges (see Table 1 (b)). The VIX is significantly negatively associated with
fluctuations in capital inflows, except for FDI inflows. The results are similar with outflows, both for
the unconditional and for the conditional correlations for the US and Western Europe; they are
weaker for the other geographical areas. In contrast, and in agreement with our previous results,
5

the same pattern of correlations does not hold for net flows. I do not report these results due to
space constraints.
Table 1 (b): Conditional correlations of liability flows with the VIX, quarterly, 1990Q1‐2012Q4..
Correlations
inflows / VIX

Equity
FDI
Debt
Credit

North
America

Latin
America

Central
Eastern
Europe

Western
Europe

Emerging
Asia

Asia

Africa

‐0.06

‐0.31

‐0.32

‐0.38

‐0.08

‐0.34

‐0.25

0.10

0.35

0.07

0.06

0.08

0.16

0.07

‐0.30

‐0.15

‐0.36

‐0.23

‐0.28

‐0.06

‐0.22

‐0.29

‐0.15

‐0.16

‐0.24

‐0.26

0.09

‐0.14

In Table 1(c), I investigate whether fluctuations in the VIX are also associated with changes in credit
creation and leverage using various measures. We report the conditional correlations controlling
again for the classic push factors (world growth rate and short term real rate). Following Forbes
(2012), I measure leverage as the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial
institutions to bank deposits, including demand, time and saving deposits in nonbanks. The precise
definitions of leverage and domestic credit can be found in Appendix B.
Table 1(c) offers this striking finding: in all areas of the world, credit growth is negatively linked to
the VIX. Correlations tend to be the strongest in North America and Western Europe. Leverage and
leverage growth are also negatively related to the VIX in all the main financial centres (North
America, Western Europe and Asia), which are the homes of the global banks. But the correlation is
in contrast positive for leverage and leverage growth in Latin America, CEE and Africa.

Table 1 (c): Conditional correlations of credit and leverage measures with the VIX, quarterly data,
1990‐2012. The conditioning variables are the world real short rate and the world growth rate.
Correlations
credit / VIX

North
America

Latin
America

Central
Eastern
Europe

Western
Europe

Emerging
Asia

Asia

Africa

6

Domestic credit
growth
Leverage

‐0.26

‐0.14

‐0.14

‐0.11

‐0.01

‐0.30

0.01

‐0.17

0.05

0.30

‐0.09

‐0.12

‐0.25

0.03

‐0.32

0.06

0.07

‐0.21

‐0.06

‐0.31

0.01

Leverage
growth

To sum up, the data show (i) commonality in capital inflows – and outflows – across regions
and types of assets (except for FDI flows and a subset of Asian and African flows). The
commonality is particularly strong for credit and portfolio debt inflows (see Figures 1a,b) but
is absent for net capital flows (Figure 1c); (ii) surges in gross capital flows in period of low
volatility and decline in flows when the VIX goes up (with the exception of FDI flows); a large
volatility and pro‐cyclicality of credit flows (see Figure 2 and Tables 1a,b); (iii) increases in
credit growth around the world in parallel with falls of the VIX (see Table 1c); (iv) increases in
leverage and leverage growth in all the main financial centres when the VIX is low (see Table
1c).

As noted in Brunnermeier et al. (2012) and Shin (2012), credit flows grew at a very fast rate in
the 2003–2007 pre‐crisis period and collapsed during the financial crisis. The pattern of capital
inflows and outflows follows a global financial cycle which is synchronized with fluctuations in
world market risk aversion and uncertainty as proxied by the VIX. Furthermore, it appears that
credit creation in the banking sector and leverage are dancing to the same tune.

II) The global financial cycle: The common component in risky asset
prices.
Having established the existence of a global financial cycle for capital inflows and outflows, credit
growth and leverage, it is natural to study fluctuations in asset prices and to see whether they also
follow the global financial cycle. One might think that prices of equities around the world, prices of
corporate bonds and of commodities reflect to a large extent continent specific, sector specific,
country specific and company specific factors. But, as shown by Miranda‐Agrippino and Rey (2012)
using a large cross section of 858 risky asset prices distributed on the five continents, an important

7

part of the variance of risky returns (25%) is explained by one single global factor4. This result is
remarkable given the size and the heterogeneity of the set. Irrespective of the geographical location
of the market in which the assets are traded or the specific asset class they belong to, risky returns
load to a large extent on this global factor.
As apparent from Figure 3, taken from Miranda‐Agrippino and Rey (2012), the factor is consistent
with the timing of major events such as the Gulf War starting from the second half of 1990, 9/11 and
the first quarter of 2009 when the most recent financial crisis reached its climax. Overall, the index
goes up from the early 1990s until mid 1998 when the Russian crisis erupts followed by the LTCM
bankruptcy, and eventually the bursting of the dotcom bubble. From the beginning of 2003, the
index increases rapidly until the beginning of the third quarter of 2007. This is shortly after the
collapse of the subprime market and coincides with the first signals of increased vulnerability of the
financial markets. The high degree of correlation of the global factor with the VIX is striking.
Building on the analyses of Adrian and Shin (2008) and Danielsson, Shin and Zygrand (2012),
Miranda‐Agrippino and Rey (2012) propose a structural interpretation of the factor. It can be
understood as reflecting the joint evolution of the effective risk appetite of the market as well as
realized market volatility. In turn the effective risk appetite of the market can be empirically related
to the leverage of a subset of financial market intermediaries whose investment strategy is well
approximated by a VaR constraint (broker dealer in the US, large European banks with significant
trading operations and, more generally, banks classified in the “capital market” category in
Bankscope5). Given that structural interpretation, it is not surprising that the factor should
empirically be closely (negatively) correlated with the VIX. As pointed out in Brunnermeier et al.
(2012) and Borio and Disyatat (2011), there is a positive feedback loop between greater credit
supply, asset price inflation, and a compression of spreads. Smaller risk premiums amplify the credit
boom. Measured risk is low and balance sheets look healthier as asset prices go up. By relaxing
value‐at‐risk constraints, this creates additional space for lending and for credit, and so on. This
mechanism is an important positive feedback loop between credit creation and risk spreads. It
contributes to the procyclicality of credit flows and their importance in the build‐up of financial
fragility.

Figure 3: Global factor and VIX. Source: Miranda‐Agrippino and Rey (2012).

4

For a similar conclusion based on a dynamic factor analysis in the context of sovereign credit risk, see
Longstaff et al. (2011)
5
See Miranda‐Agrippino and Rey (2012) for details.

8

To sum up, we have now established in flow data (across most types of flows and regions, but with
some exceptions) and in price data (across a sectorally and geographically wide cross‐section of risky
asset prices) the existence of a global financial cycle. Interestingly, the VIX is a powerful index of the
global financial cycle, whether for flows or for returns. Our analysis so far emphasizes striking
correlations and patterns, but cannot address causality issues. Low value of the VIX, in particular for
long periods of time, are associated with a build up of the global financial cycle: more capital inflows
and outflows, more credit creation, more leverage and higher asset price inflation.

III) Capital flows and market sensitivities to the global financial cycle
In this part I attempt to gauge further the importance of the global financial cycle for different asset
markets (stock prices, house prices) as well as for the leverage of financial intermediaries. Having
reported the importance of the global cycle for the fluctuations of these variables in the time series
dimension, I study in more details the factors affecting the cross sectional sensitivities of these
variables to the global financial cycles. More precisely, I focus here on the possibility that larger
volumes and different types of capital flows matter for the sensitivity of national markets to the
global factor.

9

I investigate whether cross‐sectionally, the sensitivities of country specific variables to the global
(logged) can be related to different types and intensities of capital flows into each

factor

market. The country specific variables

,

are stock market returns

, and house price inflation

,

. I run the following set of regressions:

growth

,

∗

,

where

∗

∗

,

, banking sector leverage

∗

denotes flows into country i (inflows, outflows, different types of flows) normalized by

the GDP of country i,

is a vector of control variables (lagged GDP growth of country i and lagged

nominal effective exchange rate of country i). I also include
The interaction terms

∗

and

∗

, the change in the global factor.

are meant to capture the possible

heterogeneous sensitivity of a given market to the global financial cycle depending on the intensity
and types of capital flows it receives or exports. I run fixed effects estimators with clustered
standard errors by country and include a linear time trend. We checked the stationarity of variables
using a Pesaran test. We have a large number of observations (between 2770 and 3462 depending
on the specification). Table 2 reports the results of selected specifications. Panel (a) reports our
results for stock market returns (log difference of local stock market indices), Appendix C presents
results for 2(b) banking sector leverage growth (difference of leverage ratio) and for 2(c) for house
price inflation (log difference of property price indices).

Table 2 (a) Stock market returns si,t is the dependent variable (1990‐2013)
flit

Credit L

C.nonbank L

Credit A

Debt L

Debt A

Equity L

Equity A

flit
*VIXt

‐0.0952***
(‐12.64)
‐0.1743***
(‐15.14)
0.00
(‐0.02)

‐0.0914***
(‐12.78)
‐0.1669***
(‐16.61)
0.0042
(1.17)

‐0.0951***
(‐12.25)
‐0.1759***
(‐14.71)
0.0002
(0.99)

‐0.0952***
(‐12.66)
‐0.1737***
(‐14.81)
0.0025*
(1.98)

‐0.0962***
(‐12.34)
‐0.1751***
(‐14.54)
0.0006***
(3.54)

‐0.0959***
(‐11.96)
‐0.1758***
(‐15.51)
0.0010***
(6.63)

‐0.0995***
(‐12.94)
‐0.1744***
(‐13.39)
0.0016***
(3.2)

flit‐1
*VIXt‐1

‐0.0007*
(‐1.88)

‐0.0012**
(‐2.13)

‐0.0004***
(‐5.61)

‐0.0005*
(‐1.77)

0.0006**
(2.4)

0
(‐0.55)

0.0001
(0.26)

VIXt

Adj.
R2
N

0.24
0.222
0.234
0.239
0.245
0.254
0.255
3042
3267
3073
2924
2971
2631
2770
Fixed effect estimator, standard errors adjusted for clustering on country, t‐stat in parentheses. All
specifications include the control variables and a linear time trend. Each column corresponds to a
different specification of the flow in the interacted term.

10

Panel (a) shows that stock prices are significantly negatively related to the global factor (the VIX) and
to its growth rate. Credit flows into and out of country i tend to be associated with a higher
sensitivity of the stock market of country i to the global financial cycle (the interaction term is
significantly negative). But, interestingly, debt outflows and especially equity inflows and outflows
tend to be associated with a lesser sensitivity to the global cycle (interaction term positive). So cross‐
sectionally, just like in the time series, credit flows seem more strongly related to the global cycle
than other flows and in particular than equity flows.
As can be seen in Appendix C, the results for banks leverage (b) and house prices (c) are similar in
some respect. There is a negative correlation of banks leverage and house price inflation with the
VIX and a positive correlation with the growth rate of the VIX. There is however in this specification
no sign of any flows associated with a higher sensitivity of leverage of banks (or of house prices) to
the global financial cycle (the interaction term is never significant).
Once again, it is worth emphasizing that these regressions indicate correlations and not causality. In
the time series credit flows are very procyclical. In the cross section, credit flows tend to be
associated with a stronger correlation of stock market returns with the global cycle, while equity
flows tend to be associated with a weaker correlation6.

IV) Monetary policy, capital flows and the global financial cycle
A) Recursive VAR analysis
The global financial cycle appears in co‐movements of gross flows, asset prices, leverage and credit
creation, which are all closely linked to fluctuations in the VIX. But what are its drivers?
Given the strong pro‐cyclicality of credit flows and the way global banks operate (e.g. Shin (2012)
and Bruno and Shin (2013a)) it is natural to investigate the effect on the global financial cycle of
refinancing costs in dollars, i.e. Federal Reserve monetary policy (see Rajan (2006); Borio and Zhu
(2008)). Shin (2012) describes how European global banks in particular were major actors in
channelling US dollar liquidity worldwide before the crisis. Foreign bank branches in the US were
raising large quantities of funds in dollars and transferring them to overseas markets. European
6

It would of course be interesting to establish a causal link between cross‐border credit flows and sensitivity to the cycle.
But for this we would need instrumental variables.

11

global banks were not only intermediating savings back in the US market but were also serving
Asian, Latin American, African and Middle Eastern markets. I will therefore treat the leverage of
European banks as a key variable of the analysis. The dollar is the main currency of global banking.
Since surges in capital flows ‐ especially credit flows ‐ are associated with increases in leverage
worldwide, a natural interpretation is that monetary conditions in the centre country are
transmitted world‐wide through these cross‐border gross credit flows. It is therefore those gross
flows that should be tracked in order to assess financial fragility and overall credit conditions, as
emphasized by Borio and Disyatat (2011), Gourinchas, Truempler and Rey (2012) and Obstfeld
(2012). It is also only by looking at gross flows that one can keep track of currency and maturity
mismatch on balance sheets of financial intermediaries and households. Both of these mismatches
are well known contributors to financial instability.
This is of course not to say that net flows are irrelevant: current account imbalances are key for the
long‐run sustainability of the net external asset position, as a long literature shows (recently
surveyed in Gourinchas and Rey (2013)).
To analyze the dynamic interaction between monetary policy, risk aversion and uncertainty,
leverage and credit flows, I perform a recursive VAR analysis 7. I build on the study of Bekaert,
Hoerova and Lo Duca (2012). They show that movements in the federal funds rate have an effect on
uncertainty (expected stock market volatility) and risk aversion, two components they extract from
the VIX. Like them, I focus on the dynamic links between the federal funds rate and the VIX but I
also study their dynamic interrelations with credit creation, leverage and credit flows. I use
quarterly data for the period 1990‐2012. I impose contemporaneous restrictions (Cholesky) on the
responses of the variables, based on institutional knowledge. I order the variables such that the first
variable cannot respond to contemporaneous shocks (within the quarter) of any other variables , the
second one can respond to contemporaneous shocks affecting variable 1 but not any others etc…
I assume that GDP and prices respond with a lag as they are slow moving, while the global factor
(VIX) can respond contemporaneously to any variable (and is therefore ordered last). The effective
Fed Funds rate (FFR) is our penultimate variable: it can respond to any variable within the quarter
except to the VIX. Financial variables such as credit, flows and leverage are in between: leverage is
ordered immediately before the FFR . I include the following 7 variables (in this order): US GDP, US
GDP deflator (GDPDEF), global credit (logged)(CREDIT) , global credit inflows (INFLOWS) , European

7

The analysis borrows from Miranda Agrippino and Rey (2012) who provides a more detailed exercise
disentangling effects on market effective risk aversion and volatility. Bruno and Shin (2013b) present a similarly
inspired and independently developed analysis but they focus on the dynamic relation with the dollar
exchange rate and the overshooting puzzle.

12

banks leverage (defined as the median of EU bank leverage) (EULEV), Fed Funds target rate (FFR) and
VIX (logged).

8

I note that since we are first and foremost interested in the impact of the shocks in the last three
variables in the VAR (VIX, FFR and leverage), how the other variables are ordered makes no
difference for those three shocks (all I need is partial identification) . For example, given a FFR shock
both credit and flows will stay put in the first quarter and then are free to react, so the relative order
of those two does not matter to FFR. That order only matters in between the two, because I am
assuming that if there were a shock on cross border flows, global credit would take a quarter to
react to that, but I am not focusing on this.
I use a two lag VAR, using the usual criteria (BIC and LR). Bootstrapped confidence intervals are
computed using 1000 replications; light and dark grey shaded areas correspond to 95 and 86%
confidence intervals respectively. I report a subset of key impulse responses in the text (Figure 4a
and 4b). The complete set of impulse response functions are reported in Figure 5 in the Appendix.

Our key findings are the following:
(i)

An increase in the effective federal funds rate (FFR) leads to an increase in the VIX after
about 5 quarters and until 11 quarters. (Figure4a)

(ii)

An increase in the VIX leads to a fall in European banks leverage. (Figure 4b)

(iii)

A fall in the VIX leads to an increase in cross border credit flows up to 6 quarters. (Figure
4b)

(iv)

An increase in the VIX leads to a fall in global domestic credit from 4 quarters onwards.
(Figure 4b)

(v)

An increase in the VIX leads to decline in the FFR. (Figure 4b)

(vi)

An increase in the FFR leads to a fall in EU bank leverage after 15 quarters. (Figure 5)

(vii)

An increase in the FFR leads to a fall in gross credit flows after 12 quarters. (Figure 5)

(viii)

An increase in EU banks leverage is associated with an increase in domestic credit from a
1 quarter horizon. (Figure 5)

(ix)

An increase in EU banks leverage is associated with a fall in the VIX after about 8
quarters. (Figure 5)

8

See Appendix B for the precise definitions of the variables.

13

The VAR results are therefore consistent with the following interpretation. When the Federal Funds
rate goes down, the VIX falls (after about 5 quarters), European banks’ leverage rises, as do gross
credit flows (after 12 quarters). A fall in the VIX leads to an increase in global domestic credit after 4
quarters.
Furthermore I find that increased bank leverage and capital flows, as well as credit expansion
(though for credit it is only marginally significant) are associated with a subsequent fall in the VIX
index. This is consistent with the following mechanism: as credit and capital flows go up, spreads fall:
as noted in particular by Adrian and Shin (2010), the quasi‐constancy of risk‐weighted assets in the
balance sheet of global banks (mostly the banks having large capital market divisions) at times when
the unweighted volume of assets rises substantially suggests a fall in measured risk during expansion
times. When leverage is high and credit is abundant, spreads are compressed and measured risk is
low. This translates into a decline in the VIX. There is therefore a positive feedback loop between
loose monetary policy, fall in the VIX, rise in credit, capital flows and leverage and further fall in the
VIX9.
From Figure 5, I also note that an increase in the VIX has a significant negative effect on GDP (as in
Bloom (2009)) and on the GDP deflator. As expected, an increase in the FFR rate has a dampening
effect on prices. I also note that monetary policy loosens when the VIX goes up (Figure 4b).

Figure 4a: 25 bp increase to the effective federal funds rate.

9

This interpretation accords well with the micro studies of Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro and Saurina (2012) on European data

who finds that banks grants more loans to riskier firms in a low interest rate environment and of Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and
Suarez (2013) who have similar findings using US data.

14

Figure 4b: Responses to a 1% increase in the VIX.

B) Robustness
I check robustness on the pre‐crisis sample 1990‐2007. I also check robustness by dropping some of
our variables (I drop successively credit, leverage, flows one by one) and by dropping a lag to make
sure overfitting is not an issue. Importantly, two studies with a different focus but some related
results (Bekaert et al. (2012) and Bruno and Shin (2013b), allow us to assess further the robustness
of some of the findings.
Bekaert et al. (2012) decompose the VIX index into a component reflecting expected stock market
volatility and into a variance premium reflecting risk aversion. They run a structural four variable
VAR with a business cycle indicator, the two components of the VIX and the US short‐term real rate
(defined as the Fed Funds end‐of‐month target rate minus the CPI annual inflation rate) as their
benchmark. They find that a loose monetary policy reduces risk aversion and uncertainty; and that
periods of high VIX are followed by looser monetary policy. They provide numerous robustness
checks, in particular with respect to the measurement of monetary policy shocks and by comparing
results on the pre‐crisis sample and the whole sample. Their findings are compatible with my results
showing an increase in the VIX following a tightening in the FFR and a loosening of monetary policy
after a VIX increase (see Figure 4a,b).
15

Bruno and Shin (2013b) runs a 4 variable recursive VAR with FFR, log VIX, leverage and the real
effective dollar exchange rate on quarterly data for the period 1995‐2007. For monetary policy
measures they use the real FFR and the real effective FFR, growth of US M1, and the residual of a
Taylor rule. They use US broker dealer leverage instead of the broader measure of EU leverage.
They find that a positive monetary policy shock leads to an increase in the VIX after quarter 4; to a
decline in US broker‐dealer leverage after about 10 quarters; an increase in the VIX leads to a decline
in US broker‐dealer leverage after quarter 10. These results are compatible with my results (i), (vi),
(ii) with some differences in timing. The authors also find, after augmenting their VAR, that an
increase in the FFR reduces credit flows (in their case defined as the first difference of US dollar
liabilities of banks located outside the US) after about 7 quarters; that an increase in the VIX reduces
flows . These additional results are also compatible with mine (see (vii), (iii) ) with some differences
in timing. Bruno and Shin (2013b) present in addition very interesting evidence on the dollar real
effective exchange rate dynamics and the delayed overshooting puzzle.

C) Economic significance of the results
Are the shocks to the federal funds rate an important source of variation for the dynamics of the
global financial cycle, indexed by the VIX?
In their 4 variable VAR, Bruno and Shin (2013b) find that shocks to the FFR explain almost 30% of the
variance of the VIX at horizons longer than 10 quarters.
Similarly in their 4 variable structural VAR model, Bekaert et al (2012) find that monetary policy
shocks account for over 20% of the variance of risk aversion at horizons longer than 7 quarters. They
also account for a comparable part of the variance of uncertainty. In their six variable VAR, the
monetary policy shock accounts for about 12% of the variance of risk aversion at horizons longer
than 10 quarters.
Depending on the exact specification of the VAR analysis, I find that shocks to the FFR explain from
about 4% of the variance of the VIX (in the 7 variable VAR on the whole 1990‐2012 sample) to about
10% (in a 4 variable VAR on the 1990‐2007 sample). That number goes up to 17% if I use, like Bruno
and Shin (2013b) US broker‐dealer leverage instead of the EU bank leverage variable.
Although there is some variance in the estimates depending on the number of variables and the
exact specification of the VAR, these are economically significant, possibly large effects.

16

V) Taking stock: monetary conditions, capital flows and the global
financial cycle
There is a global financial cycle in capital flows, asset prices and in credit growth. This cycle co‐moves
with the VIX, a measure of uncertainty and risk aversion of the markets. Asset markets with more
credit inflows tend to be more sensitive to the global cycle. The global financial cycle is not aligned
with countries’ specific macroeconomic conditions. In a number of countries, this can lead to excess
credit growth (or alternatively to monetary conditions which are too tight). Excess credit growth is
one of the best predictors of crisis. Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) show that across all types of
crisis, three variables play a statistically and economically significant role: the ratio of domestic
credit to output, the real exchange rate, and the ratio of official reserves to output. Schularick and
Taylor (2012) demonstrate that credit growth is a powerful predictor of financial crises, suggesting
that such crises are “credit booms gone wrong” and that “policymakers ignore credit at their peril.”
Similar findings are echoed in Lund‐Jensen (2012), who finds that high asset price inflation is
associated with systemic banking crises. Our analysis clearly implies that gross flows (particularly
credit and debt) should be monitored closely (in parallel with net flows which are key for
sustainability issues) in order to assess financial fragility and overall credit conditions. It is also only
by looking at gross flows and gross cross‐border positions (the entire balance sheet of countries)
that one can keep track of currency and maturity mismatch. Both of these mismatches have proved
to contribute to financial instability10.

The importance of the global financial cycle in creating boom and bust cycles in emerging markets
and advanced economies alike with capital inflows surges goes back a long way and has been
mentioned in different contexts by Diaz Alejandro (1983), Calvo et al. (1996), (identification of “push
factors” for capital flows), Eichengreen and Portes (1987), Reinhart and Reinhart (2008) (capital
flows “bonanzas”), Lane and McQuade (2012) and many others. The role of cross‐border flows in
disrupting financial intermediation in the period leading to the 2008 crisis is stressed by Portes
(2009) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (2010); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) draw similar conclusions from
the historical record.

Our VAR analysis suggests that one important determinant of the global financial cycle is monetary
policy in the centre country, which affects leverage of global banks, credit flows and credit growth in
the international financial system. This channel invalidates the “trilemma”, which postulates that in
10

See for example Kalemni‐Ozcan et al. (2012).

17

a world of free capital mobility, independent monetary policies are feasible if and only if exchange
rates are floating. Instead, while it is certainly true that countries with fixed exchange rates cannot
have independent monetary policies in a world of free capital mobility, my analysis suggests that
cross‐border flows and leverage of global institutions transmit monetary conditions globally, even
under floating exchange‐rate regimes.
So should policy restrict capital mobility?

VI) Benefits of international capital flows
If restricting the movement of capital across border is to be a policy option, its potential benefit
should be assessed against its costs. So what do we know about the gains to international capital
mobility?

The literature has attempted to measure gains to free capital mobility mostly in two ways: by
calibrating standard international macroeconomic models and evaluating welfare gains when going
from autarky to financially integrated markets; by testing for growth effects and better risk sharing
(lower volatility) following financial integration, using either panel data or event studies.

A) Calibration of standard models
The neoclassical growth model is behind many of our economic intuitions regarding why the
free flow of capital could be beneficial. Within this model, financial integration brings
improvements in allocative efficiency (capital flows to places with the highest marginal product)
and better risk sharing. Interestingly, even within that paradigm, realistic calibrations indicate
that gains tend to be small. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) show, in the context of small open
economies and in a deterministic setting, that gains are second order. All that international
financial integration does is to speed up transition toward the steady state of the economy.
Coeurdacier et al. (2013) allow for uncertainty and estimate welfare gains from allocative
efficiency and risk sharing together, in the context of a general equilibrium neoclassical growth
model. The welfare gains are small, even in such a world where the interaction between the
precautionary savings motives and allocative efficiency effects is modeled explicitly – so the
two main channels of gains from integration can express themselves‐ . We find they are on the
18

order of a few tenths of a percent of permanent consumption for realistic calibrations.

B) Empirical evidence from panel data and event studies
Cross‐border investment positions have risen for advanced economies from 68% of GDP in 1980 to
438% of GDP in 2007; for emerging markets they have gone from 35% to 73% of GDP during the
same period (Lane and Milesi‐Ferretti 2007 and Lane (2012)). If capital flows bring gains, we should
be observing large effects in the data, due to the sheer scale of financial globalisation since the
1990s. There are numerous studies that try to test for effects of international capital flows on
growth or on consumption volatility. Surprisingly, these effects are hard to find in macroeconomic
data. As attested by the most recent surveys reviewing a long list of empirical papers, it is hard to
find robust evidence of an impact of financial openness on growth or on improved risk sharing (see
Eichengreen 2002; Jeanne et al. 2012; Kose et al. 2006; Obstfeld 2009). Some papers point toward
the existence of threshold effects: capital flows are beneficial only after a country has reached a
certain amount of institutional or financial sector development (see Bekaert et al. (2005)). There are
also some differences if one looks across different types of capital flows: FDI flows seem better at
delivering growth and risk sharing benefits than others. But this evidence is not very conclusive
because the sample used often makes a difference (see Jeanne et al. (2012)). The literature based
on event studies is often more positive (see Henry (2007)) and points towards a fall in the cost of
capital and increased investment at the time of financial integration. But the simultaneity of other
economic reforms or policies put in place at the time of financial opening is however often a
concern. Further, from a theoretical point of view, evaluating welfare gains requires tracking the
path of integrating economies from the point of capital account integration to their steady state.
Along such paths, one can observe initial investment increases and current account deficits which
then reverse later on as countries have to repay their external debt. Welfare gains along these paths
are found to be small (see Coeurdacier et al. (2013)).

So both on the empirical side and on the calibration side, it is so far hard to find robust support
for large quantifiable benefits of international financial integration. I do not claim that there
are no benefits to international financial integration, only that they have been remarkably
elusive so far given the scale of financial globalization the world has undergone. In that light, it
would be useful to identify more precisely the channels for which capital flows may be
beneficial. One possibility is to look more closely at potential effects on total factor productivity

19

of certain types of flows. The existing literature on this topic has to deal with hard identification
issues and is also not very conclusive ( for a discussion see Obstfeld 2009, p. 89). Another
possibility is that financial FDI favours financial market deepening and thereby improves growth
prospects11. Yet another possibility is to investigate more closely the risk sharing properties of
the external balance sheet of countries during catastrophic events such as the 2007‐2008 global
financial crisis. Gourinchas et al. (2012) show that there were massive wealth transfers between
the US and the rest of the world when the global financial crisis hit (about 2 trillion dollars
valuation losses on the US net external asset position, which is equivalent to a wealth transfer
to the rest of the world). The US, centre of the international monetary system, acted as a global
insurer. It is easy to see how this insurance transfer is implemented: since emerging markets
tend to be long in US government debt (the reserve asset) and short equity and FDI (and vice
versa for the United States)12, in times of crisis the value of a large part of their assets (US
government bonds) is stable or even goes up while the value of their liabilities, consisting of
risky assets, collapses. Thus, while large external balance sheets can help propagate financial
crisis, they can also contribute to risk sharing depending on their exact structure. This is a
further reason why monitoring gross flows and gross positions (as opposed to only net flows or
current accounts) is essential.

To sum up, gains to international capital flows have proved elusive whether in calibrated models or
in the data, though perhaps this is just because those gains are hard to measure. For example, they
might occur through improvements in TFP, which we have not been able to measure precisely (but
then why don’t we see them in growth rates?) or they might manifest themselves mainly when
large shocks hit. One thing is clear at this stage: we cannot take them for granted.

VII) Policy options: dealing with the “dilemma”
Gross capital inflows, leverage, credit growth and asset prices dance largely to the same tune. They
co‐move with the VIX. There is a global financial cycle, which may not be appropriate for individual
countries. Symptoms can go from benign to large asset price bubbles and excess credit creation, a
condition which has been identified repeatedly as one of the best predictors of financial crises. VAR

11

For detailed work on operations of international financial institutions see in particular Cetorelli and Goldberg
(2012).

12

Gourinchas et al. (2010) show how to endogenize such asymmetric portfolios when the centre country of the
international monetary system is more risk neutral than the rest of the world.

20

analyses suggest monetary conditions are transmitted from the main financial centre to the rest of
the world through gross credit flows and leverage, irrespective of the exchange rate regime. This
puts the traditional “trilemma” view of the open economy into question. Fluctuating exchange rates
cannot insulate economies from the global financial cycle, when capital is mobile. The “trilemma13”
morphs into a “dilemma” – independent monetary policies are possible if and only if the capital
account is managed, directly or indirectly, regardless of the exchange‐rate regime.
This implies that gross flows, particularly credit flows, are of great importance for financial stability
and have to be monitored carefully. It is also only by looking at gross flows and gross cross border
positions (the entire balance sheet of countries) that one can keep track of currency and maturity
mismatch. Both of these mismatches have proved to contribute to financial instability, time and
time again (see for example Farhi et al. (2012)). Once more, this is not to say net flows do not
matter, as they are important for sustainability issues14.
As welfare gains from capital flows cannot be taken for granted (though the jury is still out), we
should consider the following range of options to weaken the potency of the global financial cycle
and thereby increase financial stability. One could: a) impose targeted capital controls; b) act on one
of the sources of the financial cycle itself: the monetary policy of the Fed and other main central
banks; c) act on the transmission channel cyclically by limiting credit growth and leverage during the
upturn of the cycle using national policies (and possibly doing the reverse during downturns) – i.e.
putting in place macro‐prudential policies; d) act on the transmission channel structurally by
imposing stricter limits on leverage for all financial intermediaries.

a) Capital controls
One could consider capital controls either cyclical or permanent to insulate the economy from the
global financial cycle. Permanent capital controls can be applied on subset of assets either on the
inflow side or the outflow side. It is, at this stage hard to assess rigorously the effect of such policy
on financial stability and its side effects, as, in the recent period, permanent controls have been
implemented exclusively in a subset of low income countries, which have very specific characteristics
(see Klein (2012)). Overcoming this selection issue is a major challenge.

13

Alternatively the “impossible trinity” becomes an “irreconcilable duo”.
Gourinchas and Rey (2007) estimated that about a third of the adjustment of the United States towards its
long run budget constraint came from valuation effects while the rest came from net exports (i.e. current
account and net flows).

14

21

Temporary controls, especially on credit flows and portfolio debt when the cycle is in a boom phase
could be used. This option has been tested in various contexts: the Chilean encaje (1991‐ 1998); the
2010 and 2011 Brazilian taxes on equity inflows etc… Often though, controls have been used with
the primary aim of preventing excessive appreciation of the exchange rate. When capital flows in, an
excessive exchange rate appreciation may hurt the export sector. As a result, Central Bankers may
wish to intervene on the foreign exchange market to keep the currency down, accumulating
reserves. They face the tradeoff of higher inflation or increased sterilization costs with a likely side
effect of an increased interest rate leading to further inflows (also reinforced by expectations of
further appreciation of the exchange rate). Taxing inflows, if effectively implemented can act as a
circuit breaker in such a situation. There is a lively debate –as there are also difficult measurement
issues linked to selection and endogeneity‐ on the effectiveness and side effects of temporary capital
controls in this context (see for example Forbes et al. (2012), Chamon and Garcia (2013), Klein
(2012), Werning (2012)).
Ultimately, since in our context, it is really excessive credit growth that is the main issue of concerns,
capital controls should be viewed more as partial substitutes with macroprudential tools. The latter
tend to be more targeted. But capital controls may be appropriate if there is a lot of direct cross‐
border lending and the banking system can be circumvented (see Ostry et al (2011)). It is important
to note that macro‐prudential policies can weaken the link between domestic monetary policy and
capital inflows, without the imposition of capital controls. For instance, by preventing excessive
credit growth in boom times, the Central Bank may reduce the incentive for banks to borrow
externally when domestic monetary policy tightens.

b) Internalisation of the global spillovers of the centre’s monetary policy
One could consider acting on one of the sources of the global cycle itself, the monetary policy stance
in the main financial centres. Monetary conditions in large financial centres such as the US shape
the global financial cycle via the endogenous response of leverage and the procyclicality of cross
border credit flows. This transmission mechanism, unhindered by the flexibility of exchange rate
transforms the ”impossible trinity” of a fixed exchange rate, independent monetary policy and free
capital mobility into the “irreconcilable duo” (a “dilemma”) of independent monetary policy and free
capital mobility. The spillover effects of large countries central bank’s policies onto other countries
are at present not internalized. Central bankers of systemically important countries should pay more
attention to their collective policy stance and its implications for the rest of the world. One practical
way of implementing this, proposed in Eichengreen et al. (2012) would be for “a small group of
systemically significant central banks to meet regularly under the auspices of the Committee on the
22

Global Financial System of the BIS. This group would discuss and assess the implications of their
policies for global liquidity, leverage, and exposures, and the appropriateness of their joint money
and credit policies from the point of view of global price, output, and financial stability”. It could
issue a short report discussing policy tradeoffs and international inconsistencies. With time, this
should at least help to understand better these complex issues –also by stimulating more research in
these areas – and might encourage Central Bankers to internalize some of the external spillovers of
the policies. The difficulties of such a policy option are obvious: international cooperation on
monetary spillovers may conflict with the domestic mandates of central banks. For example,
international financial stability and domestic activity and inflation targets may be at odds at least in
the short to medium run. Furthermore the management of aggregate demand in systemically
important economies also has important consequences for economic activity in the rest of the
world. It is easy to see that the tradeoffs are extraordinarily complex.

c) Muting the transmission channel of the global cycle by taking cyclical measures (macro‐
prudential measures) to limit excessive credit growth.
Since, for a country, the most dangerous outcome of inappropriately loose global financial
conditions is excessive credit growth, a sensible policy option is to monitor directly credit growth
and leverage in each market. Recently, much effort has gone into putting in place macro‐prudential
measures having just this goal. The arsenal has several layers. Basel 3 has a countercyclical capital
cushion that can be activated in boom times. Loan‐to‐value ratios and debt‐to‐income ratios can be
used in order to restrict lending and keep real estate prices in check. One should also monitor closely
lending standards and trading strategies during periods of high credit growth. There is a wealth of
experience being gathered around the world recently on the practical implementation of macro
prudential tools (see for example the Reserve Bank of India or the Bank of Korea where

macroprudential measures were imposed including leverage caps on FX derivatives position and
a macroprudential stability levy on non‐core FX liabilities of banks (Bank of Korea Report 2013)).
It is obvious that country‐specific institutional details and market organization matter a lot. A
centralized repository of the knowledge and experience gathered so far by supervisors and central
bankers would be highly valuable.
Beyond the tools, one of the big practical issues is to determine the timing of intervention. When
should one activate circuit breakers to cut the positive feedback loops described in Part IV?
It is important, not to wait too long; not to wait, for example, for the quasi‐certainty that there is a
bubble in asset prices or real estate to intervene.
23

One option is to devise automatic rules based on the credit to GDP ratio and act as soon as a certain
threshold is crossed (Borio et al. (2011)). This has the advantage of being robust to lobbying of
interested parties. It also overcomes the well known bias towards inaction when good times are
unfolding and everyone is happily sharing the dividends of increasing asset returns, forgetting about
the risk building up.
Another option is to stress‐test the balance sheet of the financial sector (banks and shadow
banks) very frequently, either in a targeted way or broadly, and judge whether large but
realistic changes in asset prices could jeopardize financial stability. Stress testing is a difficult
exercise in general and estimating second‐round effects is particularly challenging.
Furthermore, this is not a popular undertaking with market participants, as it requires regular
inputs on top of mandatory reportings. It also requires careful thinking about communication
policy (and/or absolute confidentiality as the case may be). Moreover, fiscal backstop strategies
are needed to guarantee the credibility of the stress testing. None of this is easy. But doing
stress tests regularly and often, even if this is an imperfect process, is a necessary monitoring
tool. It improves the knowledge of supervisors and insures they are up to date with the recent
market developments; importantly it may also give constructive challenges to the internal risk
monitoring of institutions. It may reveal failures in corporate governance in organizations where
incentives are not necessarily aligned to keep risk in check or where information is not available
or centralized adequately. It may even reveal “blind spots” of risk taking activities occurring
below the radar screen of the Chief Risk Officer. An aggressive policy of frequent stress tests,
some targeted, some broad, can provide a flexible way to tackle the issue of excessive credit
growth and leverage. Tests are particularly informative when they indicate whether if

current financing conditions, including the shadow banking sector, were to be
disrupted, financial stability could be endangered.15

d) Muting the transmission channel structurally by dampening the amplification capacity of
financial intermediaries: tougher limits on leverage.

15

We should not forget that, usually, there are a number of important domestic distortions that interact with capital flows
and credit growth. In practice, for political reasons, we see many subsidies to investment in real estate and to debt. These
subsidies are instrumental to creating the initial bubble or the beginning of a bubble in real estate prices and investment.
By all means, the first thing to do is to remove these distortions. It is also important to remember that excessive borrowing
by a country means that someone else is lending excessively: macroprudential policies apply to lenders just as well as they
apply to borrowers.

24

At the heart of the transmission mechanism described in this paper is the ability of financial
intermediaries, whether banks or shadow banks to leverage up quickly to very high levels when
financing conditions are favourable. Credit is excessively sensitive to the financing costs. I start
again, as in c) with the useful observation that the most dangerous outcome of inappropriately loose
global financial conditions is excessive credit growth. It is possible in addition to or instead of
monitoring the cyclical properties of credit growth to cut structurally the ability of financial
intermediaries to be excessively procyclical. One policy lever seems particularly appropriate for
doing this: the leverage ratio. By putting a tougher limit on leverage, the ability of the financial
system to engage in the feedback loops discussed in sections V and VI will be curtailed. Complex
macro prudential policies described above are not necessarily robust. Errors of judgements by
supervisors, Chief Risk Officers, CEOs and boards are possible and even likely in our excessively
complex financial and regulatory environment. Tougher leverage ratios may be in principle a way to
decrease the (verifiably huge) cost of these errors, without imposing any large costs, if at all, on the
real economy (see Haldane (2012), Jenkins (2012), Admati and Hellwig (2013))16.

Conclusion
Of these four options, if history is of any guidance, putting in a place an effective international
cooperation among the main central banks to internalise the spillovers of their monetary policies on
the rest of the world seems out of reach17. And there are some reasons for that: international
cooperation on monetary spillovers may conflict with the domestic mandates of central banks. For
example, international financial stability and domestic activity and inflation targets may be at odds,
at least in the short to medium run. Furthermore the management of aggregate demand in
systemically important economies has important consequences for economic activity in the rest of
the world. This is a major consideration. The rest of the world cannot at the same time complain of
excessive capital inflows due to loose monetary policy in the centre countries and wish for a higher
level of economic activity and demand stimulus in the same countries. Tradeoffs are extraordinarily

16

Of course excessive complexity in regulation has also the downside of letting a well resourced industry find
loopholes or create them as well as encouraging risky bets guided by regulatory arbitrage. Complexity often
goes with lack of transparency and heterogeneous implementation.
17
Policy coordination was a major theme in international macroeconomics in the 1980s (see, e.g. Buiter and
Marston (1985) and Bryant and Portes (1987)). The G7 summits of 1986 (Tokyo) and 1987 (Venice) emphasized
multilateral surveillance. To this day, however neither the economic analysis nor the policy pronouncements
have had any observable effect on actual monetary policies.

25

complex and policy action will most likely remain biased towards national priorities. A transparent
forum in which the collective monetary policy stance of the systemically important central banks is
actively discussed and inconsistencies analysed would reduce the risk of volatility in capital flows18.

References
Admati Anat and Martin Hellwig (2013) “The bankers’new clothes: what’s wrong with banking and
what to do about it”, Princeton University Press.
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin (2010) “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial
Intermediation, 19, 418‐437.
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin (2012) “Procyclical Leverage and Value‐at‐Risk” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 338,
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff reports/sr338.html

Adrian, Tobias and Nina Boyarchenko, 2013, “Intermediary Leverage Cycles and Financial
Stability”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 567.
Bank of Korea Report (2013), “Macroprudential Policies: Korea’s experiences”.
Bekaert Geert, Campbell Harvey and Christian Lundblad (2005) “Does financial liberalization spur
growth? “ Journal of Financial Economics 77 (1), 3‐55.
Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca. (2012). “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy,”
working paper, European Central Bank.

Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat (2011) “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: Link or no link?”
BIS Working Papers No 346 http://www.bis.org/publ/work346.pdf
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu (2012) “Capital regulation, risk‐taking and monetary policy: a missing
link in the transmission mechanism?” Journal of Financial Stability, 8(4), 236‐251
Brunnermeier, M. De Gregorio, J. et al. 2012. “Banks and Cross‐Border Capital Flows: Policy
Challenges and Regulatory Responses.” Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform.

18

We also note that monetary policy is only one of the drivers of the global financial cycle and that more
research should be done to uncover other important drivers.

26

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2012a) “Capital Flows, Cross‐Border Banking and Global
Liquidity” working paper, Princeton University.
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2013b) “Capital Flows and the Risk‐taking channel of
monetary policy”, working paper Princeton University.
Buiter, Willem, and Richard Marston (1985), eds., International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge University Press.
Bryant, Ralph, and Richard Portes (1987), eds., Global Macroeconomics: Policy Conflict and
Cooperation, Macmillan.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1993) “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” IMF Staff Papers, 40 (1),
108‐151.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996) “Capital Flows to Developing
Countries in the 1990s: Causes and Effects,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10, Spring 1996, 123‐
139.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S. Goldberg (2012) “Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission”
Journal of Finance 67(5), 1811—1843.
Chamon Marcos and Marcio Garcia (2013), Capital controls in Brazil: Effective?, manuscript, IMF.
Coeurdacier Nicolas, Hélène Rey and Pablo Winant (2013) “Financial Integration and Growth

in a Risky World”, manuscript, London Business School and SciencesPo.
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven and Gustavo Suarez (2013) “Bank Leverage and Monetary
Policy’s Risk‐Taking Channel: Evidence from the United States” working paper, International
Monetary Fund.

Díaz‐Alejandro, Carlos F. “Good‐Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash.” Journal of
Development Economics 19 (February 1985): 1‐24.
Drehmann, M, C Borio and K Tsatsaronis (2011): “Anchoring countercyclical capital buffers:
the role of credit aggregates”, International Journal of Central Banking, vol 7(4), pp 189‐239
Eichengreen Barry et al. (2011) Rethinking Central Banking, Committee on International Economic
Policy and Reform, Brookings Institution.
Eichengreen Barry 2002, “Capital Account liberalization: what do the cross country studies tell us?
World Bank Economic Review 15, 341‐366.

Eichengreen Barry and Richard Portes (1987), ‘The Anatomy of Financial Crises’, in Richard
Portes and Alexander Swoboda, eds., Threats to International Financial Stability, Cambridge
University Press.
Farhi Emmanuel, Pierre‐Olivier Gourinchas and Hélène Rey, 2011 Reforming the
International Monetary System, CEPR e‐book and Conseil d’Analyse Economique.
27

Forbes Kristin (2012) "The "Big C": Identifying and Mitigating Contagion" , 36th Jackson Hole
Symposium.
Forbes Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas Kostka and Roland Straub (2012) "Bubble Thy Neighbor:
Direct and Spillover Effects of Capital Controls", NBER Working Paper #18052.
Forbes, Kristin J. and Francis E. Warnock (2012) “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight
and Retrenchment” Journal of International Economics 88(2): 235‐251.
Geanakoplos, John (2010) “The Leverage Cycle.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, ed.
Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and MichaelWoodford, 1‐65. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier and Olivier Jeanne (2006), “The elusive gains from international
financial integration”, Review of Economic Studies, 73, 715‐741.
Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier and Maurice Obstfeld (2012) ”Stories of the Twentieth Century
for the Twenty‐First,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 226‐65.
Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier, Nicolas Govillot and Hélène Rey (2010) “Exorbitant Privilege and
Exorbitant Duty” Manuscript, London Business School.
Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier and Hélène Rey (2007) “International Financial Adjustment” Journal of
Political Economy, 115(4), 665‐703.
Gourinchas, Pierre‐Olivier, Hélène Rey, and Kai Truempler (2012) "The Financial crisis and the
geography of wealth transfers." Journal of International Economics, 88(2), 266‐283
Haldane, Andrew (2012) “The dog and the frisbee”, given at the Jackson Hole 36th economic policy
symposium.

He Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy. Intermediary Asset Pricing. American Economic
Review, 103(2):732–770, 2013.
Henry Peter (2007), "Capital account liberalization: theory, evidence and speculation”, Journal

of economic literature, vol. 45(4), 887‐935.
Jeanne, Olivier, Arvind Subramanian and John Williamson (2012), “Who needs to open the capital
account?”, Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Jenkins Robert (2012),”Let’s make a deal”, speech, Bank of England, Financial Policy Committee.

Jimenez, G. S. Ongena, J.‐L. Peydro and J. Saurina (2012) “Hazardous Times for Monetary
Policy: What Do Twenty‐Three Million Bank Loans Say about the Effects of Monetary Policy
on Credit Risk‐Taking?”, Econometrica forthcoming.
Kalemni‐Ozcan, Elias Papaioannou and Fabrizio Perri (2012), “Global banks and crisis
transmission”, Journal of International economics.
Klein, Michael (2012) “Capital Controls: Gates versus Walls”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity.
28

Korinek, Anton. “The New Economics of Prudential Capital Controls.” IMF Economic
Review 59 (August 2011): 523‐561.

Kose M Eshwar Prasad and Ken Rogoff 2006 “Financial globalization: a reappraisal”, IMF
Staff Papers, 56, 8‐62.
Lane, Philip and Gian Maria Milesi‐Ferretti (2007). "The External Wealth of Nations Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970.2004" Journal of
International Economics, 73, 223‐250.
Lane, Philip and Peter McQuade (2012), “Domestic credit growth and international capital
flows”, mimeo, Trinity College Dublin.
Longstaff, Francis, Jun Pan, Lasse Pedersen and Kenneth Singleton (2011) “How sovereign is
sovereign credit risk?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3: 75‐103.

Lund‐Jensen, Kasper, (2012) Monitoring Systemic Risk Based on Dynamic Thresholds, IMF
Working Paper No. 12/159.
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Marco E. Terrones. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from
Macro Aggregates and Micro Data.” Working Paper 14049, May 2008
Miranda‐Agrippino, Silvia, Rey, Hélène (2012) . World Asset Markets and Global Liquidity, presented
at the Frankfurt ECB BIS Conference, February 2012, mimeo, London Business School.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2009), “International Fiannce and growth in developing countries: what have we
learned?”, IMF staff papers vol 56, n1.

Obstfeld, Maurice (2012a) “Financial Flows, Financial Crises, and Global Imbalances”,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 31, 469—480
Obstfeld, Maurice (2012b) “Does the Current Account Still Matter?”, American Economic
Review, 102(3), 1‐23.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan Taylor (2004) “Global capital markets: integration, crisis and
growth”, Cambridge University Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of
Common Causes. In Reuven Glick and Mark M. Spiegel, eds., Asia and the Global Financial Crisis. San
Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2010.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S.
Qureshi, and Annamaria Kokenyne. “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?” IMF Staff
Discussion Note SDN/11/06, April 2011.

Rey, Hélène (2013), “Capital flows: assessing the costs, hunting for the gains”, presented at the
IMF research conference on Rethinking macroeconomic policy, Washington DC.

29

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent R. Reinhart. “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of the
Past and Present.” In Jeffrey A. Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, eds., International Seminar on
Macroeconomics 2008. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor (2012) “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy,
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870‐2008.” American Economic Review 102, 1029‐61.
Shin, Hyun Song (2012) “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium” Mundell‐Fleming
Lecture, IMF Economic Review 60 (2), 155‐192.
Sims, Christopher A. 1980. “Macroeconomic and Reality” Econometrica, 48, 1‐48.

30

Appendix A

List of countries included:
North
America
Canada

Latin
America
Argentina

Central & Eastern
Europe
Belarus

Western
Europe
Austria

Emerging
Asia
China

Asia
Australia

US

Bolivia

Bulgaria

Belgium

Indonesia

Japan

Brazil

Croatia

Cyprus

Malaysia

Korea

Chile

Czech Republic

Denmark

Thailand

New
Zealand

Colombia

Hungary

Finland

Costa Rica

Latvia

France

Ecuador

Lithuania

Germany

Mexico

Poland

Greece

Romania

Iceland

Russian Federation

Ireland

Serbia

Italy

Slovak Republic

Luxembourg

Slovenia

Malta

Turkey

Netherlands

Africa
South
Africa

Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK

31

Data on Capital flows:
Source of flow data: quarterly gross capital inflows and outflows from the International Monetary
Fund’s International Financial Statistics (accessed through IMF website in March 2013) for:
Portfolio Equity Inflows, Outflows and Net Flows constructed as Outflows‐Inflows (Assets‐Liabilities)
FDI Inflows, Outflows and Net Flows
Portfolio Debt Inflows, Outflows and Net Flows, and
Other Investment Inflows, Outflows and Net Flows
Data transformations: Flows are reported in millions of U.S. dollars
IFS does not differentiate between true zeros and not availables; most of the times we treat these
values as errors and omissions, unless they evidently represent zero flows.
Mapping of the flows from BPM5 (until 2004 Q4) to BP6 (2005 Q1 onwards) in accordance to the
guidelines of the 6th edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position
Manual of IMF – Reconciliation for quarters 2005 Q1‐2008 Q4 for which there is data overlap.
Construction of Net Flows only when data on Inflows and Outflows are available
World GDP Growth (Quarterly): International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics

(accessed through IMF website in March 2013).

32

Appendix B
Global Factor: common factor extracted from a collection of 858 asset price series spread over Asia
Pacific, Australia, Europe, Latin America, North America, Commodity and Corporate samples. For
details on extraction and original asset prices dataset composition please refer to Miranda Agrippino
and Rey (2012).
Banking Sector Leverage: constructed as the ratio between Claims on Private Sector and
Transferable plus Other Deposits included in Broad Money of Depository Corporations excluding
Central Banks. Data are in national currencies from the Other Depository Corporations Survey;
Monetary Statistics, International Financial Statistics database. Classification of deposits within the
former Deposit Money Banks Survey corresponds to Demand, Time, Savings and Foreign Currency
Deposits.
EU Banking Sector Leverage: constructed as the median Banking Sector Leverage of the initial 12
Euro Area Countries (Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain) and the UK.
US Brokers‐Dealers Financial Leverage: constructed as the ratio of Security Broker and Dealers
Financial Assets and Total Liabilities; Federal Reserve Board; Financial Accounts, release Z.1
Domestic Credit: constructed as the sum of domestic claims of Depository Corporations excluding
Central Banks. Domestic claims are defined as Claims on Private Sector, Public Non‐Financial
Corporations, Other Financial Corporations and Net Claims on Central or General Government
(Claims less Deposits); Other Depository Corporation Survey and Deposit Money Banks Survey;
Monetary Statistics; IFS. Original data in national currencies.
Direct Cross‐Border Credit: measured as difference in claims on all sectors or non‐bank sector of a
given country of all BIS reporting countries in all currencies; Locational Statistics Database;
International Bank Positions by Residence; BIS; Tables 7A and 7B.
Global Inflows: constructed as the sum of direct cross‐border credit to non‐bank sector in the 53
countries sampled for the panel data analysis; list of countries sampled at the end of this section.
Nominal GDP Data in USD: original data in national currencies from National Statistical Offices;
Haver Analytics conversion using spot end of period FX rates.
VIX: end of period readings; Chicago Board Option Exchange (CBOE).
Stock Market Indices: end of period close quotes; Haver Analytics and Global Financial Data.
House Price Indices: OECD, BIS.
Exchange Rates: in national currency per US Dollar; end of period; International Financial Statistics.
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate: Broad Effective Exchange Rate Indices, BIS
US GDP: Real Gross Domestic Product (Billions of Chained 2005 Dollars); Bureau of Economic
Analysis
33

US INFLATION: Gross Domestic Product: Implicit Price Deflator (Index 2005=100); Bureau of
Economic Analysis
FFR US: Effective Federal Fund Rates, End of Period (% p. a.); Federal Reserve Board; Selected
Interest Rates, release H.15

Countries in the panel: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong , Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.

34

Appendix C
Table 2
Table 2 (b) Banking Sector Leverage Growth
flit

Credit L

VIXt
ΔVIXt
flit*VIXt

‐0.0125***
(‐3.84)
0.0164***
(4.06)
0.00
(1.28)

C.nonbank L
‐0.0122***
(‐3.82)
0.0167***
(‐4.4)
0.0014
(‐1.39)

,

, is the dependant variable (1990‐2013)

Credit A

Debt L

Debt A

Equity L

Equity A

‐0.0127***
(‐3.87)
0.0171***
(4.44)
0
(0.67)

‐0.0121***
(‐4.02)
0.0167***
(4.26)
0.0007
(1.09)

‐0.0127***
(‐3.87)
0.0174***
(4.39)
0
(0.89)

‐0.0140***
(‐3.70)
0.0175***
(4.49)
0
(‐0.36)

‐0.0121***
(‐3.43)
0.0190***
(4.81)
0.0005
(1.24)

flit‐

‐0.0002
0.0014
0
0.0001
0.0001
0
‐0.0003
(‐0.61)
(‐1.43)
(‐0.56)
(0.34)
(0.67)
(0.29)
(‐1.18)
Adj. R2
0.01
0.008
0.008
0.009
0.008
0.007
0.011
N
2352
2405
2370
2273
2332
2018
2167
Fixed effect estimator, standard errors adjusted for clustering on country, t‐stat in parentheses. All
1*VIXt‐1

specifications include the control variables and a linear trend.

Table 2 (c) House price inflation
flit

Credit L

VIXt
ΔVIXt
flit*VI
Xt
flit‐
1*VIX
t‐1

Adj.
R2
N

,

is the dependant variable (1990‐2013)

C.nonbank L

Credit A

Debt L

Debt A

Equity L

Equity A

‐0.0174***
(‐3.66)
0.0073***
(2.91)
0.00
(1.04)

‐0.0127***
(‐3.68)
0.0051**
(‐2.03)
0.001
(‐0.99)

‐0.0170***
(‐3.52)
0.0072***
(2.88)
0.0001
(1.07)

‐0.0183***
(‐3.52)
0.0076***
(2.87)
0.0003
(1.16)

‐0.0179***
(‐3.74)
0.0082***
(3.5)
0
(0.3)

‐0.0166***
(‐3.60)
0.0081***
(4.33)
0
(0.59)

‐0.0178***
(‐3.36)
0.0074***
(2.89)
0.0001
(0.65)

0.0001

0.0018

0

0.0001

0

0

0.0001

(1.00)

(‐1.11)

(‐0.09)

(0.56)

(0.08)

(‐0.02)

(0.59)

0.07
0.064
0.068
0.066
0.063
0.058
0.076
2335
2490
2358
2263
2303
2044
2166
Fixed effect estimator, standard errors adjusted for clustering on country, t‐stat in parentheses. All
specifications include the control variables and a linear trend.

35

Appendix D:

Figures 1a,b,c: heatmaps of correlations of gross inflows, gross outflows and net flows

Figure 2: plots capital inflows disaggregated by asset types (FDI, portfolio equity, portfolio debt
and credit) as a proportion of the world GDP for the period 1990Q1‐2012Q4 and it reports the VIX
(inverted scale) on the same graph.

Figure 5: Complete set of Impulse response functions of the VAR.

36

Liability
Equity Equity Equity Equity Equity Equity Equity FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI FDI FDI FDI
Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt Credit Credit Credit CreditCredit
Flows
N. Am. LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As
Equity N. Am 1.00
Equity LatAm 0.39 1.00
Equity CE. EU 0.52 0.49 1.00
Equity W. EU 0.63 0.35 0.50 1.00
Equity Em. As 0.37 0.24 0.28 0.47 1.00
Equity Asia
0.24 0.31 0.28 0.40 0.31 1.00
Equity Africa 0.41 0.22 0.26 0.55 0.34 0.26 1.00
FDI N. Am 0.54 0.06 0.07 0.45 0.52 ‐0.07 0.22 1.00
FDI LatAm 0.41 0.10 0.08 0.29 0.32 ‐0.07 0.04 0.68 1.00
FDI CE. EU 0.46 0.11 0.08 0.18 0.23 ‐0.12 0.09 0.61 0.65 1.00
FDI W. EU 0.57 0.21 0.19 0.38 0.35 0.01 0.16 0.61 0.59 0.75 1.00
FDI Em. As 0.47 0.24 0.16 0.34 0.36 ‐0.04 0.04 0.65 0.77 0.69 0.64 1.00
FDI Asia
0.36 0.16 0.03 0.29 0.30 ‐0.17 0.05 0.60 0.70 0.57 0.51 0.69 1.00
FDI Africa 0.33 0.01 0.10 0.18 0.03 ‐0.16 ‐0.19 0.31 0.36 0.35 0.35 0.34 0.27 1.00
Debt N. Am 0.42 0.17 0.32 0.51 0.29 0.21 0.31 0.40 0.39 0.55 0.51 0.48 0.37 0.08 1.00
Debt LatAm 0.20 0.40 0.33 0.16 0.13 0.00 ‐0.05 0.16 0.35 0.13 0.05 0.31 0.26 0.06 0.10
1.00
Debt CE. EU 0.37 0.42 0.50 0.43 0.13 0.17 0.19 0.14 0.35 0.14 0.12 0.47 0.21 0.04 0.37
0.52
1.00
Debt W. EU 0.49 0.05 0.33 0.50 0.23 0.27 0.47 0.29 0.10 0.44 0.27 0.25 0.02 0.10 0.58 ‐0.13
0.28 1.00
Debt Em. As 0.40 0.58 0.65 0.35 0.20 0.23 0.20 0.13 0.24 0.25 0.37 0.35 0.15 0.02 0.32
0.38
0.53 0.14 1.00
Debt Asia
0.16 0.18 0.24 0.22 0.16 ‐0.04 0.16 0.35 0.31 0.30 0.30 0.45 0.26 0.14 0.45
0.27
0.42 0.19 0.39
1.00
Debt Africa 0.26 0.27 0.39 0.18 0.07 0.14 0.09 0.12 0.21 0.10 0.01 0.41 0.21 0.07 0.21
0.46
0.61 0.15 0.44
0.32 1.00
Credit N. Am. 0.29 ‐0.02 0.21 0.38 0.15 ‐0.01 0.32 0.20 0.02 0.19 0.20 0.12 0.09 0.04 0.37
0.14
0.23 0.25 0.23
0.25 0.03 1.00
Credit LatAm 0.41 0.34 0.21 0.26 0.12 0.04 0.22 0.38 0.35 0.42 0.27 0.48 0.35 0.24 0.35
0.25
0.41 0.30 0.29
0.46 0.28 0.22 1.00
Credit CE. EU 0.42 0.25 0.27 0.28 0.32 0.15 0.21 0.54 0.38 0.72 0.55 0.47 0.36 0.28 0.54
0.14
0.13 0.56 0.25
0.48 0.12 0.17 0.55 1.00
Credit W. EU 0.19 ‐0.03 0.24 0.31 0.19 ‐0.16 0.26 0.27 0.08 0.20 0.30 0.19 0.13 0.15 0.45
0.20
0.25 0.33 0.26
0.45 0.16 0.63 0.30 0.34 1.00
Credit Em. As 0.25 0.54 0.39 0.21 0.10 0.16 0.05 0.22 0.16 0.30 0.29 0.38 0.24 0.00 0.40
0.31
0.33 0.15 0.56
0.51 0.27 0.24 0.45 0.48 0.28
1.00
Credit Asia
0.08 ‐0.03 0.02 ‐0.01 0.00 ‐0.40 ‐0.12 0.23 0.23 0.32 0.24 0.31 0.23 0.25 0.32
0.18
0.17 ‐0.01 0.13
0.37 0.08 0.43 0.35 0.23 0.52
0.37
Credit Africa 0.11 0.06 0.01 0.15 0.01 ‐0.20 0.12 0.40 0.30 0.35 0.33 0.24 0.37 0.18 0.32
0.11
0.00 0.13 0.03
0.34 ‐0.02 0.24 0.30 0.40 0.36
0.30

Credit Credi
Asia Africa

1.00
0.31 1.00

Asset
Flows
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
N. Am
LatAm
CE. EU
W. EU
Em. As
Asia
Africa
N. Am
LatAm
CE. EU
W. EU
Em. As
Asia
Africa
N. Am
LatAm
CE. EU
W. EU
Em. As
Asia
Africa
N. Am.
LatAm
CE. EU
W. EU
Em. As
Asia
Africa

Equity Equity Equity
N. Am. LatAm CE. EU
1.00
0.25 1.00
0.53 0.63 1.00
0.58 0.61 0.72
0.05 0.34 0.28
0.26 0.23 0.38
0.02 ‐0.09 ‐0.04
0.19 0.34 0.45
‐0.04 0.07 0.12
0.03 0.21 0.18
0.26 0.26 0.40
0.09 0.09 0.18
‐0.12 ‐0.09 ‐0.02
0.06 0.29 0.16
0.37 0.50 0.51
0.17 0.21 0.43
‐0.11 0.20 0.11
0.46 0.56 0.61
0.30 0.52 0.46
0.25 0.27 0.20
0.18 ‐0.10 0.12
0.25 0.15 0.27
0.17 ‐0.25 0.09
‐0.01 0.02 0.10
0.42 0.16 0.43
0.36 0.41 0.55
0.32 0.07 0.22
0.22 0.06 0.21
1.00
0.63 1.00
0.23 0.20 1.00
0.40 0.47 0.20 1.00
0.27 0.30 0.16 0.55 1.00
0.42 0.44 0.11 0.65 0.63 1.00
0.53 0.66 0.26 0.66 0.62 0.77 1.00
0.44 0.35 0.18 0.66 0.54 0.68 0.64 1.00
0.45 0.37 0.30 0.49 0.60 0.57 0.58 0.68 1.00
‐0.04 ‐0.06 ‐0.48 0.17 ‐0.02 0.15 0.04 0.10 ‐0.16 1.00
0.21 0.25 ‐0.20 0.21 ‐0.18 0.06 0.04 0.02 ‐0.14 0.44 1.00
0.08 0.09 ‐0.12 0.25 0.15 0.04 0.19 0.08 0.12 0.07 0.30
0.32 0.24 ‐0.08 0.22 0.40 0.36 0.38 0.14 0.23 ‐0.11 0.02
0.02 0.23 ‐0.14 0.35 ‐0.01 0.25 0.29 0.05 ‐0.20 0.28 0.59
0.39 0.20 ‐0.07 0.38 0.12 0.36 0.33 0.37 0.10 0.34 0.30
0.06 0.20 ‐0.02 0.35 0.12 0.14 0.23 0.38 0.13 0.22 0.20
0.27 0.33 0.40 0.51 0.27 0.33 0.46 0.59 0.31 0.07 ‐0.04
‐0.24 0.14 ‐0.17 0.14 ‐0.05 0.10 0.20 ‐0.03 ‐0.18 0.18 0.35
0.09 0.27 0.05 0.42 0.30 0.22 0.35 0.51 0.49 ‐0.05 ‐0.08
0.35 0.33 0.25 0.47 0.52 0.61 0.59 0.45 0.49 ‐0.05 ‐0.16
‐0.19 0.20 ‐0.25 0.39 0.11 0.19 0.33 0.12 ‐0.09 0.34 0.28
0.41 0.38 0.01 0.43 0.16 0.35 0.47 0.35 0.26 0.16 0.43
‐0.07 0.18 ‐0.16 0.24 0.17 0.16 0.18 0.28 ‐0.05 0.25 0.17
‐0.22 ‐0.16 ‐0.16 ‐0.07 ‐0.10 ‐0.17 ‐0.18 ‐0.14 ‐0.13 ‐0.07 0.18

1.00
0.30
0.37
0.31
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.14
‐0.15
0.21
0.34
‐0.10
0.29

1.00
0.25 1.00
0.06 0.36 1.00
0.03 0.27 0.10
‐0.12 ‐0.03 0.29
‐0.12 0.40 ‐0.07
0.00 ‐0.19 0.04
0.20 0.20 0.13
‐0.17 0.53 0.20
0.26 0.45 0.47
‐0.19 0.17 0.28
‐0.14 0.12 ‐0.15

1.00
0.03
0.05
0.61
0.15
0.33
0.17

1.00
0.10 1.00
0.27 0.22 1.00
0.15 0.24 0.33
0.28 0.11 0.49
0.03 ‐0.23 0.20

1.00
0.09 1.00
0.07 ‐0.08 1.00

Debt Credit Credit Credit CreditCredit Credit Credi
Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa

1.00
0.19 1.00
0.14 ‐0.01
0.21 0.53
0.13 0.17
0.25 0.21
0.24 0.18
0.08 0.29
‐0.12 ‐0.17

Equity Equity Equity Equity FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI FDI FDI FDI
Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt
W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia

1.00
0.15
0.20
0.06
0.20
‐0.07
‐0.04
0.23
‐0.02
‐0.18
0.20
0.52
0.41
0.04
0.56
0.45
0.19
0.04
0.32
‐0.20
‐0.11
0.25
0.44
0.03
0.28

Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
Equity
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Debt
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit
Credit

Net
Equity Equity Equity
Flows N. Am. LatAm CE. EU
N. Am 1.00
LatAm ‐0.07 1.00
CE. EU 0.19 0.05 1.00
W. EU ‐0.06 0.04 ‐0.09
Em. As ‐0.03 ‐0.17 0.00
Asia ‐0.10 0.11 0.19
Africa 0.02 ‐0.11 ‐0.17
N. Am ‐0.28 0.00 ‐0.20
LatAm 0.26 0.01 ‐0.14
CE. EU 0.26 0.03 ‐0.35
W. EU ‐0.05 0.21 0.17
Em. As ‐0.03 ‐0.05 ‐0.23
Asia ‐0.23 ‐0.27 0.08
Africa 0.07 0.00 ‐0.16
N. Am 0.04 0.04 ‐0.14
LatAm 0.06 0.14 0.04
CE. EU ‐0.06 ‐0.04 ‐0.12
W. EU 0.11 0.03 ‐0.04
Em. As 0.23 0.01 ‐0.04
Asia ‐0.15 0.33 ‐0.14
Africa 0.15 ‐0.02 0.12
N. Am. ‐0.14 ‐0.03 ‐0.18
LatAm 0.20 ‐0.01 0.12
CE. EU 0.11 0.16 0.09
W. EU ‐0.01 ‐0.10 ‐0.09
Em. As 0.02 0.28 0.22
Asia
0.13 ‐0.26 0.02
Africa 0.14 0.04 0.07
1.00
0.30
0.36
‐0.18
0.01
‐0.13
0.19
0.13
0.22
‐0.16
0.18
‐0.04
0.47
‐0.55
0.44
0.01
0.22
0.02
0.18
0.03
0.05
‐0.14
‐0.02
‐0.26
1.00
0.12
0.13
‐0.07
‐0.37
0.28
0.09
0.08
‐0.13
‐0.02
0.02
0.07
‐0.13
‐0.04
0.02
0.15
‐0.15
0.04
0.15
‐0.19
‐0.03
‐0.36
‐0.39
1.00
‐0.05
‐0.13
0.10
0.03
0.07
0.27
‐0.52
‐0.02
‐0.23
0.07
‐0.08
0.09
0.15
0.01
‐0.07
0.16
0.40
‐0.08
‐0.17
‐0.19
‐0.25
1.00
‐0.18
‐0.11
‐0.09
‐0.11
0.08
0.04
‐0.16
‐0.12
‐0.28
0.02
‐0.27
‐0.03
‐0.37
‐0.22
‐0.16
‐0.06
0.21
‐0.11
‐0.09
‐0.08
1.00
0.37
‐0.30
0.32
‐0.36
0.31
0.40
0.14
0.14
0.04
0.21
‐0.01
0.10
0.13
‐0.07
0.06
‐0.11
‐0.20
0.20
0.18
1.00
‐0.40
0.21
‐0.23
0.19
0.53
‐0.09
‐0.12
0.16
‐0.10
0.21
‐0.22
0.02
0.15
0.22
0.02
‐0.17
0.00
0.44
1.00
‐0.31
0.16
‐0.12
‐0.33
‐0.14
0.01
‐0.44
‐0.02
‐0.06
‐0.08
0.11
‐0.06
‐0.28
‐0.15
0.25
‐0.01
‐0.34
1.00
‐0.03
0.14
0.31
0.09
0.32
0.05
0.20
0.20
0.19
‐0.10
0.06
0.13
‐0.07
‐0.23
‐0.24
0.04

1.00
‐0.24
‐0.35
‐0.23
0.15
‐0.17
‐0.07
‐0.04
0.06
0.00
0.03
‐0.04
0.07
0.00
‐0.18
‐0.32

1.00
0.08
‐0.06
‐0.12
0.03
0.06
‐0.05
‐0.13
‐0.01
‐0.02
‐0.06
0.14
‐0.09
0.15
‐0.13

1.00
0.01
‐0.04
0.00
0.06
0.13
0.06
‐0.32
0.01
0.29
‐0.04
‐0.11
0.00
0.25

1.00
0.30
‐0.04
0.20
0.10
0.40
0.08
‐0.30
‐0.06
0.03
0.25
‐0.03
0.17

1.00
‐0.28
0.48
0.07
0.39
0.35
0.22
‐0.19
‐0.01
0.13
‐0.09
0.09

1.00
‐0.27 1.00
0.00 ‐0.02
‐0.03 0.33
0.00 0.06
‐0.06 0.05
0.24 ‐0.01
‐0.51 0.08
0.01 0.06
0.03 0.04
0.08 0.05

1.00
‐0.25
‐0.04
‐0.51
‐0.08

1.00
0.00
0.13
0.09

1.00
‐0.03 1.00
0.11 0.09 1.00

Debt Credit Credit Credit CreditCredit Credit Credi
Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa

1.00
0.12 1.00
0.05 0.01 1.00
0.20 0.11 0.12 1.00
0.50 0.18 ‐0.19 0.25
‐0.18 ‐0.07 ‐0.27 ‐0.07
0.04 0.04 ‐0.10 0.05
‐0.73 ‐0.14 0.04 ‐0.23
0.03 ‐0.18 0.17 0.08

Equity Equity Equity Equity FDI
FDI
FDI
FDI FDI FDI FDI
Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt Debt
W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia Africa N. Am LatAm CE. EU W. EU Em.As Asia

1.00
0.07
‐0.20
0.01
0.00
0.29
0.12
‐0.19
0.11
‐0.24
0.17
0.11
0.11
‐0.02
‐0.05
0.34
0.16
‐0.09
0.15
0.02
0.15
‐0.25
‐0.18
0.06
0.16

60

40

20

0

‐20

‐40

‐60

199
90 Q1
199
90 Q3
199
91 Q1
199
91 Q3
199
92 Q1
199
92 Q3
199
93 Q1
199
93 Q3
199
94 Q1
199
94 Q3
199
95 Q1
199
95 Q3
199
96 Q1
199
96 Q3
199
97 Q1
199
97 Q3
199
98 Q1
199
98 Q3
199
99 Q1
199
99 Q3
200
00 Q1
200
00 Q3
200
01 Q1
200
01 Q3
200
02 Q1
200
02 Q3
200
03 Q1
200
03 Q3
200
04 Q1
200
04 Q3
200
05 Q1
200
05 Q3
200
06 Q1
200
06 Q3
200
07 Q1
200
07 Q3
200
08 Q1
200
08 Q3
200
09 Q1
200
09 Q3
201
10 Q1
201
10 Q3
201
11 Q1
201
11 Q3

FDI

Debt

Credit

Equity

( ) VIX
(‐)

