                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LIQUIDITY IN RETIREMENT SAVINGS SYSTEMS:
                           AN INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON

                                            John Beshears
                                             James J. Choi
                                           Joshua Hurwitz
                                            David Laibson
                                          Brigitte C. Madrian

                                         Working Paper 21168
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21168


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015

We thank Susanne Schwarz for her research assistance. We are grateful for helpful feedback from
Sumit Agarwal, Julie Agnew, Keith Ambachtsheer, Bob Baldwin, James Banks, Hazel Bateman, Richard
Blundell, Christopher Carroll, Jeremy Duffield, Alexandre Laurin, Raimond Maurer, Olivia Mitchell,
Jessica Pan, John Piggott, Mark Rozanic, and Wenlan Qian. This research was supported by the Pershing
Square Fund for Research on the Foundations of Human Behavior at Harvard University and NIA
grant awards R01AG021650, P01AG005842, and P30AG034532. The content is the sole responsibility
of the authors and does not represent the official views of NIA, NIH, or the NBER. The authors have
been compensated to present academic research at events hosted by financial institutions that administer
retirement savings plans. See the authors’ websites for a list of outside activities. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21168.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, Joshua Hurwitz, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity in Retirement Savings Systems: An International Comparison
John Beshears, James J. Choi, Joshua Hurwitz, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 21168
May 2015
JEL No. D14,F61,H3,H31

                                             ABSTRACT

What is the socially optimal level of liquidity in a retirement savings system? Liquid retirement savings
are desirable because liquidity enables agents to flexibly respond to pre-retirement events that raise
the marginal utility of consumption. On the other hand, pre-retirement liquidity is undesirable when
it leads to under-saving arising from, for example, planning mistakes or self-control problems. This
paper compares the liquidity that six developed economies have built into their employer-based defined
contribution (DC) retirement savings systems. We find that all of them, with the sole exception of
the United States, have made their DC systems overwhelmingly illiquid before age 55.


John Beshears                                       David Laibson
Harvard Business School                             Department of Economics
Baker Library 439                                   Littauer M-12
Soldiers Field                                      Harvard University
Boston, MA 02163                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                            and NBER
jbeshears@hbs.edu                                   dlaibson@gmail.com

James J. Choi                                       Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management                           Harvard Kennedy School
165 Whitney Avenue                                  79 JFK Street
P.O. Box 208200                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                            and NBER
and NBER                                            Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
james.choi@yale.edu

Joshua Hurwitz
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
josh.hurwitz23@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21168
         What is the socially optimal level of liquidity in a retirement savings system? Liquid re-
tirement savings are desirable because liquidity enables agents to flexibly respond to pre-
retirement events that raise the marginal utility of consumption, like medical emergencies or in-
come shocks.1 On the other hand, pre-retirement liquidity is undesirable when it leads to under-
saving arising from, for example, planning mistakes or self-control problems.2
         This paper compares the liquidity that six developed economies have built into their em-
ployer-based defined contribution (DC) retirement savings systems. We find that all of them,
with the sole exception of the United States, have made their DC systems overwhelmingly illiq-
uid before age 55.
         In the United States, employer-sponsored DC account balances can be moved to an Indi-
vidual Retirement Account (i.e., a “rollover” IRA) once the individual no longer works for the
employer, which provides considerable scope for liquidation before the withdrawal-eligibility
age of 59½. Pre-eligibility IRA withdrawals may be made for any reason by paying a 10 percent
tax penalty, and certain classes of pre-eligibility IRA withdrawals are exempt from this penalty.3
         Liquidity generates significant pre-retirement “leakage” in the United States: for every $1
contributed to the DC accounts of savers under age 55 (not counting rollovers), $0.40 simultane-
ously flows out of the DC system (not counting loans or rollovers).4 This amount of leakage may
or may not be socially optimal, an issue that is beyond the scope of the current paper.5


I. Analytic Framework
         We focus on the five highest-GDP developed countries that have English as an official
language: the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and Singapore.6 We also


  1
     For example, see Carroll (1992, 1997).
  2
     See Laibson (1997); Gul and Pesendorfer (2001); and Fudenberg and Levine (2006).
   3
     For example, no penalty is charged on withdrawals made for (i) permanent and total disability; (ii) unreimbursed
medical expenses exceeding 10% of adjusted gross income; (iii) buying, building, or rebuilding a home if the with-
drawal does not exceed $10,000 and the account holder has not owned a home in the past two years; (iv) higher edu-
cation costs; (v) tax payments resulting from an IRS levy; (vi) health insurance premiums if unemployed for more
than 12 weeks; (vii) a series of substantially equal periodic payments made over one’s life expectancy; (viii) distri-
butions to an alternate payee under a qualified domestic relation order; or (ix) recovery from designated natural dis-
asters.
   4
     See Argento, Bryant, and Sabelhaus (2015).
   5
     However, see Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (1998); Amador, Werning, and Angeletos (2006); and Beshears
et al. (2015).
   6
     South Africa is coded as economically developing and is omitted.



                                                           2
analyze Germany, the largest developed economy with a substantial pool of DC savings that
does not have English as an official language.7
         We analyze employer-based DC plans instead of defined benefit (DB) plans for three rea-
sons. First, DC plans are gaining assets relative to DB plans in almost all countries around the
world, including the six that we study. Second, DC plans already have more than half of retire-
ment wealth in three of the countries that we study: Australia, Singapore, and the United States.8
Third, in most circumstances, DC assets are at least as liquid as DB assets, so DC assets are the
relevant margin for a household considering liquidating retirement wealth to augment pre-
retirement consumption.
         There are many ways to measure liquidity, including the actual quantity of liquidations or
the marginal price of liquidations. We use the marginal price because statistics on actual liquida-
tions are difficult to obtain. Even if such statistics were readily available, it is unclear how they
should be compared across countries. For example, should liquidations be normalized by DC
balances, retirement assets, total assets, or GDP? Also, from an economic perspective, the most
natural object to study is the marginal price because it summarizes the incentives that consumers
face.
         Accordingly, we compute the marginal rate of transformation (MRT) between withdraw-
al-funded consumption at ages when the household is “pre-eligible” for withdrawals and with-
drawal-funded consumption at ages when the household is “eligible” to make withdrawals (in all
countries that we study, eligibility begins no earlier than 55 and no later than 63):9,10,11


  7
     Since 2002, DC arrangements have been permitted in three of the five types of occupational schemes in Germa-
ny. German savers had also set up over 14 million Riester plans as of 2011 (Börsch-Supan, Coppola, and Reil-Held
2012). DC saving in Japan is still in its infancy.
   8
     In 2013, the Social Security trust fund contained $2.8 trillion, and other retirement plan assets totaled $23.0 tril-
lion, summing to $25.8 trillion. DC plans (including the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan and state and lo-
cal DC plans) had assets of approximately $13.2 trillion, more than half of the $25.8 trillion total. (Sources: Social
Security Trust Fund, Investment Company Institute, Thrift Savings Plan, and authors’ calculations.)
   9
     Singaporeans turning 55 after 2012 may only withdraw S$5,000 of their Central Provident Fund (CPF) balances
plus amounts exceeding the Minimum Sum and Medisave Minimum Sum between age 55 and the drawdown age
(currently 64). The remainder is paid out as an annuity beginning at the drawdown age.
   10
      In Germany, access to vested occupational pension benefits is typically linked to eligibility for state-provided
pension benefits. Benefits can only commence when the member provides a pension approval certificate (i.e., proof
that she receives state-provided pension benefits). The early state retirement age for the long-term insured is current-
ly 63.
   11
       We do not model provisions allowing for early access to small balances upon job separation. For example, em-
ployers in Canada (Ontario) may allow (or require) separated employees to withdraw balances of less than 20% of
the Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings (YMPE) (as defined under the Canada Pension Plan) applicable to their



                                                             3
                               ,
(1)                                     .
                               ,

        In this equation, τ(pre, y) is the marginal tax rate (accounting for penalties and phase-outs
of means-tested benefits) on a $1 withdrawal from the DC plan when (i) the household is young
enough to be at a pre-eligible withdrawal age and (ii) the household’s employment income, y, in
the withdrawal year is less than or equal to the household’s permanent income, Y. Likewise,
τ(eligible, Y) is the marginal tax rate on a $1 withdrawal from the DC plan when (i) the house-
hold is old enough to be eligible to make withdrawals and (ii) household earnings in the with-
drawal year equal permanent income, Y. Because we are studying a situation in which the house-
hold may have a liquidity need at a pre-eligible age, we calculate how the MRT varies as we
change y. We assume permanent income is Y = US$60,000, which is approximately the median
household income in each of the six countries. For simplicity, we set the gross real interest rate,
R, to one (i.e., we set the net real interest rate to zero). Cross-country comparisons are not affect-
ed by this interest rate assumption.
        We need to make additional demographic assumptions to pin down the household’s mar-
ginal tax rate. We assume the household is a one-earner married couple with no dependents that
rents housing, takes the standard income tax deduction and is not disabled. In the pre-eligible
withdrawal state, the earner is any age strictly under 55; in the eligible withdrawal state, the
earner is at least 65 years old.
        In some situations, withdrawals are completely prohibited in the pre-eligible state. We
treat such a ban as a 100 percent marginal tax rate—i.e., τ(pre, y) = 1. High values of the MRT
are associated with high levels of liquidity (early withdrawals are potentially encouraged), and
low values of the MRT are associated with low levels of liquidity (early withdrawals are discour-
aged or completely banned).


II. DC Liquidity Across Six Countries
        We are now ready to describe the MRT as a function of labor income during the pre-
eligible withdrawal year, y, country by country. More detailed analysis and a description of our
methodology are provided in the Web Appendix.

termination year. Employers in Germany may enforce the liquidation of balances below a restrictive minimum
threshold if the separating employee does not transfer her pension rights to a new employer. Superannuation fund
members in Australia may access balances of less than AU$200 from previous employers.



                                                        4
A. Germany, Singapore, and the United Kingdom
        In Germany, Singapore, and the United Kingdom, early withdrawals are banned: MRT =
0 for all y.12 Only disabled13 or terminally ill individuals may receive payments (an allowance
that exists in all six countries). Singapore carves out some additional exceptions: a portion of DC
balances may be used for medical expenses, a home purchase (which must be repaid with interest
if the home is sold), and education (which must be repaid with interest in 12 years).14


B. Canada and Australia
        In Canada15 and Australia, the MRT = 0 under normal circumstances,16 but DC balances
become liquid in the event of adverse transitory labor income shocks.

Canada (Ontario) — Employer-based DC plan balances cannot be accessed before the eligibility
age unless a household’s expected income in the 12-month period following the application for
withdrawal falls below US$32,428.17 Therefore, MRT = 0 at our hypothetical household’s nor-
mal level of income: US$60,000. Once income in the pre-eligible withdrawal year falls below


  12
      We do not consider the Supplementary Retirement Scheme in Singapore, a voluntary DC plan designed to
complement the CPF. More details can be found in the Web Appendix.
   13
       In Germany, if the occupational pension plan covers disability, any payments during disability will
be contingent on providing an official pension approval certificate from the social insurance system. If the employee
is temporarily disabled, the payment of state-provided pension benefits will be discontinued and the employee will
lose the pension approval certificate once s/he returns to work.
   14
      See Agarwal, Pan, and Qian (2014) for a discussion of spending that occurs in Singapore once participants can
access part of their balance at age 55.
   15
      Our analysis for Canada considers Registered Pension Plans, which require employer contributions and are sub-
ject to both federal tax jurisdiction and federal or provincial pension legislation. Group Registered Retirement Sav-
ings Plans, on the other hand, do not require employer contributions and are not subject to pension legislation. Le-
gally, these plans may allow for withdrawals at any age, but sponsoring employers can and typically do place re-
strictions on early access, at least until separation from employment. A more detailed analysis of these plans can be
found in the Web Appendix.
   16
      There are some additional withdrawal provisions in these two countries, which are limited to a specific need
(such as outstanding medical expenses, mortgage payments, etc.) or group (such as temporary residents permanently
leaving Australia) and are explained in the Web Appendix.
   17
      We assume that the pre-eligible household accesses DC funds transferred to a “locked-in retirement account.”
Withdrawals may be made from a locked-in account under the “low expected income” financial hardship provision
if total expected income in the 12-month period following the application for withdrawal falls far enough below
two-thirds of the YMPE to permit a withdrawal of at least C$500. The maximum eligible withdrawal amount is (50
percent × YMPE) – (75 percent × Expected Income During the Next 12 Months). Therefore, withdrawals of at least
C$500 may be made when expected income falls to C$33,400, or about US$32,427 using the 2013 annual exchange
rate: (50 percent × C$51,100) – (75 percent × C$33,400) = C$500. Due to the C$500 minimum withdrawal require-
ment, we calculate the MRT in this case based on the effective marginal tax rate on the last dollar of a C$501 pen-
sion withdrawal.



                                                          5
US$32,428, the MRT jumps from 0 to 1.11. The MRT increases with further declines in income,
y, because the marginal tax rate in the pre-eligible year falls while the marginal tax rate in the
eligible year is held fixed. Means-tested benefit programs generate (local) nonmonotonicities in
the marginal tax rate that feed through to the MRT. As income approaches zero, the MRT plat-
eaus at a peak value of 1.50 (see Figure 1). Hence, the Canadian DC system has the intuitively
appealing property that, for a typical household, DC withdrawals are barred when income is near
its normal level but are encouraged (MRT > 1) when income declines substantially.


Australia — In Australia, the MRT = 0 as long as the household remains employed, no matter
how low income falls. However, if the household receives income support from the government
for at least 26 weeks (e.g., unemployment benefits), the household becomes eligible for DC
withdrawals.18,19 Hence, Australia also has a rising MRT as income in the pre-eligible year de-
clines if low income in the pre-eligible year is due to a long unemployment or underemployment
spell and the household receives government benefits as a result (see Figure 2).


C. United States
           In contrast, even at a normal level of income, the US DC system is liquid. Workers can
roll over balances from a previous employer’s DC plan into an IRA and then liquidate those bal-
ances under any circumstances with a maximum tax penalty of 10 percent. For instance, if our
hypothetical household lived in Texas, its MRT with pre-eligible income equal to permanent in-
come would be
                           ,
(2)
                               ,
       .       .
                   0.88.
           .




  18
       The severe financial hardship provision that allows early access in this case restricts the withdrawals to
AU$10,000 (with a minimum of AU$1,000) to cover reasonable and immediate family living expenses, such as gen-
eral outstanding bills, insurance premiums, or mortgage payments. These withdrawals must be approved by the plan
trustee. Given the AU$1,000 minimum withdrawal requirement in this case, we calculate the MRT based on the ef-
fective marginal tax rate on the last dollar of a AU$1,001 pension withdrawal.
   19
      In Australia, withdrawals are also possible during temporary disability. In this case, withdrawals must typically
be taken as an income stream throughout the period of disability (whereas a single lump sum may be taken for per-
manent disability).



                                                           6
       As pre-eligible income falls below its normal level, the MRT tends to rise (as in Canada
and Australia) due to falling marginal tax rates in the pre-eligible withdrawal year. As pre-
eligible income approaches zero, the MRT eventually exceeds one (see Figure 3). Hence, like the
Canadian and Australian systems, the US MRT increases as income falls transitorily, but the rise
is much more muted in the United States: the MRT increases from 0 to 1.50 in Canada, from 0 to
1 in Australia, and from 0.88 to 1.06 in the United States.


III. Conclusions
       The six countries that we study fall into three groups. In Germany, Singapore, and the
United Kingdom, withdrawals from general funds in employer-based DC plans are essentially
banned no matter what kind of transitory income shock the household realizes. By contrast, in
Canada and Australia, liquidity in employer-based DC plans is sharply state-contingent. For a
household that normally earns US$60,000, DC accounts are completely illiquid unless annual
income falls substantially, at which point the DC assets may be accessed. Canadian workers who
temporarily have very low income face strong incentives to withdraw their DC balances (MRT =
1.50). The United States stands alone with respect to the high degree of liquidity in its DC sys-
tem. Penalties for early withdrawals are relatively low, and early withdrawals are slightly subsi-
dized as income falls transitorily.
       Explaining these cross-country differences in employer-based DC plans is beyond the
scope of the current paper. Nevertheless, we list four (mutually compatible) hypotheses for fu-
ture research.
       First, the differences in liquidity across DC regimes might matter little for welfare be-
cause the benefits of commitment (addressing a self-control problem) and the benefits of flexibil-
ity (liquidity during financial emergencies) are approximately equal in magnitude. Under this
first hypothesis, differences across countries are neutral mutations, so it is not unexpected to see
wide variation. See Beshears et al. (2015) for analysis that reaches this conclusion.
       The second hypothesis is akin to the first. If a country’s DC system was designed to only
be a minor supplement to a larger retirement income system, then its liquidity properties would
have little welfare consequence. Thus, wide variation in these properties could ensue. The US
DC system was first conceived as a top-up for DB pension plans. Only by historical “accident”
did it instead become a substitute for DB plans over time, as DB plans lost appeal because of



                                                  7
their non-portability and balance sheet risk. The United States was not intended to have a highly
liquid workplace pension system, but this is what resulted from the unforeseen atrophy of the DB
leg. The German DC system was also designed as a top-up to a DB system, but unlike in the
United States, it is essentially illiquid before retirement.
        Third, cross-country differences might reflect different ideological preferences. If a coun-
try’s citizens have a relatively strong preference for economic freedom (potentially as an end in
itself), this would tilt the retirement savings system toward more flexible institutions.
        Finally, variation in the employer-based DC plans might result from other cross-country
differences, like the strength of the social safety net. Liquid DC accounts are particularly useful
if other sources of income support (e.g., unemployment benefits) are not sufficient during peri-
ods of financial duress. However, if this were the explanatory mechanism for the US DC sys-
tem’s liquidity, we would expect to see US liquidity being made contingent on the presence of an
income/expenditure shock (e.g., withdrawals that are only liquid during an unemployment spell
or coincident with a large health shock). Instead, US households are able to access their balances
under any circumstances by paying no more than a 10 percent penalty.


References
Agarwal, Sumit, Jessica Pan, and Wenlan Qian. 2014. “Age of Decision: Pension Savings With-
  drawal and Consumption and Debt Response.” Unpublished.


Amador, Manuel, Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2006. "Commitment vs. Flexi-
  bility." Econometrica 74 (2): 365-96.


Argento, Robert, Victoria L. Bryant, and John Sabelhaus. 2015. "Early Withdrawals from Re-
  tirement Accounts During the Great Recession." Contemporary Economic Policy 33 (1): 1-16.


Beshears, John, James J. Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Jung
  Sakong. 2015. “Self-Control and Liquidity: How to Design a Commitment Contract.” Un-
  published.


Börsch-Supan, Axel H., Michela Coppola, and Anette Reil-Held. 2012. “Riester Pensions in



                                                    8
 Germany: Design, Dynamics, Targetting Success and Crowding-In.” National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper 18014.


Carroll, Christopher D. 1992. "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evi-
 dence." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1992 (2): 61-156.


Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. “Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hy-
 pothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 1-55.


Fudenberg, Drew and David K. Levine. 2006. "A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control." Ameri-
 can Economic Review 96 (5): 1449-76.


Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. "Temptation and Self-Control." Econometrica 69
 (6): 1403-35.


Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics 112 (2): 443-77.


Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 1998. “Self-Control and Saving for Re-
 tirement.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (1): 91-196.




                                              9
Figure 1. Marginal Rate of Transformation (MRT) for Canada

 1.6


 1.4


                                                      Ontario basic reduction fully phases out                          WITB begins to phase out based on total
 1.2                                                                                                                       income (which includes pension
                                                                                                      Ontario health                withdrawals)
                                                                                                     premium kicks in
                                                                             Working
 1.0                                                                       Income Tax
                                                                                                      Ontario net income taxes
                                                                              Benefit
                                                                                                          become positive
                                                                             (WITB)
                                                                           fully phases
 0.8                                                                            out                 Federal net
                                                                            Ontario Sales Ontario income taxes
                                                                              Credit and   health become positive
                                                                           Ontario Energy premium
 0.6                                                                         and Property goes flat
                                                                              Tax Credit
                                                                            begin phasing
                                                                                  out
 0.4

                           Not eligible for "low expected
                        income" financial hardship provision
 0.2


 0.0
       $0                $10,000                  $20,000        $30,000          $40,000                                  $50,000                 $60,000
                                                     Employment income reduction (US$)

Notes: This figure reports the MRT for a household in Ontario, Canada with assets from a DC Registered Pension Plan that have been rolled over to a locked-in
retirement account. For more details see the Web Appendix.



                                                                                    10
Figure 2. Marginal Rate of Transformation (MRT) for Australia

 1.6


 1.4


 1.2


 1.0
                                                                 Medicare Levy rate decreases
                                                                     from 10% to 1.5%
 0.8
                                                                                                                              Federal net income taxes
                                                                                                                                 become positive
                                                                                                                        Medicare Levy kicks in
 0.6
                                                                                                Federal income tax rate
                                                                                                increases, lump sum offset kicks
                                                                                                in, and low income offset
                                                                                                begins phasing out
 0.4

                         Not eligible for the severe financial
                                hardship withdrawal
 0.2


 0.0
       $0               $10,000                    $20,000        $30,000          $40,000                             $50,000                   $60,000
                                                      Employment income reduction (US$)

Notes: This figure reports the MRT for a household in New South Wales, Australia, with DC assets in a superannuation fund. We assume that the reduction in
employment income is due entirely to an unemployment spell. Hence, an x percent reduction in income is engendered by x percent of 52 weeks of unemploy-
ment. We also assume that the household receives unemployment benefits throughout the unemployment spell. For more details see the Web Appendix.


                                                                              11
Figure 3. Marginal Rate of Transformation (MRT) for the United States

 1.6


 1.4


 1.2
                                                                       Earned Income Tax Credit
                                                                        (EITC) fully phases out

 1.0
                                                                                                                     EITC begins to phase out based
                                                            Federal income tax                 Federal net income    on AGI (which includes pension
                                                              rate increases                 taxes become positive           withdrawals)
 0.8


 0.6


 0.4


 0.2


 0.0
       $0                $10,000               $20,000        $30,000          $40,000                               $50,000               $60,000
                                                  Employment income reduction (US$)

Notes: This figure reports the MRT for a household in Texas, with some DC assets that have been or can be rolled over to an IRA. For more details see the Web
Appendix.



                                                                                 12
