                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SKILL BIASED STRUCTURAL CHANGE

                                           Francisco J. Buera
                                           Joseph P. Kaboski
                                           Richard Rogerson

                                         Working Paper 21165
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21165


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015




We thank Daron Acemoglu, David Dorn, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow as well as seminar participants
at the 2015 AEA Meetings, Pittsburgh, Stanford, and USC for useful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21165.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skill Biased Structural Change
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 21165
May 2015
JEL No. E02,J2

                                              ABSTRACT

We document for a broad panel of advanced economies that increases in GDP per capita are associated
with a shift in the composition of value added to sectors that are intensive in high-skill labor. It follows
that further development in these economies leads to an increase in the relative demand for skilled
labor. We develop a two-sector model of this process and use it to assess the contribution of this process
of skill-biased structural change to the rise of the skill premium in the US, and a broad panel of advanced
economies, over the period 1977 to 2005. We find that these compositional demands account for between
25 and 30% of the overall increase of the skill premium due to technical change.


Francisco J. Buera                                   Richard Rogerson
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                      Woodrow Wilson School of
230 South La Salle Street                            Public and International Affairs
Chicago, IL 60604                                    323 Bendheim Hall
francisco.buera@chi.frb.org                          Princeton University
                                                     Princeton, NJ 08544
Joseph P. Kaboski                                    and NBER
Department of Economics                              rdr@princeton.edu
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu
1     Introduction

The dramatic increase in the wages of high skilled workers relative to low skilled
workers is one of the most prominent secular trends in the US and other ad-
vanced economies in recent decades. Understanding the underlying causes of
these trends, both the common features and those unique to different country’s
experiences, is important for projecting future trends and evaluating the extent
to which policies might be effective or advisable in addressing this issue. It has
therefore been a major research focus. The consensus view in the literature,
as summarized in the review article by Acemoglu and Autor (2011), is that
the dominant factor generating this trend is skill-biased technological change
(SBTC).1 In this paper we argue that a distinct process – which we label skill-
biased structural change – has also played a quantitatively important role. We
use the term skill-biased structural change to describe the systematic realloca-
tion of sectoral value-added shares toward high-skill intensive industries that
accompanies the process of continued development among advanced economies.
    The economic rationale for the consensus view is based on simple demand
and supply analysis in the context of what Acemoglu and Autor call the canoni-
cal model–an aggregate production function that has high-skilled and low-skilled
labor as inputs. Because the relative supply of high-skilled labor has increased,
an increase in the relative wage of high-skilled labor requires some force that
increases the relative demand for high-skilled labor. But the only way to gener-
ate an increase in relative demand for high-skilled labor in the canonical model
is via technical change that favors high-skilled workers.2
    The economic intuition behind our result is equally simple, but it requires
that one go beyond the aggregate production function approach in the canon-
ical model. If, as we show is indeed the case in the next section, the process
of development is systematically associated with a shift in the composition of
value added toward sectors that are intensive in high-skill workers, then this
process alone will increase the demand for high-skilled workers, independently
of whether it is driven by skill-neutral or skill-biased technical change. With
an aggregate production function, development that comes from skill-neutral
technical change has no effect on the relative demand for high-skilled workers,
so this channel is absent.
    To assess the quantitative significance of this channel, we develop a simple
general equilibrium model of structural transformation that incorporates an
   1 This is not to say that SBTC is the only factor at work, as the literature has also high-

lighted the effect of other factors on overall wage inequality. For example, DiNardo et al.
(1996) argue that labor market institutions such as minimum wages and unionization have
played an important role in shaping wage inequality overall, Feenstra and Hanson (1999)
emphasize the role of offshoring, and Autor et al. (2013) emphasize the role of trade.
   2 One can formulate richer structures in which the fundamental technical change is not

explicitly skill biased but which operates like skill-biased technical change in a reduced form
sense. For example, Krusell et al. (2000) stressed how the decreasing price of equipment
coupled with capital-skill complementarity also serves to increase the relative demand for
skill.



                                              2
important role for skill and use it to study the evolution of the US economy
between 1977 and 2005. In order to best highlight the shift in value added to
high skill-intensive sectors, we study a two-sector model in which the two sectors
are distinguished by their intensity of skill workers in production. We allow for
sector-specific technological change, which is a (sector-specific) combination of
skill-neutral and skill-biased technical change. We show how the model can be
used to infer preference parameters and the process for technical change using
data on the change in the composition of employment by skill, the change in
aggregate output, changes in sectoral factor shares, the skill premium, relative
sectoral prices and the distribution of sectoral value added.
    In the data, our measure of the skill premium increases from 1.41 to 1.90
between 1977 and 2005, an increase of 49 percentage points.3 Our calibrated
model perfectly matches this increase. We then use the model to decompose this
increase into three different components: one due to the changes in the relative
supply of high-skill workers, one part that is due to skill-biased technical change,
and a third part due to other technological changes. If there had been no change
in technology, our model predicts that the skill premium would have decreased
to 0.92, a drop of 49 percentage points, due to the increase in the relative supply
of high-skill workers. It follows that overall changes in technology created an
increase in the skill premium of 98 percentage points. In our benchmark speci-
fication, between one quarter and one third of this increase comes from changes
in technology other than skill-biased technical change, operating through their
effect on the composition of value added. We conclude that systematic changes
in the composition of value added associated with the process of development
are an important factor in accounting for the rise in the skill premium. In fact,
if skill-biased technical change had been the sole source of technical change over
this period, our model predicts that the skill premium would have increased by
only 18 percentage points instead of by 49.
    Having established the importance of this effect for the US, we also repeat the
analysis for a set of nine other OECD countries. While there is some variation
in the contribution of compositional changes in value added to changes in the
skill premium across countries, ranging from around 10 percent to slightly more
than 50 percent, the average for this sample is slightly above 30 percent, very
much in line with our estimates for the US.
    Our paper is related to many papers in two distinct literatures, one on SBTC
and the skill premium and the other on structural transformation. An early con-
tribution in the former literature is Katz and Murphy (1992), and an excellent
recent overview is provided by Acemoglu and Autor (2011). Although Katz and
Murphy predominantly use an aggregate production function to interpret the
data, Section V of their paper does argue that changes in sectoral composition
are an important element of the increased relative demand for skill. Except
for their explicit consideration of international trade, they are otherwise agnos-
tic about the driving forces behind these reallocations. Relative to them, our
   3 Our measure of the skill premium compares those with at least college degrees to those

with high school degrees or less, and is based on total compensation and not just wages and
salaries, which explains why this increase is larger than what the literature typically reports.


                                               3
contribution is threefold. First, we document the importance of compositional
effects that are systematically related to the process of development. Second,
we show how to uncover the different dimensions of technological change in a
multi-sector framework. Third, we present a general equilibrium model in which
one can assess the driving forces behind compositional changes. It is also of in-
terest to note that whereas their analysis ended in 1987, ours covers the period
through 2005. An early contribution in the second literature is Baumol (1967),
with more recent contributions by Kongsamut et al. (2001) and Ngai and Pis-
sarides (2007). (See Herrendorf et al. (2014) for a recent overview.) Relative
to this literature our main contribution is to introduce heterogeneity in worker
skill levels into the analysis and to organize industries by skill intensity rather
than broad sectors.
    The paper that we are most closely related to is Buera and Kaboski (2012).
Like us, they study the interaction between development and the demand for
skill, though their primary contribution is conceptual, building a somewhat
abstract model to illustrate the mechanism. Relative to them our main contri-
bution is to build a simple model that can easily be connected to the data and
to use the model to quantitatively assess the mechanism. Leonardi (forthcom-
ing) considers a similar mechanism to us, but focuses on how demand varies by
education attainment as opposed to income more broadly, and finds relatively
small demand effects.4 An important antecedent of our work is the paper by
Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008). Like us, they study the relationship between
development and structural change in a model that features heterogeneity in
factor intensities across sectors. But differently than us, they focus on differen-
tial intensities for physical capital and the role of the relative price of physical
capital rather than human capital. Their work is also primarily theoretical.
    An outline of the paper follows. Section 2 presents aggregate evidence on
the relation between development and the value added share for high skill in-
tensive services in a panel of advanced economies, in addition to some other
important empirical patterns. Section 3 presents our general equilibrium model
and characterizes the equilibrium. Section 4 shows how the model can be used
to account for the evolution of the US economy over the period 1977 to 2005,
and in particular how the data can be used to infer preference parameters and
the process of technical change. Section 5 presents our main results about the
contribution of various factors to the evolution of the skill premium. Section
6 assesses the contribution of skill-biased structural change for relative prices,
and in Section 7 we extend our analysis to a set of nine other countries. Section
8 concludes.
   4 In independent work, Boppart (2015) carries out a similar exercise to ours for the US.

Ngai and Petrongolo (2014) use a similar framework to show that compositional changes in
value added associated with development can explain part of the decrease in the gender wage
gap that has occured in the US over time.




                                            4
2      Empirical Motivation
This section provides motivating facts for the prevalence of what we refer to
as skill-biased structural change. In particular, using data for a broad panel of
advanced economies, we document two key facts. First, there is a strong positive
correlation between the level of development in an economy, as measured by
GDP per capita, and the share of value added that is attributed to high skill
services. Second, there is also a strong positive correlation between the level
of development and the price of high skill services relative to other goods and
services. Interestingly, these relationships are very stable across countries, and
in particular, the experience of the US is very similar to the average pattern
found in the data.
    We supplement the above aggregate time series evidence for a panel of coun-
tries with some evidence about cross-sectional expenditure shares in the US
economy. In particular, we show that the expenditure of higher income house-
holds contains a higher share of skill-intensive value-added. This fact will serve
two purposes. First at a qualitative level it is suggestive evidence of the role
of a non-homotheticity in the demand for high skill services, which is a feature
we will include in our model. Second, we will also show how this cross-sectional
moment provides important information about preference parameters that is
not readily available from aggregate time series data.

2.1         Aggregate Panel Evidence
The starting point for our analysis is the earlier work of Buera and Kaboski
(2012). They divide industries in the service sector into two mutually exclusive
groups: a high skill-intensive group and a low skill-intensive group, and show
that whereas the value added share of the high-skill group rose substantially be-
tween 1950 and 2000, the value added share of the low-skill group actually fell
over the same time period. This finding suggests that the traditional breakdown
of economic activity in the structural transformation literature, into agriculture,
manufacturing and services, was perhaps not well suited to studying the reallo-
cation of economic activity in today’s advanced economies. Here we pursue this
line of work further, modifying their aggregation procedure to include goods-
producing industries, and extending their analysis to a broad panel of advanced
economies.
    The analysis is based on underlying value added data from the EUKLEMS
Database (“Basic Table”)5 These data exist in comparable form for a panel of 12
advanced economies over the years 1970-2005.6 The sectoral value-added data
are available at roughly the 1 to 2-digit industry level. We focus on a two-way
split of industries into high skill intensive and low skill intensive based on the
    5 SeeO’Mahony and Timmer (2009).
    6 Thesecountries are Australia, Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, South Korea, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The U.S. data
for value-added go back to only 1977, while the Japan data go back to only 1973.




                                           5
share of labor income paid to high-skill workers.7 While one could imagine more
detailed splits, including more than two skill categories and perhaps interacting
skill intensity with goods vs. services, we feel that this two-way split both
facilitates exposition and allows us to capture a robust pattern in the cross-
country data.
    The labor payment data come from the EUKLEMS Labour Input Data
and are slightly more disaggregated. High skill-intensive service sectors are:
“Financial Intermediation”, “Real Estate and Business Services”, “Education”,
and “Health and Social Work”. In 1970, the economy-wide average share of
labor compensation paid to high-skill workers in the U.S. was 20 percent; the
corresponding shares for these high skill-intensive industries were 34, 38, 74, and
49 percent, respectively. These industries remain well above average throughout
the time period.8 We combine these data with real (chain-weighted) GDP per
capita data from the Penn World Tables 7.1. Finally, we demean both the value-
added share data and the (log) GDP per capita data by taking out country fixed
effects.




                                    1

                                   0.9

                                   0.8
     Sector Share of Value-Added




                                                                               low-skill sectors
                                   0.7
                                             y = -0.17ln(x) + 2.37
                                   0.6             R² = 0.80

                                   0.5

                                   0.4
                                               y = 0.17ln(x) - 1.37
                                   0.3              R² = 0.80
                                                                              high-skill sectors
                                   0.2

                                   0.1

                                    0
                                   $10,000
                                                    Real GDP per Capita (Log Scale)



     Figure 1: Value-added by Skill-intensity and Economic Development.

   Figure 1 shows the data pooled across time and countries. The small squares
show the relationship for the panel of advanced countries; we have highlighted
the United States data using the larger circles. The relationship is clear: the
  7 High-skillis defined as a college graduate and above.
  8 The  next highest industries are “Chemicals and Chemical Products” (27 percent), “Coke,
Refined Petroleum, and Nuclear Fuel” (21 percent), and “Electrical and Optical Equipment”
(21 percent).



                                                                      6
value added share of the high skill-intensive sector increases with log GDP/capita,
with a highly significant (at a 0.1 percent level) semi-elasticity of 0.17. The re-
gression line implies an increase of roughly 24 percentage points as we move from
a GDP per capita of 10, 000 to 40, 000 (in 2005 PPP terms), and explains 80 per-
cent of the variation in the data. Moreover, we see that the United States data is
quite similar to the overall relationship. Indeed, the tight relationship suggests
that cross-country differences in the details for funding of education or health,
for example, are second order relative to the income per capita relationship.
In sum, the tendency for economic activity to move toward high skill-intensive
services as an economy develops is a robust pattern in the cross-country data.
    One of the common explanations for structural change is changes in relative
prices. (See, for example, Baumol (1967) and Ngai and Pissarides (2007).) Using
value-added price indices from the same EUKLEMS Database, we can examine
the correlation between the relative price of high-skill intensive services and the
increasing value added share of high-skill intensive services that accompanies
the process of development.9 Figure 2 is analogous to Figure 1, but it plots the
price index of the high skill-intensive sector relative to the low-skill intensive
sector rather than share data on the y-axis. Again we have demeaned both the
relative price and log GDP per capita data to eliminate country fixed effects,
and normalized the relative price indices to 100 in 1995. As before, the larger
circles represent the U.S. data.




                                                  180
                                                             High	  Skill-­‐Intensive	  Sector	  
                                                             Rela5ve	  Price	  
      Relative VA Price of High-Skill Intensive




                                                  160

                                                                                                       y = 51.9ln(x) - 428.2
                                                  140
                                                                                                            R² = 0.84
                                                  120

                                                  100
                       Sector




                                                   80

                                                   60

                                                   40

                                                   20

                                                    0
                                                   $10,000
                                                                Real GDP per Capita (Log Scale)



Figure 2: Relative Price of Skill-intensity Sector and Economic Development.
   9 We construct sector-level aggregate indices as chain-weighted Fisher price indices of the

price indices for individual indices. Calculation details are available in the data appendix.



                                                                                                7
   Again, the relationship is striking. The linear regression is highly significant,
explains 84 percent of the variation in the demeaned data, and is quantitatively
important: the relative price of the high skill-intensive sector increases almost
two and a half times over the range of the data. Finally, the U.S. relationship is
quite similar to the overall relationship, and again the tight relationship suggests
that cross-country variation in this relative price-income relationship is second
order. We conclude that changes in relative prices are another robust feature of
the structural transformation process involving the movement of activity toward
the high-skill intensive sector.

2.2    Income Effects: Cross-Sectional Household Evidence
A second common explanation for structural change is income effects associated
with non-homothetic preferences. (See, for example, Kongsamut et al. (2001).)
With this in mind it is of interest to ask whether high-skill intensive services are
a luxury good, i.e., have an income elasticity that exceeds one. To pursue this
we examine whether the relationship between the skill intensity of value-added
consumption and income exists in the expenditure data from a cross-section of
households. To the extent that all households face the same prices at a given
point in time and have common preferences (or at least preferences that are
not directly correlated with income), the cross-sectional expenditure patterns
within a country abstract from the relative price relationship in Figure 2 and
allow us to focus on the effect of income holding prices constant.
    One complication with pursuing this approach is that it involves mapping
household expenditure data through the input-output system in order to deter-
mine the consumption shares of value added. We briefly sketch the steps of this
procedure here, and provide more details in the appendix. First, we start with
the household level Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) data for the United
States from 2012. We adapt a Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) mapping from
disaggregate CEX categories to 76 NIPA Personal Consumption Expenditure
(PCE) categories. We then utilize a Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) map-
ping of these 76 PCE categories to 69 input-output industries, that properly
attributes the components going to distribution margins (disaggregated trans-
portation, retail, and wholesale categories). Using the 2012 BEA input-output
matrices, we can then infer the quantity of value added of each industry em-
bodied in the CEX expenditures. Using the EUKLEMS data, we classify the 69
industries as high skill- or low skill-intensive.10 We therefore have constructed
a household-level data set of the amount of value added per dollar spent pro-
duced by high skill-intensive sectors and low skill-intensive sectors, which we
can regress on household observables, most importantly income or education,
and potentially a host of other household level controls. We restrict ourselves
to the primary interview sample, and each observation is a household-month
observation.
 10 The labour data from EUKLEMS contains 41 distinct industries. The "basic" data, from

which we obtain value-added data, contain only 33 distinct industries.




                                           8
    Table 1 presents results for regressions of the total share of expenditures that
is high-skill intensive. The first column presents results from an OLS regression
on log after tax income and a set of demographic controls, including age; age
squared; dummies for sex, race, state, urban, and month; and values capturing
household composition (number of boys aged 2-16, number of girls aged 2-16,
number of men over 16, number of women over 16 years, and number of children
less than 2 years). The coefficient on log income in the first column indicates
that the semi-elasticity of the share of value-added embodied in expenditures is
0.012.

Table 1: Household High-Skill Intensive Expenditure Share vs. Income
                             OLS         IV      OLS
            Ln Income     0.012*** 0.049***        .
                SE           0.001      0.002      .
          High Skill Head       .         .    0.043***
                SE              .         .      0.002
                R2            0.08      0.02     0.15
           Observations     48,550     48,550   17,812
            *** indicate significance at the 1 percent level.
Controls include: age; age squared; dummies for sex, race, state, urban, and month;
 number of boys (2-16 year); number of girls (2-16 years); number of men (over 16
years); number of women (over 16 years);and number of infants (less than 2 years).
High skilled is defined as 16 years of schooling attained, while low skilled is defined
                                as 12 years attained.

    Income is certainly mis-measured in the micro data, and even if properly
measured it would only proxy for permanent income, leading to a likely attenu-
ation bias. The second column attempts to alleviate this measurement error by
instrumenting for log income using the years of schooling attained by the head
of household. Instrumenting for income in this fashion increases the coefficient
roughly four-fold to 0.049.
    The last column uses education as a direct regressor, replacing log income
with a dummy for whether the head of household is high skilled or not. Here
high skill is defined as having exactly 16 years of education, while low skill is
defined as having exactly 12 years. (The rest of the households are dropped from
the sample.) The coefficient indicates that the share of value-added embodied
in expenditures is 4.3 percentage points higher in households with a high-skilled
head.
    We have examined the robustness of the results in Table 1 to alternatives.
Table 1 uses monthly expenditures of the household, but if we aggregate house-
hold expenditures across the three months they are surveyed, we find nearly
identical results. By defining high skill as those with at least 16 years of educa-
tion, and low skill as those with less than 16 years of education, we expand the
sample somewhat, but the raw estimates are similar (0.032 rather than 0.043).11
 11 An   alternative analysis, however, where we try to directly estimate expenditure elastic-


                                              9
Second, dropping demographic controls increases the sample by about 15 per-
cent and lowers the coefficients on income somewhat (by roughly 50 percent),
but the coefficients remain highly significant. Dropping the controls have es-
sentially no impact on the high-skilled head of household coefficient. The main
effect of dropping the controls is substantially lower R2 values.
    Quantitatively, even the larger, instrumented, income coefficient of 0.049 is
substantially smaller than the aggregate time series value of 0.17 in Figure 1,
but not negligible in comparison. We therefore take this as suggestive evidence
that, in addition to relative prices, non-homotheticities may also play a role in
accounting for the observed pattern of skill-biased structural change.
    While we do regard this evidence as suggestive, we want to note an important
limitation in directly applying the micro elasticity as an income effect. Because
the CEX captures only out-of-pocket expenditures, it underestimates the true
consumption of certain goods like insurance premiums (a substantial share of
which is paid by employers) and higher education (a substantial share of which
is paid by government).12

2.3     Summary
In summary, we have documented a robust relationship in the time series data for
advanced economies regarding the movement of activity into high-skill intensive
services and the process of development. We will refer to this process as skill-
biased structural transformation, so as to emphasize both its connection to the
traditional characterization of structural transformation and the special role of
skill intensity. This relationship is remarkably stable across advanced economies,
thus suggesting that it is explained by some economic forces that are robustly
associated with development, with country specific tax and financing systems
not playing a central role in explaining the time series changes.
    The traditional structural transformation literature emphasizes the role of
both non-homotheticities and relative price changes as drivers of structural
transformation, and we have also presented evidence that both of these ef-
fects are relevant in the context of skill-biased structural transformation as well.
Specifically, we documented a strong positive correlation between the relative
price of high skill intensive services and GDP per capita in a cross-country panel
as well as a positive correlation between household value added expenditure
shares on high skill intensive services in the US cross-section. These relation-
ities by regressing the (log) level of high-skill value-added on the (log) level of expenditures
gives substantially higher estimates. This is driven by certain lumpy expenditures like higher
educational expenses and car purchases driving both up in particular months. This motivates
are emphasis on the relationship between the high skill share and education or income rather
than direct expenditures per se.
   12 The estimated income semi-elasticity of the share of out-of-pocket insurance is actually

significantly negative in the CEX data although overall insurance consumption is certainly
positive. Similarly, although the expenditure share-income semi-elasticity of higher education
is positive, it is likely understated. Finally, the lack of primary and tertiary expenditures
may actually be overstated in the CEX data because it neglects public expenditures, but we
conjecture that this relationship is small relative to the higher education relationship.



                                              10
ships are not only highly statistically significant, but they are also economically
significant in a quantitative sense.
    Finally, we should note that in documenting these relationships we have
used a strict high versus low-skill dichotomy. This masks important within sec-
tor heterogeneity. Indeed, within the low-skill sector, a pattern emerges that the
relatively more skill-intensive sectors, e.g., manufacturing industries like electri-
cal equipment and chemicals expand relative to the less skill-intensive sectors
like agriculture or textiles.13 In this sense, our simple dichotomy may under-
state the true extent of skill-biased structural change. However, the relative
price patterns, use patterns (consumption and investment), and trade patterns
make the analysis at a more disaggregated level more difficult to interpret and
much less directly tied to traditional structural change forces.


3     Model and Equilibrium
Our analysis focuses on how features of intratemporal equilibrium allocations are
affected by changes in the economic environment over time that operate through
changes in income and relative prices. In order to capture these interactions in
a simple a setting as possible, our benchmark model is static. In this section, we
describe the economy and its equilibrium at a point in time; later we describe
the features that we will allow to change over time to generate skill-biased
structural change as described in the previous section. Our model is essentially
a two-sector version of a standard structural transformation model extended to
allow for two labor inputs that are distinguished by skill.

3.1     Model
There are two types of households in the economy, distinguished by their skill
level. We will refer to them as low skilled and high skilled, denoted by the
subscript L and H respectively. The total mass of households is normalized to
one and we denote the fractions of low and high skill households as fL and fH
respectively, where fL + fH = 1. There are multiple sectors in the economy,
distinguished by the extent to which they rely on low versus high-skilled labor.
To facilitate the analysis we assume that there are only two sectors, which in the
calibration of the model will be connected to the low and high-skilled aggregates
studied in the previous section. As a practical matter, most high-skilled sectors
are services and most goods sectors are low-skilled sectors. For this reason it
will be convenient to label the two sectors as goods and services even though
these labels are not strictly correct. This will allow us to avoid having double
indices to distinguish between both low- vs. high-skilled workers and low vs.
high skill-intensive sectors.
  13 Katz and Murphy (1992) give a detailed analysis across 150 2-digit industry-occupation

cells for the period, 1963-1987. Autor and Dorn (2013) present a recent account focusing on
detailed occupation categories.




                                            11
   All households have identical preferences over goods and services, indepen-
dently of their skill level. We assume these preferences take the form:
                                ε−1                           ε−1
                           aG cGiε + (1 − aG ) (cSi + c̄S )    ε



where cGi and cSi are consumption of goods and services by an individual of
skill level i, 0 < aG < 1, c̄S ≥ 0 and ε > 0. Note that if c̄S > 0, preferences
are non-homothetic and, holding prices constant, the expenditure share on ser-
vices will be increasing in income.14 This non-homotheticity will be important
in allowing the model to match the observation from the previous section con-
cerning development and the value-added share for high-skilled sectors. Note
that households are assumed to not value leisure, since our focus will be on the
relative prices of labor given observed supplies.
    Each of the two production sectors has a constant returns to scale production
function that uses low- and high-skilled labor as inputs. We assume that each
of these production functions is CES:
                                                     ρ
                                                    ρ−1
                               ρ−1             ρ−1

                  Yj = Aj αj Hj ρ + (1 − αj ) Lj ρ       j = G, S

where Lj and Hj are inputs of low- and high-skilled labor in sector j, respec-
tively. The parameter αj will dictate the importance of low- versus high-skilled
labor in each sector. While one could imagine that the elasticity of substitution
between these two factors also differs across sectors, our benchmark specifica-
tion will assume that this value is the same for both sectors. We consider the
effects of cross-sectional variation in this parameter in our sensitivity analysis.

3.2     Equilibrium
We focus on a competitive equilibrium for the above economy. The competitive
equilibrium will feature four markets: two factor markets (low- and high-skilled
labor), and two output markets (goods and services), with prices denoted as
wL , wH , pG and pS . We will later normalize the price of low-skilled labor to
unity so that the price of high-skilled labor will also represent the skill premium,
though in our derivations it will be convenient to postpone implementing this
normalization.
    The definition of competitive equilibrium for this model is completely stan-
dard and straightforward, so here we will focus on characterizing the equilibrium.
   14 This is a simple and common way to create differential income effects across the two

consumption categories. One can also generate non-homothetic demands in other ways. For
example, Hall and Jones (2007) generate an income elasticity for medical spending that exceeds
unity through the implied demand for longevity. Boppart (2014), Swiecki (2014) and Comin
et al. (2015) all consider more general preferences with the common feature being that income
effects associated with non-homotheticities do not vanish asymptotically. This property is
likely to be relevant when considering a sample with countries at very different stages of
development. Because we focus on a sample of predominantly rich countries, we have chosen to
work with the simpler preference structure in order to facilitate transparency of the economic
forces at work.



                                             12
Individuals of skill i = L, H solve
                                     ε−1                               ε−1
                       max aG cGiε + (1 − aG ) (cSi + c̄S )             ε
                      cGi ,cSi

subject to
                                   pG cGi + pS cSi = wi .                            (1)
The first-order conditions associated with their problem are

                                                        −1
                                                   aG cGiε     = pG λi               (2)
                                                        − 1ε
                         (1 − aG ) (cSi + c̄S )                = pS λi               (3)

Rearranging these two first order conditions and substituting into (1) yields:
                                                  wi + pS c̄S
                                 cGi =                  ε
                                                  1−aG pG
                                         pS        a G pS       + pG

and                                                    ε
                                         1−aG pG
                                          aG pS         wi − pG c̄S
                            cSi =                        ε
                                                  1−aG pG
                                         pS        aG pS     + pG
Normalizing wL to unity the aggregate expenditure share for services is then
given by:
                                            ε
                                        G pG
   pS [(1 − fH )cSL + fH cSH ]   pS 1−a
                                     aG pS
                               =         ε
         1 − fH + fH wH         p 1−aG pG + p
                                         S        aG    pS        G
                                                 pS              pG
                                         −                                 c̄S       (4)
                                           1 − fH + fH wH p 1−aG pG ε + p
                                                                    
                                                           S   aG pS     G


   The problem of the firm in sector j = G, S is
                                                  ρ
                                                 ρ−1
                            ρ−1             ρ−1

          max pj Aj αj Hj ρ + (1 − αj ) Lj ρ          − wH Hj − Lj
             Hj ,Lj

The first order conditions are
                                             1
                                            ρ−1
                      ρ−1              ρ−1
                       ρ                 ρ                 −1
           pj Aj αj Hj    + (1 − αj ) Lj         (1 − α)j Lj ρ               =   1   (5)
                                                   1
                                                  ρ−1
                             ρ−1             ρ−1
                                                           −1
                  pj Aj αj Hj ρ + (1 − αj ) Lj ρ       αj Hj ρ               = wH    (6)

Taking the ratio of (5) and (6) we obtain
                                               ρ
                             Hj        αj     1
                                 =                                                   (7)
                             Lj      1 − α j wH

                                                   13
Substituting (7) into (5) and rearranging delivers an equation for the price of
sector j output in terms of the skill premium wH :
                                                                   1
                                           αjρ
                                      "                         # 1−ρ
                                 1
                     p̂j (wH ) =           ρ−1   + (1 − αj )ρ           .       (8)
                                 Aj       wH

The above expression implies that the search for equilibrium prices can be re-
duced to a single dimension: if we know the equilibrium wage rate for high-
skilled labor then all of the remaining prices can be determined.
    In what follows we derive an expression for the market-clearing condition for
high-skilled labor that contains the single price wH . Using (7), the production
function of sector j, and (8), we obtain
                                                   ρ
                                                       Yj
                          Lj = (1 − αj )p̂j (wH )Aj       .
                                                       Aj

Similarly, we solve for the demands for high-skilled labor in sector j as a function
of output of sector j and the wage for high-skilled labor:
                                                 ρ
                                    αj p̂j (wH )Aj Yj
                             Hj =                                                (9)
                                           wH        Aj

    Using (9) and equilibrium in the goods market, the market-clearing condition
for high-skilled labor yields a single equation in wH :
                                            ρ P
                                                 i=L,H fi ĉSi (wH )
                           
                             αS p̂S (wH )AS
                                   wH                  AS
                                      ρ P
                                                f ĉ  (wH)
                  
                    αG p̂G (wH )AG        i=L,H i Gi
               +                                              = fH .        (10)
                          wH                   AG

where we have used ĉji (wH ) to denote the demand for output of sector j by a
household of skill level i when the high-skilled wage is wH and prices are given
by the functions p̂i (wH ) defined in (8).


4    Accounting for Growth and Structural Trans-
     formation
In this section we describe how the model of the previous section can be cali-
brated so as to account for growth, structural transformation, and the skill pre-
mium. To do this we will use the above model to explain equilibrium outcomes
at two different points in time, that we denote as 0 and T for the initial and
terminal periods respectively. We assume that there are two types of changes
in the economic environment across these two periods. One is a change in the
fraction of individuals that are high skill. The other is technological change.
However, we will allow for technological change along several dimensions. In


                                            14
particular, we assume that technological change within each sector can be some
combination of skill biased technological change and skill neutral technological
change. Skill-biased technological change in sector j will be captured by changes
in αj , whereas neutral technological change will be captured by changes in Aj .
Additionally, the mix of these two types of technological change is allowed to
differ across the two sectors. Consistent with the existing literature on techno-
logical change and the skill premium, we do not allow the parameter ρ to change
over time. We also do not allow for preferences to change over time.
    In choosing our targets, we again focus on the KLEMS data from Section
2. For the U.S., the complete data are available for the years, 1977 to 2005,
so those two end years become our targets for 0 and T .15 These dates are
convenient, since 1977 effectively marks a local minimum in the skill premium
(see Acemoglu and Autor (2011) for earlier data), and it secularly increases after
1977. The data contain total compensation and total hours by industry, skill
level (“low”, “medium”, and “high”, which are effectively, secondary degree or
less, some tertiary schooling, and four year college degree or more), gender, and
age groupings (15-29, 30-49, and 50 and over). We combine the compensation of
KLEMS categories of “low" and “medium” educated workers of all genders and
ages into our classification of low-skilled, and all varieties of “high” into high-
skilled, in order to calculate aggregate and goods and service sector-specific
labor income shares, using the same sectoral classification as in Section 2. To
compute the skill premium, we compute wages as the ratio of compensation to
hours, and the skill premium as the ratio of college-educated (“high”) to high
school-educated (“low”) prime-aged (i.e., aged 30-49) male wages. This premium
rises from 1.41 in 1977 to 1.90 in 2005.16 Finally, we infer fH , using the identity
that the ratio of labor compensation equals the product of the skill premium
and the relative quantity of high- to low-skilled labor (fH and fL = 1 − fH ,
respectively). In doing so, the implicit assumption is that relative wages between
different low-skilled (high-skilled) demographic groups reflect relative efficiency
units of low-skilled (high-skilled) labor.
    In mapping the model to these targets, we proceed in two steps. In the first
step, we describe a procedure that allows us to infer the changes in parameters
that represent technical change given a value for ρ. In the second step, we
describe how to infer values for the preference parameters.
    We begin with the determination of technological change. First, we show
  15 The  KLEMS value-added and price data line up quite closely with BEA data, but the
consistent aggregation is not available prior to 1977. They are available through 2007, but
labor compensation and hours data are only available through 2005.
  16 Comparing earnings of full time workers using CPS data, Figure 1 in Acemoglu and Autor

(2011) indicates values of 1.39 and 1.64 for 1977 and 2005 respectively. Our measure indicates
a roughly 25 percentage point greater increase. This difference reflects two factors. First, our
lower skill group includes those with less than high school education in addition to those with
high school education, while our high skill group involves those with at least a college degree.
Second, our measure is based on total compensation and not just on labor earnings.Pierce
(2010) documents that the change in the 90-10 ratio over this time period is more than twenty
log points higher when using total compensation than when using CPS wages. His analysis is
based on firm level data and so does not allow a breakdown by educational attainment.



                                              15
that given a value for ρ, the four values of the αjt are pinned down by sectoral
factor income shares and the skill premium, wHt . To see this, note that the
share of sector j income going to high skill labor is
                                      wHt Hjt
                          θHjt =
                                   p̂j (wHt )Yjt
                                               ρ
                                              αjt
                               =    ρ                 ρ−1
                                   αjt + (1 − αjt )ρ wHt

Therefore, given ρ, the skill premium wHt , and data for θHjt , the value of the
αjt are given by:
                                         1
                          αjt =                  1 .
                                      1    1−θHjt ρ
                                 1 + ρ−1     θHjt
                                       wHtρ

    Next we turn to determining the values of the Ajt ’s. Although there are
four of these parameters, the two values in period 0 basically reflect a choice of
units and so can be normalized, leaving only two parameters to be determined.
We next derive a condition that determines the two AjT ’s up to a scale factor.
As is well known in the literature, if we had Cobb-Douglas sectoral technologies
with identical labor share parameters, then relative sectoral prices would simply
be the inverse of relative sectoral TFPs. In this case, changes in relative prices
would pin down changes in relative TFPs, and hence determine the values of
the two AjT ’s up to a scale factor. This same relation holds more generally, and
in particular would also apply if the sectoral production functions are CES with
identical parameters. While this result does not apply to our setting because
of sectoral heterogeneity in the αjt ’s, there is still a close connection between
relative sectoral prices and relative sectoral TFPs (i.e., the Ajt ), though the
relation is somewhat more complex. In particular, using equation (8) for the
two sectors we have:
                               αρ                ρ
                                                    1/(1−ρ)
                                 ρ−1 + (1 − αGt )
                                  Gt
                    AGt   pSt  wHt
                        =        αρ
                                                            .                (11)
                    ASt   pGt     St
                                     + (1 − αSt )
                                                 ρ
                                wρ−1Ht


    As noted above, the initial values of the Ajt simply reflect a choice of units.
We will normalize AS0 to equal one, and given the calibrated values for the αj0
and the value of wH0 , we will choose AG0 so as to imply pG0 /pS0 = 1. In this
case pGT /pST can be easily identified with the change in the relative sectoral
prices, and this value from the data will pin down the sectoral TFPs in period
T up to a scale factor.
    This scale factor will of course influence the overall growth rate of the econ-
omy between periods 0 and T , so we choose this scale factor to target the
aggregate growth rate of output per worker. However, in order to compute ag-
gregate output at a point in time (and thus also the growth rate in aggregate
output) it is necessary to determine the sectoral distribution of output. The


                                         16
relations that we have imposed thus far guarantee that maximum profits will be
zero in each sector but do not determine the scale of operation in either sector.
Intuitively, the split of activity across sectors at given prices will be determined
by the relative demands of households for the two sectoral outputs at those
same prices. Below we will describe how preference parameters can be chosen
to match the sectoral distribution of value added at both the initial and final
date. For now we simply note that if we assume this split is the same as in the
data, then given our previous steps we can compute the growth rate of output
per worker as a function of the scale factor and hence use the growth rate in
aggregate output to determine the scale factor.
    To summarize, at this point, given a value for ρ, we have identified all of
the technology parameters given values for fLt at t = 0, T , θjt for j = G, S,
t = 0, T , the change in pS /pG and the growth of total output per worker. For
our benchmark analysis we set ρ = 1.42, which corresponds to the value used in
Katz and Murphy (1992), and which is commonly used in the literature. Though
this is a commonly used value in the literature, it is worth noting that previous
estimates using an aggregate production function do not necessarily apply in
our setting. For this reason we will also do sensitivity analysis with regard to ρ
over a fairly wide interval, ranging from 0.77 to 2.50. Table 2 provides values
for the inputs into the calibration procedure. Table 3 below shows the implied
values for the technology parameters.

                                    Table 2
                Values Used to Calibrate Technology Parameters
                fL0    fLT   wH0 wHT %∆ ppG      S
                                                       %∆Y
                0.78 0.67 1.41       1.90    62.0      70.0
                                              CS0       CST
                θG0    θGT    θS0    θST       Y0        YT
                0.18   0.34   0.54   0.66     0.29      0.44
                                      Table 3
                    Calibrated Technology Parameters (ρ = 1.42)
                 αG0    αS0 αGT αST AST /AS0 AGT /AG0
                 0.28 0.55 0.43 0.66            1.25       2.27

    A few remarks are in order. Not surprising given the way in which we
grouped industries into the two sectors, we see that the weight on low-skilled
labor is greater in the goods sector than in the service sector at both dates.
More interesting is that in both sectors technological change has an important
component that is skill biased. While the level drop in α is larger for the goods
sector than the service sector, the percent changes are very similar, though
slightly larger for the service sector than the goods sector (22% versus 20%). It
follows that the extent to which technological change is skill biased is relatively
similar for the two sectors. However, overall technological progress is much
greater in the goods sector than in the service sector. The TFP term in the
goods sector more than doubles over the nearly thirty year period from 1977
to 2005, corresponding to an average annual growth rate of 2.97%. In contrast,
the growth of the TFP term in the service sector averages only 0.80% per year.


                                        17
    We now turn to the issue of determining the values for the three preference
parameters: aG , c̄S and ε. While technological change can be inferred without
specifying any of the preference parameters, we cannot evaluate some of the
counterfactual exercises of interest without knowing how relative demands for
the sectoral outputs are affected by changes in prices. As noted above, the cal-
ibration of technology parameters used information about sectoral expenditure
shares without guaranteeing that observed expenditure shares were consistent
with household demands given all of the prices. Requiring that the aggregate
expenditure share for goods (or services) is consistent with the observed values
in the data for the initial and terminal date would provide two restrictions on
the three preference parameters. It follows that we would either need to in-
troduce an additional moment from the data, or perhaps use information from
some outside study to determine one of the three preference parameters. For
our benchmark results we will follow the second approach and fix the value of ε,
and then use data on aggregate expenditure shares to pin down the values for
aG and c̄S . It will turn out that our main finding is relatively robust to variation
over a large range of values of ε, thereby lessening the need to tightly determine
its value. Nonetheless, in Section 5 we will describe how cross-sectional data
on expenditure shares could be used as an additional moment and allow us to
determine all three preference parameters.
    The empirical literature does not provide estimates of ε that correspond to
our definitions of the two sectors. However, as noted previously, what we label
the goods sectors does contain almost all of the industries that produce goods,
while the sector that we label as services does consist primarily of service sector
industries in the actual economy. However, this split is not sharp, since low
skilled service sector industries such as retail trade are also included in what
we label the goods sector. Nonetheless, we believe that information about the
elasticity of substitution between the “true” goods and services sectors should
be informative about a reasonable range of values for ε in our model. Recalling
that the objects in our utility function reflect the value-added components of
sectoral output, the relevant estimates in the literature would include Herrendorf
et al. (2013), Buera and Kaboski (2009), and Swiecki (2014). All of these
studies suggest very low degrees of substitutability between true goods and true
services. For this reason we consider values for ε in the set {0.125, 0.20, 0.50},
with ε = 0.20 chosen as our benchmark.17
    Simple manipulation of the household demands gives:

                     ε−1        ε
                  pGt          1−aG
                  pSt           aG                           1                     pSt c̄S
    cSt =         ε−1          ε        −         ε−1        ε
              pGt            1−aG                pGt         1−aG             1 − ftH + ftH wt
              pSt             aG       +1        pSt          aG         +1

for total demand for services in period t. Using information on relative prices
  17 Comin et al. (2015) redo the exercise in Herrendorf et al. (2013) for a more general class

of preferences and find an elasticity of substitution that is somewhat higher, though still less
than 0.50, which is our upper range.


                                                 18
and total income, given a value for ε this allows us to determine values for aG
and c̄S .
   Table 4 shows the values for the preference parameters in the different sce-
narios.
                                    Table 4
                        Calibrated Preference Parameters
                                        ε     aG    c̄S
                        Benchmark 0.20 0.72 0.14
                          High ε      0.50 0.31 0.35
                          Low ε      0.125 0.92 0.11

    The qualitative patterns in this table are intuitive. In all cases the change in
income, relative prices and the aggregate expenditure shares are all the same.
As we move from ε = 0.20 to ε = 0.125 we decrease the elasticity of substitution
between the two goods, implying a smaller response in relative quantities but
a larger response in relative expenditure shares. In order to compensate for
this larger effect, we need to decrease the impact of income changes on relative
expenditure shares, implying a lower value for c̄S . The lower value for c̄S will
in turn lead to a higher expenditure share on services in the initial period, since
the non-homotheticity is now less important. Hence, in order to match the
expenditure shares for the initial period we need to attach a lower weight to
consumption of goods. As we move from ε = 0.20 to ε = 0.50 we see the reverse
pattern.


5    Decomposing Changes in the Skill Premium
Having calibrated the model so as to be consistent with growth, structural
transformation, changes in the skill premium and changes in the share of skilled
labor, we can now use the model to perform counterfactuals that allow us to
attribute changes in the skill premium to changes in various aspects of the eco-
nomic environment. Our primary objective is to decompose the effect of changes
in technology on the skill premium into a piece due to skill biased technological
change and a residual piece that is due to other forms of technological change.
The residual piece affects the relative demand for skilled individuals indirectly,
through its impact on the relative consumption of services.
    In order to decompose the effects of technological change into these subcom-
ponents we carry out several counterfactuals, which we report in Table 5, for
each of the three specifications that differ with respect to the value of ε.




                                        19
                                Table 5
              Decomposing Changes in the Skill Premium
                             US, 1977-2005
                                        ε = 0.50 ε = 0.20               ε = 0.125
               wH0 Data                    1.41    1.41                    1.41
              wH0 Model                    1.41    1.41                    1.41
              wHT Data                     1.90    1.90                    1.90
              wHT Model                    1.90    1.90                    1.90
      wHT Model–changes in fi only         0.96    0.92                    0.92
   wHT Model–changes in fi and Aj only     1.17    1.16                    1.16
   wHT Model–changes in fi and αj only     1.61    1.59                    1.59

    The first four rows of the table simply report that in the data, the skill
premium increased from 1.41 to 1.90 between 1977 and 2005, and that our cali-
brated model perfectly replicates this change. The rest of the table decomposes
this change in the model by considering several counterfactuals. The first coun-
terfactual assesses the role of “supply” versus “demand” factors. Specifically, the
share of labor supply coming from skilled workers increases between 1977 and
2005, and in the absence of any other changes exerts downward pressure on the
skill premium. The fifth row of Table 5 shows that if the change in relative sup-
ply of skill had been the only change over time, it would have resulted in a drop
in the skill premium of between 45 and 49 percentage points across the three
specifications. Given that we in fact observe a increase in the skill premium of
49 percentage points, it follows that the overall effect of technological change is
to increase the skill premium by between 94 and 98 percentage points.
    Our next goal is to decompose the overall effect of technological change
into the part that is due to skill biased technological change (i.e., changes in the
αjt ’s) and a residual due to other dimensions of technical change (i.e., the Ajt ’s).
Before doing so it is of interest to note that in standard aggregate analyses of
technological change, it is only skill biased technological change that affects
the skill premium, since changes in TFP have no impact on relative marginal
products holding factor supplies constant. Central to our analysis is the fact that
this result does not hold in our model. The reason that this is true is precisely
because the two sectors have different skill intensities. As a result, any change in
the economic environment that leads to changes in the composition of demand
will impact on the relative demand for skill. As is standard in the structural
transformation literature, our model features two forces through which changes
in the Ajt ’s can influence the sectoral composition of output. One is through
income effects: because of nonhomothetic preferences, any change in technology
that increases income will lead to a reallocation of activity from the goods to the
services sector, thereby indirectly increasing the relative demand for skill. The
other is through relative price effects. If goods and services have an elasticity of
substitution that is less than unity, then decreases in the relative productivity
of services will also lead to a reallocation of factors of production to the service
sector, again indirectly increasing the relative demand for skill.
    There are two natural exercises that one could perform to assess the con-


                                         20
tribution of changes in the Ajt ’s to changes in the skill premium. In the first
we shut down the changes in the αjt ’s and compute what fraction of the over-
all increase is accounted for by changes in the Ajt ’s alone. In the second we
shut down changes in the Ajt ’s and find the residual that is not accounted for
by changes in the αjt ’s. In a linear model these two exercises would give the
same answer, but to the extent that nonlinearities are present they may differ.
It will turn out that the answers do differ, but only to a minor extent. The
final two rows in Table 5 present the results of these two counterfactuals. For
concreteness, we first focus on the case of ε = 0.20. When we hold the αjt ’s
fixed, we find that the change in the Ajt ’s accounts for 24 percentage points
of the overall 98 percentage point increase accounted for technical change, or
approximately 24%. If we instead fix the Ajt ’s, the residual is 31 percentage
points, which represents approximately 31% of the total. Based on this we
conclude that non-skill biased technical change accounts for between 25 and 30
percent of the overall change in the skill premium due to technical change. Put
somewhat differently, according to our calibrated model, if skill biased technical
change had been the only force affecting the relative demand for skill then the
skill premium would have increased by only 18 percentage points instead over
the period 1977 to 2005 instead of increasing by 49 percentage points.
    If we redo this calculation for the other two values of ε the answers are
similar. For ε = 0.50 the two methods imply that changes in the Ajt ’s account
for 22% and 31% of the overall change in the skill premium due to technical
change, whereas for ε = 0.125 the two values are effectively identical to those
for the ε = 0.20 case, being equal to 24% and 31%. From this we conclude that
our finding of significant contribution of changes in the Ajt ’s is robust to a
large variation in the value of ε.
    In the introduction we stressed the fact that aggregate production function
analyses abstract from compositional changes, and that our main objective was
to assess the quantitative importance of the compositional changes that are
associated with the process of structural transformation during development.
In order to illustrate that this is the mechanism that we are picking up in
the above calculations it is of interest to examine the relationship between the
different changes in the economic environment and the sectoral composition of
value added. Table 6 reports the results for each of the three values of ε.

                                  Table 6
            Technical Change and Value Added Share of Services
                               US, 1977-2005
                                 ε = 0.50 ε = 0.20 ε = 0.125
              US Data 1977          0.29     0.29      0.29
               Model 1977           0.29     0.29      0.29
              US Data 2005          0.44     0.44      0.44
               Model 2005           0.44     0.44      0.44
            Model with fixed Aj     0.26     0.25      0.25
            Model with fixed αj     0.44     0.46      0.46


                                       21
    The first four rows of the table simply confirm that the service sector grew
significantly between 1977 and 2005, increasing its share of value added from
29 percent to 44 percent, and that our calibrated model perfectly accounts for
this change. The last two rows provide two different ways of assessing the
role of changes in the Aj ’s and the αj ’s in accounting for this compositional
change. Both methods provide the same simple message: virtually all of the
compositional change is accounted for by changes in the sectoral TFPs. It
follows that our previous decomposition of changes in the skill premium due to
the two different sources of technical change can effectively be interpreted as
statements about the importance of compositional changes.
    Non-skill biased technological change in our model still has two dimensions:
one of which increases the overall level of TFP in the economy and the other
of which led to higher relative TFP in the goods sector. As we noted above,
both of these changes tend to reallocate activity from the goods sector to the
service sector, thereby indirectly increasing the relative demand for skill. It is
perhaps of interest to examine the relative magnitude of these two effects. Note
that for given changes in the Ajt ’s the relative magnitude of these two effects is
dictated by the preference parameters ε and c̄s : as ε becomes smaller, relative
TFP changes have larger effects, and as c̄S becomes larger then sector neutral
changes in the Ajt ’s have larger effects. Because our calibration procedure
implies that as ε becomes smaller the value of c̄S decreases, we expect to find
that sector neutral change plays a larger role for smaller values of ε. To evaluate
this we consider the counterfactual in which we hold all parameters fixed from
the original calibration, allow the fit ’s and the αjt ’s to change as before, but
counterfactually force the Ajt ’s to grow at the same rate so as to yield the same
overall change in aggregate output as in the data. When we do this, the implied
values of the skill premium are 1.83, 1.72, and 1.69 for the cases of ε = 0.50, 0.20,
and 0.125 respectively. It follows that when ε = 0.50 it is income effects that
dominate the overall impact of the Ajt ’s on the skill premium, whereas for the
smaller values of ε the sector biased nature of TFP growth is somewhat more
important than the income effect. So while the three different specifications
offer very similar decompositions regarding the overall effect of changes in the
Ajt ’s, they do have different implications for what type of changes in the Ajt
will lead to future changes in the skill premium.

5.1    Using Data to Infer ε
In the results above we considered a range of values for ε rather than trying
to use our model to infer a specific value. Since our main message was robust
to a wide range of values for ε we do not view this is a particular limitation
of the analysis. Nonetheless, in this subsection we describe how the use of a
cross-sectional moment on the household side would allow us to also infer a
value for ε. One way to frame the issue is the following. The expenditure shares
at time 0 effectively pins down the weight on goods in the utility function. Our
calibration procedure requires that changes in aggregate expenditure shares be
consistent with observed changes in income and relative prices. However, all this


                                         22
does is restrict us to a one parameter family of combinations of income effects
and substitution effects, i.e., there is a one parameter family of pairs (ε, c̄S )
that can deliver the required change in expenditure shares for given changes in
income and relative prices. In order to uniquely pin down the parameter pair
we would need an additional moment that reveals information about the size of
these two effects.
    Intuitively, cross-sectional information can provide information about the
magnitude of the income effect: assuming that all households have the same
preferences and face the same prices at a point in time, cross-sectional hetero-
geneity in income will allow us to infer the size of the income effect. This can be
implemented using the cross-sectional information that we reported in Section
2. In particular, our empirical analysis found that the expenditure share for ser-
vices is 0.04 higher for high skill households than for low skill households. If we
require that our model match this moment in the final time period, the implied
values for ε and c̄S are 0.05 and 0.08 respectively when we assume ρ = 1.42.
This would correspond to values of ε somewhat below the lower end of the in-
terval that we considered. As a practical matter, it turns out that moving to
increasingly smaller values of ε from ε = 0.20 has relatively small effects, as
could already be seen in Table 4. We have also repeated this exercise for alter-
native values of ρ and obtained estimates of ε = 0.11 and 0.01 for ρ equal to
0.77 and 2.50 respectively. While we do not report the results for these cases in
detail, we note that our main message remains unaffected if we were to adopt
these specifications.
    Having offered the idea of using cross-sectional data to infer the size of in-
come effects on the demand for what we have labelled goods and services, we
think it is important to repeat one important limitation of this approach in the
current context. Two of the largest components of high skill services are edu-
cation and health care, both of which are not well tracked by household expen-
diture surveys. To the extent that spending on some components of education
and health reflect a collective societal choice, it is not clear that cross-sectional
data will be useful in detecting how cross-sectional differences in income affect
desired consumption.

5.2    Sensitivity Exercises
For the results in the previous section we assumed that ρ = 1.42, which we noted
was a standard value in the literature, and the value implied by the analysis in
Katz and Murphy (1992). However, we also noted that the aggregate analyses
that have supported this estimate are not necessarily appropriate in our multi-
sector economy. For this reason we also consider a wider range of values for ρ
to assess the extent to which the above conclusions are robust to variation in
this parameter.
    We consider two alternative values of ρ, corresponding to higher and lower
elasticities of substitution. Specifically, we consider ρ = 0.77 and ρ = 2.5. In
each case we redo the calibration procedure as before. While the value of ρ does
affect the quantitative findings, it leaves our main message largely unchanged.


                                         23
For example, focusing on the case of ε = 0.20 we find that when ρ = 0.77, the
share of changes in the skill premium due to technical change that are accounted
for by changes in the Ajt is 27% and 41% from the two methods. When ρ = 2.50
the corresponding values are 19% and 23%. We conclude that our main finding
of a significant role for changes in demand composition induced by technical
change in accounting for changes in the skill premium is robust to considering a
wide range of values for ρ, though higher values of this elasticity parameter do
lead to modest declines in the estimated role played by demand composition.
    To this point our analysis has implicitly assumed that the value of ρ is the
same in both sectors, which given the absence of any empirical evidence on the
extent of heterogeneity in ρ across sectors, seemed a natural benchmark. Reshef
(2013) suggests that the elasticity of substitution between high and low-skilled
workers may be lower in services, for example. It is therefore important to
assess whether our results are sensitive to the equality assumption. To do this
we redo our exercise for several specifications in which we allow the two values
of ρ to vary across sectors, and allowing for the ratio ρG /ρS to be both larger
and smaller than one. In all cases we assume that the weighted average of the
two elasticities–(HG /H)ρG + (HS /H)ρS –is equal to 1.42 when evaluated at the
initial factor shares, so that our analysis can be interpreted as assessing the
effect of heterogeneity holding the aggregate elasticity of substitution constant.
We consider values for ρS of 0.77, 0.91, 1.11, and 2.00, and the implied values
for ρG are 2.23, 2.06, 1.82, and .73. Table 7 reports the same statistics as in
Table 5, focusing on the case of ε = 0.20.


                                       Table 7
                        The Effect of Sectoral Variation in ρ
                                   US, 1977-2005
                       ρS          ρS
                       ρG
                          = 0.35   ρG
                                       = 0.44 ρρGS
                                                    = 0.61      ρS
                                                                ρG
                                                                     = 1.00   ρS
                                                                              ρG
                                                                                   = 2.73
      wH0 Data            1.41        1.41         1.41              1.41          1.41
     wH0 Model            1.41        1.41         1.41              1.41          1.41
     wHT Data             1.90        1.90         1.90              1.90          1.90
     wHT Model            1.90        1.90         1.90              1.90          1.90
                          Counterfactual wHT
 changes in: fi only      1.00        0.99         0.97              0.92          0.86
     fi and Aj only       1.15        1.15         1.15              1.16          1.18
     fi and αj only       1.66        1.66         1.64              1.59          1.46

     For ease of comparison, the fourth column repeats the results from our bench-
mark specification. For values of ρS /ρG < 1 the implications are affected very
little, and to the extent that a very large value of ρS /ρG influences the quan-
titative results, it yields a larger role for the demand side effects that we focus
on. Noting that we are considering a very wide range of variation in the relative
values of ρ, we conclude that our results are quite robust to variation in ρ across
sectors.
     Lastly, we consider the extent to which mismeasurement of relative prices
might influence our results. Our quantitative analysis utilized information about


                                        24
changes in the relative price of the high skill intensive sector. Between 1977 and
2005 this relative price increased by more than sixty percent. One possible con-
cern is that the price inflation in the high skill intensive sector might be upward
biased because of the failure to properly account for quality improvements. We
report the results of a simple exercise to assess the extent to which our conclu-
sions are affected by this possibility. In particular, consider the case in which
the true increase in the relative price of the high skill intensive sector was only
half as much as indicated by the official data. This means that real value added
in this sector increased by roughly 30% more than indicated by the official data,
and aggregate GDP grew by roughly 15 additional percentage points. We re-
peat our benchmark exercise for the case of ρ = 1.42 and ε = 0.20 , carrying
out the same calibration procedure as previously. Not surprisingly, given that
we are holding ε fixed and decreasing the role of relative price changes, the
calibration procedure yields a larger value for c̄S , indicating a larger role for
nonhomotheticities. However, we find that the contribution of demand factors
is virtually identical to what we found in our benchmark calculation. So while
mismeasurement of relative price changes has implications for relative magni-
tudes of preference parameters, it has virtually no effect on our assessment of
the role of demand factors.


6     Decomposing Changes in Relative Prices
While our main focus has been to use our model to understand the relative
importance of different factors in generating the observed changes in the skill
premium, our model also allows us to assess the importance of different factors
in generating the change in the relative price of skill intensive services over
time. In particular, our model suggests two distinct channels at work. As
is standard in the literature on structural change with uneven technological
progress across sectors, differential growth in sectoral TFP will lead to changes
in relative sectoral prices. But our model also features an additional channel:
because the sectors have different factor shares, changes in the relative price of
factors will also lead to changes in relative sectoral prices. In particular, since
the high-skill intensive sector uses skilled labor more intensively, any increase
in the relative price of skilled labor will lead to a higher relative price for this
sector. This effect was previously documented in equation (8).18
    Here we consider some counterfactuals for our benchmark specification in
which ρ = 1.42 and ε = 0.20 in order to assess the relative importance of the
different forces. In the data, the relative price of high-skill intensive services
increases by 62 percentage points between 1977 and 2005, and by virtue of
our calibration procedure, our model perfectly accounts for this increase. To
assess the pure role played by the increase in the skill premium, we compute the
implied relative price from equation (8) assuming that all technology parameters
remain fixed at their 1977 values, but letting the skill premium increase from
  18 Buera and Kaboski (2012) highlight this effect in a theoretical model in which the differ-

ence in skill-intensity across the goods and service sectors arises endogenously.


                                              25
1.41 to 1.90, as in the data. The result is an increase in the relative price of
skill intensive services of 11 percentage points, or roughly 18% of the overall
increase.
    It follows that the direct effects of technological change are the dominant
force behind the increase in the relative price of skill intensive services. More-
over, it is the differences in sectoral TFP growth that drives this direct effect.
Again, if we take equation (8) and now instead hold the skill premium and
sectoral TFP constant and consider the pure effect of skill biased technological
change, the result is that the relative price of skill intensive services would have
decreased by 19 percentage points.
    This last calculation examined the direct effect of changes in skill-biased
technological change, but without incorporating the general equilibrium effect
on wages. Our previous counterfactuals argued that the contribution of skill
biased technological change to the skill premium served to increase it from 1.41
to 1.59. If we include this effect in combination with the direct effect of skill
biased technological change, the result is that the relative price of skill intensive
services decreases by 15 percentage points.
    In summary, we conclude that although increases in the skill premium di-
rectly account for a non-trivial share of the increase in the relative price of
high-skill intensive services, the dominant factor behind this increase is the rel-
atively slow sectoral TFP growth in this sector.


7     Cross Country Analysis
In this section we use data from nine other OECD countries for which the
available data exists to address two distinct issues. The first issue concerns
model validation, and the second issue is to assess the importance of skill-biased
structural change for a larger set of countries.

7.1    Model Validation Using Cross-Country Data
Our calibration procedure assigned parameter values by targeting the same num-
ber of moments as there were parameters. While both the production structure
and our method for inferring technological change are very standard, taking the
production side as given we assumed that the values for the preference parame-
ters of our utility function were such that the model would match the beginning
and end points of the data for valued added expenditure shares. Even if our
utility function were mis-specified in an important way, this procedure would
still allow us to fit the beginning and end points, but in this case we might be
wary of using our calibrated specification for the counterfactual exercises. One
simple test of the specification is to consider its ability to fit not only the two
endpoints of our sample, but also the actual time series. Unfortunately this is
not a very stringent test for the period we are studying, since the key series in
our analysis are fairly linear, and the model is able to match them fairly well.



                                         26
                                  0.50                                                                                2.25
                                  0.45
                                                                                                                      2.00
      Predicted Skill-Intensive




                                                                                            Predicted Skill Premium
                                  0.40
           Service Share




                                  0.35                                                                                1.75

                                  0.30                                                                                1.50
                                  0.25
                                                                                                                      1.25
                                  0.20
                                                                                                                      1.00
                                  0.15

                                  0.10                                                                                0.75
                                         0.1        0.2        0.3        0.4         0.5                                    0.75   1    1.25   1.5   1.75     2   2.25
                                               Actual Skill-Intensive Service Share                                                     Actual Skill Premium

Figure 3: Model Fit in a Panel of Countries: Structural Change (left panel) and
the Skill Premium (right panel).


    As a somewhat more stringent test, we turn to cross country data. For this
exercise we use data from the following nine countries: Australia, Austria, Den-
mark, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom.
We assume that the utility function for each country is the same as the one im-
plied by our benchmark calibration with ρ = 1.42 and ε = 0.20, i.e., we impose
the implied values for aG and c̄S . Additionally, we assume that ρ is the same
for all countries. However, using the same procedure as above, for each country
we use our model to infer the time series for technological change, as well as
measuring the supply of skill in each country. Because preference parameters
are imported from the calibration using US data, we have not imposed that
the model will fit the time series of interest for each country. Nonetheless, Fig-
ure 3 shows that this specification provides a reasonably good fit to the actual
data for this set of countries. Because the behavior of the skilled labor share
and the skill premium do differ across countries, we believe that this finding is
supportive of our parsimonious structure.19
    It is also of interest to note that the above procedure also implies processes
for technological change that are broadly similar across countries over devel-
opment, as shown in Figure 4.20 To the extent that we believe the process of
technology adoption and diffusion are at least generally similar across richer
countries, we would view it is as somewhat problematic if our procedure indi-
cated dramatically different processes across these countries.
  19 We note that our model does not do such a good job of matching the series for Korea.

Notably, it specifically fails for the early part of the sample in which Korea has very low GDP.
We intepret this as evidence that our specfiication of non-homotheticities is probably best
viewed as an approximation that holds in a restricted range of incomes, and that if one wants
to consider a much larger range of incomes then it is probably important to consider more
general specifications such as those in Boppart (2014) and Comin et al. (2015).
  20 The plots in Figure 4 have removed country fixed effects in order to focus on the changes

in technology over time rather than the cross-sectional differences.



                                                                                      27
                                       0.3                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                        αS	  




                                                                                               Skill-Biased Technology Parameter
                                       0.1
      Log Sector-Biased Productivity
                                                              AS	                                                                 0.5
                                       -0.1

                                       -0.3                                                                                        0.4

                                       -0.5
                                                                          AG	                                                     0.3
                                       -0.7                                                                                                                          αG	  
                                       -0.9                                                                                        0.2

                                       -1.1
                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                       -1.3

                                       -1.5                                                                                          0
                                         $10,000                                     $50,000                                        $10,000                                     $50,000
                                                   Real GDP per Capita (Log Scale)                                                            Real GDP per Capita (Log Scale)


Figure 4: Calibrated Technological Processes: Sector-Biased (left panel) and
Skill-Biased (right panel) Technologies. The diamonds (squares) correspond to
the high (low) -skill intensive sector.


7.2                             Skill-Biased Structural Change and the Skill Premium
                                in Cross Country Data
In this subsection we assess the extent to which skill biased structural transfor-
mation has influenced the skill premium in each of the countries that we studied
in the previous subsection. We could carry out this calculation for the speci-
fications in the last subsection, i.e., assuming the same preference parameters
for these countries as in the US. A potential disadvantage of this method is
that although the model with common preference parameters across countries
offers a good fit to the cross country time series data, it does not necessarily
account for all of the changes in the skill premium for each of the countries.
Alternatively, we could assume country specific values for aG and c̄S and simply
repeat the analysis that we have carried out for the US for each of the addi-
tional economies. These two methods provide fairly similar answers, and in the
interest of space we only report here the results of the second exercise, which
are shown in Table 8. To compute the values in Table 8 we first calculate the
contribution of all forms of technological change by computing the difference
between the actual skill premium in 2005 versus the skill premium that would
have existed in 2005 if there had been no technological change relative to 1977
but allowing for the observed change in the supply of skill. We then isolate
the fraction of this overall contribution of technological change that is due to
skill biased structural change by computing the fraction of this change that is
accounted for by changes in the Aj ’s.




                                                                                     28
                                    Table 8
                    Contribution of SBTC Across Countries
                     Australia              0.18
                      Austria               0.40
                     Denmark                0.11
                       Spain                0.32
                     Germany                0.37
                       Italy                0.54
                      Japan                 0.22
                    Netherlands             0.27
                        UK                  0.36

    The magnitude of this share varies significantly, from a low of 11% in Den-
mark to a high of 54% in Italy, but the mean value of 31% is very much in line
with our estimates from the US. We conclude that the demand side forces asso-
ciated with skill biased structural change seem to be quantitatively significant
in a broad group of advanced economies.


8    Conclusion
Using a broad panel of advanced economies, we have documented a systematic
tendency for development to be associated with a shift in value added to high-
skill intensive sectors. It follows that development is associated with an increase
in the relative demand for high skill workers. We coined the term skill-biased
structural change to describe this process. We have built a simple two-sector
model of structural transformation and calibrated it to US data over the period
1977 to 2005 in order to assess the quantitative importance of this mechanism
for understanding the large increase in the skill premium during this period.
We find that technological change overall increased the skill premium by almost
100 percentage points, and that between 25 and t30 percent of this change is
due to technological change which operated through compositional changes.
    Our findings have important implications for predicting the future evolution
of the skill premium, since the continued growth of the value added share of the
high-skill intensive sector will exert upward pressure on this premium even in
the absence of skill-biased technological change.
    In order to best articulate the mechanism of skill-biased structural change
we have purposefully focused on a simple two-sector model. As we noted in Sec-
tion 2, there is good reason to think that the mechanism we have highlighted
is also at work at a more disaggregated level, so it is of interest to explore this
mechanism in a richer model. The literature has also emphasized the possibil-
ity that increases in trade might lead to changes in the composition of valued
added across sectors. Katz and Murphy (1992) specifically noted this possibil-
ity, and more recent analyses include Feenstra and Hanson (1999) and Autor
et al. (2013). We think it is important to note that the compositional effects we
have focused on are not likely to be reflecting changes due to trade. The reason


                                        29
for this is that our high-skill intensive sector is composed entirely of industries
from the service sector. It is plausible that part of what we identified as within
sector skill biased technical change may at least in part reflect compositional
effects due to trade, to the extent that trade had caused manufacturing activity
in the US to shift to more skill intensive industries.




                                        30
References
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011): “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Impli-
 cations for Employment and Earnings,” Elsevier, vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor
 Economics, chap. 12, 1043–1171.
Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri (2008): “Capital Deepening and Nonbal-
 anced Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 467–498.
Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013): “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs
 and the Polarization of the US Labor Market,” American Economic Review,
 103, 1553–97.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): “The Geography of
 Trade and Technology Shocks in the United States,” American Economic
 Review, 103, 220–25.
Baumol, W. J. (1967): “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: Anatomy of
 an Urban Crisis,” American Economic Review, 57, 415–26.
Boppart, T. (2014): “Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth
 Model With Relative Price Effects and Non?Gorman Preferences,” Economet-
 rica, 82, 2167–2196.
——— (2015): “To Which Extent is the Rise in the Skill Premium Explained
 by an Income Effect?” Working paper, IIES Stockhold University.
Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2009): “Can Traditional Theories of Struc-
 tural Change Fit The Data?” Journal of the European Economic Association,
 7, 469–477.
——— (2012): “The Rise of the Service Economy,” American Economic Review,
 102, 2540–69.
Comin, D., D. Lakshari, and M. Mestieri (2015): “Structural Change with
 Long Run Income and Price Effects,” Manuscript.
DiNardo, J., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996): “Labor Market In-
  stitutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Ap-
  proach,” Econometrica, 64, 1001–44.
Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1999): “The Impact Of Outsourcing
  And High-Technology Capital On Wages: Estimates For The United States,
  1979-1990,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 907–940.
Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (2007): “The Value of Life and the Rise in
 Health Spending,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 39–72.
Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013): “Two Per-
 spectives on Preferences and Structural Transformation,” American Economic
 Review, 103, 2752–89.

                                    31
——— (2014): “Growth and Structural Transformation,” in Handbook of Eco-
 nomic Growth, Elsevier, vol. 2 of Handbook of Economic Growth, chap. 6,
 855–941.
Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-
 1987: Supply and Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 107, 35–78.
Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001): “Beyond Balanced Growth,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 68, 869–82.
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Ríos-Rull, and G. L. Violante
 (2000): “Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic
 Analysis,” Econometrica, 68, 1029–1054.
Leonardi, M. (forthcoming): “The Effect of Product Demand on Inequality:
  Evidence from the US and the UK,” American Economic Journal: Applied.
Ngai, L. R. and B. Petrongolo (2014): “Gender gaps and the rise of the
 service economy,” LSE Research Online Documents on Economics 58152, Lon-
 don School of Economics and Political Science.
Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2007): “Structural Change in a Multisec-
 tor Model of Growth,” American Economic Review, 97, 429–443.
O’Mahony, M. and M. P. Timmer (2009): “Output, Input and Productiv-
 ity Measures at the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database,” Economic
 Journal, 119, 374–403.
Pierce, B. (2010): “Recent Trends in Compensation Inequality,” in Labor in
  the New Economy, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 63–98.
Reshef, A. (2013): “Is Technological Change Biased Towards the Unskilled in
 Services? An Empirical Investigation,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16,
 312–331.
Swiecki, T. (2014): “Determinants of Structural Change,” Manuscript, Uni-
 versity of British Columbia.




                                    32
