                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SOCIAL NETWORKS, REPUTATION AND COMMITMENT:
                 EVIDENCE FROM A SAVINGS MONITORS EXPERIMENT

                                             Emily Breza
                                        Arun G. Chandrasekhar

                                         Working Paper 21169
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21169


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015


We thank Monisha Mason, Lisa Nestor, Shobha Dundi, and Gowri Nagraj for outstanding assistance
in the field. We thank Robert Townsend, Esther Duflo, Abhijit Banerjee, and Matthew O. Jackson
for their tremendous guidance. We also thank Ran Abramitzky, Sumit Agarwal, Attila Ambrus, John
Beshears, Gabriel Carroll, Pascaline Dupas, Itay Fainmesser, Erica Field, Andy Foster, Rema Hanna,
Andrew Hertzberg, Stephan Meier, Markus Mobius, Kaivan Munshi, Rohini Pande, Luigi Pistaferri,
Dina Pomeranz, Jonathan Robinson, Duncan Thomas, Chris Udry, and Xiao Yu Wang for helpful
discussions, as well as seminar and conference participants at the Santa Fe Institute, SITE, the European
Conference on Household Finance (Einaudi), the NBER Corporate Finance meeting, Duke, IFPRI,
the Stanford RAIN Seminar, Cambridge, USC, the AEA Annual Meeting for their insightful comments,
and the Harvard Conference on Information Transmission in Networks. We are grateful to CFSP, NSF
SES-1156182, the Chazen Institute at Columbia Business School, CIBER and the Earth Clinic at Columbia
University, the Russell Sage Behavioral Economics Small Grant, and the Stanford Institute for Innovation
in Developing Economies for generous support. Finally, we both thank the National Science Foundation
GRFP for support while in graduate school. Previous title “Savings Monitors.” The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Emily Breza and Arun G. Chandrasekhar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Social Networks, Reputation and Commitment: Evidence from a Savings Monitors Experiment
Emily Breza and Arun G. Chandrasekhar
NBER Working Paper No. 21169
May 2015
JEL No. D14,D83,L14,O16,Z13

                                             ABSTRACT

We conduct a field experiment with 1,300 participants in India to measure whether individuals save
more when information about their savings is regularly shared with another member of their village
(a “monitor”). We focus on whether the monitor's effectiveness depends on her social network position,
as central monitors may be better able to disseminate information, and more proximate monitors may
be more likely to pass information to individuals who interact with the saver most frequently.

In 30 villages, we randomly assign monitors to a subset of savers. An average monitor increases total
savings by 35%. Increasing the monitor’s network centrality by one standard deviation increases savings
by 14%, and increasing proximity from social distance three to two increases savings by 16%.

Supporting the information-based mechanism, 63% of monitors report telling others about the saver’s
progress. Further, over a year later, villagers are more likely to know if the saver exceeded her goal
and to think that the saver is responsible if the saver was randomly assigned to a more central monitor.
We also provide evidence that the increase in savings persists over a year after the intervention’s end,
and that monitored savers can better respond to shocks.

In the remaining 30 villages, savers choose their own monitors. We find that savers choose monitors
who are both proximate and central in the network. Finally, we find evidence of spillovers from monitored
savers onto their non-monitored friends, suggesting another channel through which social networks
influence savings decisions.


Emily Breza
Columbia Business School
Division of Finance and Economics
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 821
New York, NY 10027
ebreza@columbia.edu

Arun G. Chandrasekhar
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
arungc@stanford.edu
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                                 2


                                            1. Introduction

   Peer effects have been found in a wide range of settings from schooling to exercise to
savings. The literature has traditionally focused on cleanly identifying the reduced form
effect, asking how an individual’s savings or academic performance depends on the savings or
academic performance of her peers. Individuals may be affected by the actions of their peers
through a variety of channels. Using the example of group savings, the literature has shown
that peer effects operate through channels such as (a) learning how to use financial products;
(b) reminders; (c) posting a bond; or (d) reference-dependent preferences (“keeping up with
the Joneses”) (see Jack and Suri (2014), Cai et al. (2013), Bryan et al. (2012), Kast et al.
(2012), Beaman et al. (2014), Beshears et al. (2015), Munshi (2014), Karlan et al. (2010),
Bursztyn et al. (2013), Banerjee et al. (2013), for example). However, less has been written
on whether peer effects are driven by individuals wanting to demonstrate to others their
ability to follow through on self-set goals.
   This paper focuses on this last channel that is likely present in many peer effect appli-
cations - that demonstrating to others that one can strive towards and attain self-set goals
may come with benefits. Further, those benefits may depend on the network position of
the observer given that showing the ability to follow through on goals can preserve or build
reputation, and that building reputation may be more valuable with some members of the
community than others.1
   To explore this, we conduct an experiment across 60 villages in rural Karnataka, India,
where we have complete network data for almost all households in each and every village.
We focus on savings as our application and assist 1,300 individuals to review their finances,
set a six-month savings goal, and open a formal account at a bank or post office. A random
group of savers are selected from each village to each receive a (different) partner for the
duration of the experiment, whom we call a monitor. In 30 randomly-selected villages,
we randomly assign individuals from a pre-specified pool to serve as monitors, and in the
remaining 30 villages, using random serial dictatorship, we allow savers to select their
respective monitors from the pre-specified monitor pool. In all cases, the monitor receives
bi-weekly information about the saver’s target account savings. As monitors are drawn
from a random pool of villagers, they naturally vary in their position in the village network:

1
 The present field experiment was inspired by the earlier lab-in-the-field study Breza et al. (2015). There,
we explore the efficiency of transfers in non-anonymous sender-receiver investment games with a third-party
observer. Villagers are assigned to one of three treatments: (1) sender-receiver game, (2) sender-receiver
game with a third party who observes the interaction, but takes no action of her own, or (3) sender-receiver
game with a third party who observes the interaction and can levy a fine against the receiver. The interaction
is fully non-anonymous, and we are interested in how the network position of the third party influences the
efficiency of the transaction. The very fact that a more central third-party observes the transaction increases
efficiency significantly (as seen from comparing (2) to (1) for more versus less central third parties). This
suggests that what we call the information effect, just the third party observing the interaction in the
investment game, is stronger for more central agents. Further, the beneficial effect of a centrality is even
greater when the third party is also given an observable punishment technology.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                                3


some are more central (i.e., more connected directly or indirectly) than others, and some
have closer relationships (i.e., proximity through the network) with the saver. Using the
30 villages in which we randomly assign saver-monitor pairs, we study how the network
position of randomly-assigned monitors influences savings behavior. Further, using the 30
villages in which savers choose their monitors, we investigate whether agents do in fact
choose more central and proximate monitors and whether they save more.
   Why might the monitor’s position in the network be important? Each monitor learns
about the saver’s progress towards her goal. The monitor may, in turn, pass that information
or any opinion she has made on to others. Thus, the monitor’s position within the village
network may determine how far and to whom her opinion may spread. For example, more
central agents – i.e., better connected (directly or indirectly) to a larger set of people –
are well-suited to broadcast information. In turn, they may make more effective monitors,
ceteris paribus, as the saver has more to gain by impressing them. Similarly, a socially
proximate monitor may be more likely to speak to others with whom the saver is likely to
interact in the future. Therefore, by telling individuals who are more relevant to the saver’s
future interactions, proximate monitors may also be more valuable.2
   To help clarify these issues and identify those aspects of the otherwise-complex network on
which to focus our empirical analysis, we develop a simple model. In this model, we assume
that savers gain utility from interacting in the future with individuals who have heard about
their successes.3 Here, the network plays two roles; information is disseminated from the
monitor through the network, and future interactions between the saver and other villagers
(including the monitor) occur through the network. We show that a saver is incentivized
to save more when randomly assigned to a more central monitor or to one that is more
proximate to her.
   Equipped with this framework, we pair our experiment with extremely detailed network
data collected in part by the authors in previous work (Banerjee et al. (2014)). This
household-level network data comprises 12 dimensions of interactions across all potential
pairs of households in each of the 60 study villages.4 Again, because the social network is
an extremely complicated object, we focus our analysis on the two moments of the network
data that emerge from our model: monitor (eigenvector) centrality, which captures how
much information emanating from a monitor should spread in the network, and the social




2
  At the same time, it could be the case that individuals have heterogeneous priors about the saver based on
position in the network.
3
  There are many microfoundations for such an effect. Successful savers may gain an improved reputation
for being responsible, for example. Alternately, agents may feel embarrassment or shame when interacting
people who have leaned of their shortcomings.
4
  The network data we use here is essentially complete, with data from 90% of households in each village.
Thus there is data on essentially 1 − 0.12 ≈ 0.99 share of households in the OR network.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                                4


proximity between the saver-monitor pair, which is the inverse of the shortest path length
through the network.5
   Savings is an ideal application for our experiment for several reasons. First, we require a
setting where reputation is important. Anecdotal evidence from the study villages suggests
that a large fraction of villagers indeed want to save more, that reputation is tied to self-set
goals, and that showing one can save more is a sign of responsibility. Second, we need to
benchmark the goals in a quantitative way. A savings goal does precisely this. Third, we
want to be able to accurately measure movement towards the goal or even surpassing the
goal. Certainly savings in a bank account is easy to observe and we can verify the data
through passbooks. Fourth, we desire a context that is naturalistic. Savings is a natural
application in which to study public commitments as many of the informal financial products
commonly observed in developing countries (and in the study villages) such as RoSCAs,
SHGs and MFIs incorporate groups of individuals from the same social network and rely
on mechanisms that are likely to include mutual monitoring/observation (Besley and Coate
(1995), Beaman et al. (2014), Besley et al. (1993), Karlan (2007), Giné and Karlan (2006),
Bryan et al. (2012), and Breza (2014)).
   Finally, chronic under-saving is an important issue in developing and developed countries
alike. The desire to save is widespread, but many are unable due to lack of access, lack
of commitment, or lack of attention (Ashraf et al. (2006), Brune et al. (2013), Karlan
et al. (2010), Thaler and Benartzi (2004), and Beshears et al. (2011), for example). Our
intervention can be interpreted as a special kind of commitment savings device where the
characteristics of the monitor determine how well it performs. Research has also shown that
increased savings has numerous benefits including increased investment, working capital,
income and even labor supply and can improve the ability for households to overcome
shocks (Dupas and Robinson (2013b), Dupas and Robinson (2013a), Brune et al. (2013),
Prina (2013), Schaner (2014), and Kast and Pomeranz (2014)). We can explore these issues
in the short and medium run through the lens of our study.
   Our empirical analysis has five main components. First, using the data from the 30
villages in which we randomly assign monitors to savers, we establish that receiving an
arbitrary monitor increases total savings balances by 35%. As predicted by our model, the
largest increases are generated by more central monitors as well as more proximate moni-
tors. Increases of one standard deviation in monitor centrality and proximity, respectively,
correspond to increases in savings of 14% and 16%.
   Second, we make use of unique supplemental data to support the reputational story. We
show that monitors indeed speak to others about the saver, and 40% of savers even hear
gossip about themselves through back-channels. Moreover, 15 months after the conclusion of
the intervention, the opinions of randomly-selected households about a saver’s performance

5
 See Katz and Lazarsfeld (1970), DeMarzo et al. (2003), Ballester et al. (2006), Banerjee et al. (2013), and
Golub and Jackson (2010).
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                                5


and ability to follow through on self-set goals are related to the centrality of that saver’s
randomly-assigned monitor.
   Third, we provide evidence that our intervention caused lasting and positive impacts on
participant households. We show that the increases in savings caused by our intervention
come from increases in labor supply and decreases in unnecessary expenditures. Fifteen
months after the end of the intervention, we show that subjects randomly assigned to
monitors report declines in incidence of shocks where they did not have enough cash to
respond which we measure following Dupas and Robinson (2013a).6 Moreover, the increases
in savings persist 15 months after the intervention. Taken together, these results suggest
that monitors, especially central and proximate ones, help savers to direct financial slack
towards savings, rather than wasteful expenditures or leisure, result in improved risk-coping,
and yield persistent increases in savings, likely held as buffer stocks.7
   Fourth, in the 30 villages in which savers could choose their monitors, we find that
individuals pick more central monitors as well as more proximate monitors. This suggests
that savers are sophisticated when making their monitor choices. We also find that these
savers perform at least as well as the savers who are randomly assigned to monitors.
   Fifth and finally, we find that non-monitored savers in the endogenous assignment villages
save substantially more than the non-monitored savers in the random assignment villages.
In fact, the non-monitored savers in the endogenous-selection villages completely “catch up”
to the saving levels of the monitored community members. This suggests that monitoring
can affect the saver’s propensity to save, but may also spill over to the behavior of the
friends of the saver, which may be important to policy-makers when designing “optimal”
group savings mechanisms.
   In short, our study points to the idea that reputations matter, and that they matter
heterogeneously within the broader village network. The experiment provides a context in
which agents could respond to our monitor treatment using an important economic vehicle
– formal savings – that itself stood to generate real benefits to our subjects. That the
increased savings allowed our subjects to better respond to health and household shocks
indicates that the monitor treatment effect was strong enough not only to change savings
behavior directly but to also yield measurable and meaningful economic consequences over
the next year.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the experimental
design, setting and data. In section 3 we provide a parsimonious model that shows why it is
natural to focus on centrality and proximity. Section 4 presents the results for the villages
where monitors were randomly assigned to savers, and Section 5 presents supplemental
6
  That is, the incidence of reporting a situation where they had an above-median number of shocks (including
personal health shocks, bovine health shocks, or other unexpected household expenditure and did not have
enough cash on hand to cover the cost) drops for individuals assigned to a monitor.
7
  The most common savings goal purposes listed by savers at baseline were unforeseen expenditures and
emergencies.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                               6


evidence to help to interpret these results. Section 6 discusses the villages with endogenous
monitor assignment, Section 7 touches on policy implications, and Section 8 concludes.

                              2. Data and Experimental Design

2.1. Setting and Data. The requirements for our study are threefold: 1) the presence of
financial institutions where study participants can save; 2) detailed social networks data;
and 3) experimental variation in the nature of the saver-monitor relationship. Our final
sample includes 3,000 participants from 60 villages in rural Karnataka, India that meet our
criteria.
   We choose to set our experiment in 60 villages from rural Karnataka, India that coincide
with the social network and demographic data set previously collected in other work, in
part by the authors (and also described in Banerjee et al. (2014)). In our field experiment,
we match participants to this unique data set.
   Banerjee et al. (2014) collected network data from 89.14% of the 16,476 households living
in those villages. The data concerns “12 types of interactions for a given survey respondent:
(1) whose houses he or she visits, (2) who visit his or her house, (3) his or her relatives in
the village, (4) non-relatives who socialize with him or her, (5) who gives him or her medical
advice, (6) from whom he or she borrows money, (7) to whom he or she lends money, (8)
from whom he or she borrows material goods (e.g., kerosene, rice), (9) to whom he or she
lends material goods, (10) from whom he or she gets advice, (11) to whom he or she gives
advice, (12) with whom he or she goes to pray (e.g., at a temple, church or mosque).” This
provides a rich description of the pattern of interactions across households. Using this data
we construct one network for each village at the household level and indicate that a link
exists between households if any member of a household is linked to any other member of
another household in at least one of the 12 ways.8 Network-level summary statistics are
displayed in Appendix Table B.1.
   As such, we have extremely detailed data on social linkages, not only between our ex-
perimental participants but also about the embedding of the individuals in the social fabric
at large. We use the following notation: we have a collection of R villages, indexed by
r and Nr individuals per village. Every village is associated with a social network Gr .
Gr = (Vr , Er ) is a graph consisting of vertices Vr = {1, ..., n} and edges Er where ij ∈ Er
means that households i and j are linked. Following the extensive work on this data, we
assume that this is an undirected, unweighted network: households are linked or are not
linked and ij ∈ Er ⇐⇒ ji ∈ Er (see, e.g., Banerjee et al. (2013), Jackson et al. (2010),
Chandrasekhar et al. (2013) for discussion). We use Ar := A (Gr ) to denote the adjacency
matrix. This is a matrix with Aij = 1 {ij ∈ Er }.

8
 The main idea here is that individuals can communicate if they interact in any of the 12 ways. This is the
network of potential communications and a good description of which individuals are likely to interact (in
one of several ways in a day to day sense) with others.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                                7


   Moreover, the survey data includes information about caste, elite status, measures of
house amenities and the GPS coordinates of respondent’s homes. In the local cultural
context, a local leader or elite is someone who is a gram panchayat member, self-help group
official, anganwadi teacher, doctor, school headmaster, or the owner of the main village
shop. All our analyses study network effects conditional on these numerous observables.

2.2. Experimental Design. Figure 1 pictorially represents our experimental design and
Figure 2 presents a time line. Study participants are randomly selected from an existing
village census database and then randomly assigned to be part of our saver group, monitor
group, or pure control (Figure 1.B).
   All potential treatment savers and monitors who are interested in participating (Figure
1.C) are administered a short baseline survey, which includes questions on historic savings
behavior, income sources and desire to save.
   Our baseline data shows that the use of these branches is quite low. Only a quarter of
households had a bank or post office account at baseline. Figure B.1 shows the baseline
intensity of use of available savings vehicles separately for male and female savers. On
average, potential savers keep a large fraction of their liquid savings in cash stored inside
the house. For women, one third of savings is kept in self help groups (SHGs), while
ROSCAs and insurance policies (generally through Life Insurance Corporation of India) are
popular among men. Only 10% of savings are kept in formal bank accounts. We aim to
test whether monitors can increase savings balances and also increase the use of already-
accessible interest-bearing bank savings accounts.
   Next, potential savers establish a six-month savings plan. Importantly, this plan is es-
tablished before the saver knows whether she is assigned to the non-monitored treatment
or one of the monitored treatments. Moreover, the saver does not know whether the village
is assigned to endogenous monitor selection or random monitor selection.
   The process of setting a savings goal includes listing all expected income sources and
expenses month by month for six months. Savers are prompted to make their savings
goals concrete, and we record the desired uses of the savings at the end of the six-month
period. Individuals are then invited to a village-level meeting in which study participation
is finalized and treatment assignments are made. Potential monitors are also invited to
attend the village meeting and are told that if selected, they can earn a small participation
fee and incentive payment for participating.9
   From the pool of consenting participants and attendees of the village meeting, we ran-
domly assign savers to one of three treatments (see Figure 1.E)10:

9If the potential savers are not interested in savings, then they do not participate in the goal elicitation
and they are not invited to the village meeting. Our sample frame for randomization is the set of savers
attending the village meeting.
10Let T0 denote the pure control treatment.
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                                 8


    T1 : Non-monitored treatment (Randomization at the individual level)11
    T2 : Peer monitoring with random matching (Randomization to receive a monitor at
       the individual level, randomization of monitor assignment at the village level)
    T3 : Peer monitoring with endogenous matching (Randomization to receive a monitor
       at the individual level, randomization of monitor assignment at the village level)
All individuals who attend the village meeting are assisted in account opening by our
survey team. In each village, we identify one bank branch and the local post office branch
to offer as choices to the savers. Savers are allowed to choose either option. Savers who
already have bank or post office accounts are offered the chance to open another account if
they wish. The local post office branches are generally within a 3km walk of each village,
and 35% of our study villages have a post office branch within the village boundary. We
select bank branches that satisfy several criteria: within 5km of the village, offer “no-frills”
savings accounts,12 and agree to expedite our savings applications and process them in
bulk.13 We offer the post office choice because women often feel uncomfortable traveling
to bank branches but feel much more comfortable transacting with the local post master.
On the other hand, some individuals greatly prefer bank accounts because those accounts
make it easier to obtain bank credit in the future. We help savers to assemble all of the
necessary paper work and identification documents (KYC) for account opening and submit
the applications in bulk.
   All savers in the individual treatment (T1, T2, and T3) are visited on a fortnightly
basis. Our surveyors check the post office or bank passbooks and record balances and any
transactions made in the previous 14 days and also remind savers of their goals.14 These
home visits serve as strong reminders to save.15 We should note that in no treatment do
our surveyors collect deposits on behalf of the savers.
   In our peer treatment with random matching (T2), we randomize the assignment of
monitors to savers. In each village, a surplus of monitors turned up to the village meeting,
so there were more than enough monitors for each T2 (or T3) saver. Every two weeks,
after surveyors visit the T2 savers, they then visit the homes of the monitors. During these
visits, the monitors are shown the savings balances and transaction records of their savers
11We sometimes also refer to this treatment as the Business Correspondent treatment (BC). This is be-
cause the individual level treatment resembles a financial institution already in use in India called business
correspondents. In this institution agents of the bank travel to villages to provide direct in-home customer
service. This includes account opening procedures and deposit-taking. However, we were not legally able to
collect deposits ourselves as researchers. We discuss this further in Section 7.
12“No-frills” accounts generally have no minimum balance, charge no user fees, and require a minimal initial
deposit, which is generally around Rs. 100 ($2).
13The 5km distance restriction meant that we were not able to work with only one bank, and instead opened
accounts at branches of six different banks.
14The passbooks are official banking documents, and it would be extremely difficult for the savers to tamper
with them. We were not able to obtain administrative data from the banks and post offices due to the large
number of different institutions (Post office + branches of six different banks).
15Some participants even report that these visits are very motivating.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                                9


and are also reminded of each saver’s goal. Thus, our intervention intermediates information
between the saver and monitor. At the end of the savings period, monitors receive incentives
based on the success of their savers. Monitors are paid Rs. 50 if the saver reaches at least
half the goal, and an additional Rs. 150 if the monitor reaches the full goal.16
   The peer treatment with endogenous matching (T3) is identical to T2, except for the
method of assigning monitors to savers. In this treatment, individuals are allowed to choose
their monitor from the pool of all potential monitors attending the village meeting. We only
allowed one saver per monitor, so we randomized the order in which savers could choose.
Again, there was excess supply of monitors, so even the last saver in line had many choices.
It is important to note here that the pool of potential monitors is recruited in an identical
fashion in both sub-treatment groups (2) and (3). Table 1 presents summary statistics for
the sample that attended the village meeting and also shows baseline differences between
T1, T2, and T3.
   Figure 3 presents the histogram of savings goals, censoring the top 5%.17 There are a
few large outliers (maximum goal Rs. 26,000), so the mean of Rs. 1838 shrinks to Rs. 1650
when we trim 1% outliers. In all specifications of our key results we drop the top 1% of
savings goal observations. While Rs. 600 may seem small on face value, it is equivalent to
3-5% of household income for the poorer members of the sample. It is also equal to the
amount that could be saved if each household member saved instead of drinking one cup
of tea each day. Ananth et al. (2007) suggest that some individuals with high returns to
savings may nonetheless have a hard time saving even small amounts.
   For our endogenous matching treatment, we chose to implement random serial dicta-
torship (RSD). Here, savers were ordered at random and were able to then select their
monitors. This was a natural choice for several reasons. First, this mechanism is easy to
implement in practice and therefore policy relevant. It is easy to explain to villagers, it is
rather intuitive, and owing to its randomness it seems to be equitable. There was no resis-
tance whatsoever to implementing such a scheme. Second, this design is easier to analyze
given the randomization of the choice order. Additionally, it allows us to systematically
explore which network aspects are valued when an individual selects a monitor. Does an
individual select a more network-central monitor? Does an individual select a socially close
monitor? Third, and perhaps most importantly, there is a deep matching literature estab-
lishing equivalence between RSD and various other matching schemes with trading which
reach the core. Specifically, consider two allocation mechanisms in an environment of n
savers and n monitors, and say each agent has strict preferences over the monitors. The

16Monitors also receive a participation fee at the time of the village meeting. Monitors that are ultimately
selected receive Rs. 50 and those who are not ultimately selected receive Rs. 20. We had initially wanted to
vary experimentally the size of the monitor incentives, but the required sample size was not feasible given
our budget and the number of villages with both network data and a nearby bank branch willing to expedite
our account opening. We investigate whether these incentives could be driving our results in Section 5.
17Note that the minimum goal is Rs. 600, the lower bound of allowed goals for participants.
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                                10


first mechanism is RSD. The second is when the monitors are (for instance) randomly allo-
cated to the various agents and then trading is allowed. In this (now) exchange economy,
there is a unique allocation in the core and it can be attained by a top trading cycle (TTC)
algorithm. Results in Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez (2003), Carroll (2012), and Pathak and
Sethuraman (2011) show that various versions of RSD and TTC are equivalent, where equiv-
alence means the mechanisms give rise to the same probability distribution over allocations
irrespective of the preferences of the agents. These results both characterize optimality of
RSD as well as provide a justification for real-world use.18
   At the end of the 6-month savings period, we administer an endline to all savers and mon-
itors. Again we collect complete savings information across all savings vehicles (including
other formal accounts, other informal institutions, under the mattress, etc.) to make sure
that any results are not just coming from the composition of savings. Importantly, we also
administer this endline survey to all available attriters or dropouts.19 Approximately 16%
of savers dropped out of our experiment at some point after the village meeting, many of
which never opened a target account for the savings period. We were able to survey approx-
imately 70% of the dropouts in our endline follow-up survey and obtain information about
their ending savings balances and other key outcomes. Table 1 also shows differences in
the final sampled population decomposed between T1, T2, and T3. We find no differential
attrition across the sample of savers captured in our endline data.20
   Finally, we administer a follow-up survey 15 months after the end of the savings period to
the set of savers attending the village meeting. In addition to questions on savings balances,
the survey contains retrospective questions from the savings period about how the savers
saved, how frequently they spoke with their monitors, and whether they made any financial
transfers with their monitors. It also contains questions about shocks sustained by the
respondent in the 15 months after the savings period in the style of Dupas and Robinson
(2013b). We ask respondents about transfers made with their monitors after the end of the
savings period and also friendships made through the monitor. The follow-up survey also
contains questions about each respondent’s beliefs about the savings behavior and level of
responsibility of 12 other arbitrarily-selected savers. Appendix Table B.2 includes control
group means for all of the variables from both of our endline surveys used in the analysis.
18Naturally, the degree to which the environment studied in the allocation mechanism literature describes
our environment to first order determines the degree to whch this intuition is relevant for our setting. Of
course, the result also suggests that at best, deviations from the espoused theoretical framework lead to
welfare differences between RSD and TTC that are at best likely to be ambiguous as opposed to being
ordered.
19We also surveyed a random subset of those who were chosen to be savers but who were not interested in
savings, and a random subset of the pure control group.
20Another reason for why there is no differential attrition, in addition to the high rate of endline survey
participation, is the nature of the attrition itself. One common reason for dropping out is a lack of the “know
your client” (KYC) legal documentation required for opening a bank account (20% of dropouts). The most
frequent reason for dropping out is dis-interest in saving. Further, the composition of why savers drop out
is the virtually the same (and statistically indistinguishable) for monitored and un-monitored savers.
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                            11


                                          3. Framework

   Empirically studying how the position of the monitor in the social network affects the
saver’s behavior can be challenging. To identify those aspects of the otherwise-complex
network on which to focus our empirical analysis, we develop a simple two-period model. In
this model, we assume that savers can gain utility from interacting in the future, after the
experiment, with individuals who have heard about their successes during the experiment.
   The model’s first period summarizes the entire 6-month savings period of our experiment.
The saver first decides how much to save (taken as the total savings over the 6 months of
the intervention).21 Recall that members of the research team communicate the saver’s
progress to each monitor. Thus, in the model, the saver’s monitor is immediately informed
of the amount saved. The monitor can then pass this information or any opinion she has
formulated about the saver on to others.22 The extent to which information flows through
society is governed by the network structure (i.e., the monitor informs her friend with some
probability, the friend informs another friend with some probability, etc.) In sum, at the
end of the first period, a subset of the community is informed about the saver.
   The second period of the model captures future interactions of the agent with the village
following the end of the intervention. Savers interact with members of the community, again
in a process governed by the network structure and receive a payoff from each interaction.
We model this naturalistically, so meeting a given friend may happen with some probability,
meeting a friend’s friend happens with a lower probability (i.e., need to meet a friend and
also need to be referred to the friend’s friend), as a stylistic way to parametrize future
interactions through the network. Because these future interactions may take many forms
and may occur under a wide set of circumstances, we model the payoffs in a reduced form
way. The basic idea, of course, is that when encountering someone in the future, an agent’s
payoff is weakly (if not strictly) higher if she has saved more. This may be because the
successful saver demonstrates her capacity to keep her commitments, signals responsibility,
feels less embarrassment or shame about her own shortcomings, etc.
   Our shorthand to operationalize this idea is to use a standard Spence (1973) signaling
model. By saving a higher amount the saver demonstrates to the monitor that she is
responsible. After all, enrolling in the experiment in the first place indicates a demand for
commitment to help accumulate savings. (In fact, it was actually a member of a village in a
different study’s focus group who originally suggested the experimental design to us, citing
the idea that reputation about individuals accumulating savings when they commit to do
so could be leveraged to help encourage savings behavior.)

21For simplicity we assume this is either a low or high amount, though certainly extending this to the
continuum is straightforward and yields the same predictions.
22As we show in Section 5.1, survey evidence documents that monitors do indeed pass such information to
others and that, further, many savers have even heard, through back-channels, about others talking about
the saver’s progress.
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                                12


   For simplicity, individuals come in two kinds: responsible and irresponsible. A respon-
sible individual can be interpreted as one who is able to overcome (with effort) her time
inconsistency, temptations, or inattention issues. Of course, an individual’s responsibility
matters for interactions across all walks of life.23 For example, individuals in our study
villages rely regularly on others for loans, jobs, insurance and information.
   Thus, our model is an extremely simple signaling game situated in a network where
individuals pass information or meet along the network according to a simple stochastic
process. Individuals interact (or pass information) randomly through the network along
edges, independently, with some probability.24 With this stylized structure on interactions,
the signaling model predicts that, ceteris paribus, being randomly assigned (a) a more
central monitor leads to a greater share of savers saving a high amount and (b) a more
socially proximate monitor leads to a greater share of savers saving a high amount.

3.1. Network Interactions.

The Physical Environment. It is useful to clarify exactly what we mean by a network inter-
action and how we define a central agent. Our perspective is informed by our data. A link
between households in our data captures whether respondents indicate in a survey a strong
social or financial relationship. Surely in village communities, any two arbitrary households
interact on occasion, even in absence of a direct link in our data. For instance, one may
gossip with someone who is merely an acquaintance at the local tea shop, one may learn
of a job opportunity indirectly through a friend’s relative, etc. Therefore, we interpret the
network as a medium through which we can parametrize interactions; an individual is more
likely to pass information to or meet with direct contacts, is less likely to pass information
to or meet friends of friends, and is even less likely to interact with friends of friends of
friends, and so on.
   Notice that, broadly speaking, that there are two main types of interactions relevant
to our setting. First, an agent can pass information to another agent. We suppose that
this happens stochastically within each period, with information traveling from node i to j
(or from j to i) with some fixed probability (θ). Second, agents may meet others. Clearly
individuals should be more likely to meet their friends than their friends of friends. A simple
and plausible model for this type of interaction is to suppose that every node i travels to a
neighboring node with probability θ, to a neighbor’s neighbor with probability θ2 (if there

23In fact, survey data shows that a randomly chosen individual is 6pp more likely to believe that an individual
who reached her goal is responsible (mean 0.46) relative to an individual who did not reach her goal.
Anecdotal evidence presented in Appendix Section A suggests that this influences how people will think of
the saver in a labor market situation in the future.
24Further, individuals have the same prior beliefs over all individuals that they may encounter in the future.
We assume homogenous priors here to isolate the information diffusion component of the model. Surely it
is possible that ex ante more proximate individuals have less to learn about one another. This could lead to
non-monotone returns to signaling to close individuals.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                              13


is only one such path there), and so on. This parsimonious story motivates our model’s
physical environment.
   In our model, agents in an undirected, unweighted graph with associated adjacency ma-
trix A interact. The model is simple, essentially depending on the single parameter θ which
represents the probability of any two nodes in the network interacting either through in-
formation passing or a physical meeting. We use puv (A, θ) to denote the probability that
nodes u and v interact in a particular stage of the game. We micro-found this through a
simple model of interaction on a network. All information passing (and meetings) along the
network occur in the following manner. Given A, there is some probability θ, that a given
piece of information crosses any given link ij.25 Let us define
                                                     " T            #
                                                                t
                                                      X
                                      puv (A, θ) ∝          (θA)
                                                      t=1               uv
where the constant of proportionality is not relevant for the model but ensures that the term
is a probability. Observe that the right-hand side counts the expected number of times a
piece of information starting from node u hits node v and takes into account the potentially
numerous paths information may take between u and v. Let P denote the full matrix with
entries puv .

Key Quantities: Centrality and Proximity. Given a framework for interactions on a net-
work, observe that certain households will be more central than others (reaching directly or
indirectly more individuals). As will become clear, this has nothing to do with the strategic
interactions itself but rather only with the assumed physical interactions on the network.
   It is useful to formally define two quantities:
                           T        t
                           t=1 (θA) · 1 is called the diffusion centrality with T rounds of
                          P
    (1) DC (A, θ) :=
        communication. Taking the limit as T → ∞ with θ ≥ λ11 leads to a vector
        limT →∞ Tt=1 (θA)t · 1 ∝ e (A), the eigenvector centrality.26 This object is a vector
                 P

        where DCi (A, θ) gives the expected number of times information starting from a
        given node i hits all other nodes in the graph, with stochasticity parametrized by
        θ. Note that this also – equivalently – gives the expected number of times that i
        interacts in total with all other nodes over T periods. This is the notion of centrality
        that emerges from our simple model of interaction on a network.
    (2) Let the distance between i and j in the graph be the length of the shortest path
        between them. Let proximity be 1/d(i, j). Then it is worth observing that if two
        agents are closer in the graph, the rows of P corresponding to those agents must be

25Assume that θ ≥     1
                          .
                   λ1 (A)
26This is the same modeling structure used in Banerjee et al. (2013). For a more general discussion about
eigenvector centrality in network economic models, see Jackson (2008). See also DeMarzo et al. (2003),Golub
and Jackson (2012), Golub and Jackson (2010), and Hagen and Kahng (1992).
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                              14


        more correlated. This is because if i and j are neighbors, any path to a given k of
        length ` from i to k must be either of length ` + 1, ` or ` − 1 from j to k.
This certainly is not the only sensible way to model interactions, and different models would
generate predictions for slightly different notions of centrality. However, the core idea would
be the same. The key point is that once equipped with a simple framework describing how
agents in the society interact, it sheds light on why we may be prone to see differences
across treatments based on the network position of the parties.

3.2. A Signaling Model of Peer Monitoring. Consider a two-period game played
among network members. A saver i is either a “low” or “high” type. Low types (“irre-
sponsible”) find it differentially more costly to accumulate the high levels of savings.27 Let
the cost of savings be denoted cH < cL for the high or low type, respectively. In the future,
when a responsible type engages in a productive activity, her productivity is yH whereas it
is yL for an irresponsible type.
   The timing is as follows:
      • t = 0 : saver i picks a level of savings si ∈ {sH , sL }.
      • t = 0.5: monitor j of i observes the saver’s outcome.
      • t = 1: monitor j of i diffuses information about si throughout the village. A given
        individual k in the village has heard this with probability pjk (A, θ). Let rjk ∈ {0, 1}
        denote j having successfully reported to k.28
      • t = 2: saver meets a random individual in the future with probability pik (A, θ).
        Let mik ∈ {0, 1} denote this meeting. This individual offers i a wage contract in
        a competitive labor market, where wage offers (given signals of type) are equal to
        productivity. A responsible individual has productivity yH whereas an irresponsible
        individual has productivity yL .
The interpretation is as follows. In the first period, a potential saver decides whether to save
a high or low amount. This decision sends a signal to the monitor as to whether the saver
is responsible or not. The idea is that it is relatively costlier for an irresponsible individual
to overcome their time inconsistency, temptations or inattention and accrue high savings.
   In the second period, the saver has a future interaction with a fellow community member
from the village network. The saver again meets a community member through the graph.
The returns to this interaction can depend on whether this community member knows about
the saver’s “type” via the signaling process in period 1. If the member of the community
knows the individual is irresponsible, the saver has less to gain in the second period since
27This cost may include present bias, temptations or inattention. In a different, but equivalent framing,
low type might also encode individuals who naturally feel less shame when they don’t save very much and
interact with informed agents in the future.
28Technically, this should be a monotone function of the expected number of times information starting from
j has hit k, since this term alone is not a probability. Our notation is a simple shorthand which preserves
the qualitative aspects of the result. For related work see King (2015).
                                             SAVINGS MONITORS                                           15


she receives the low wage. Otherwise, if the member knows that she is responsible, she
receives the high wage. However, it is possible that the community member simply has not
heard any rumor about the individual’s type whatsoever, in which case the saver receives a
pooled wage, which we normalize to 0.
   The remainder of our analysis is focused on the separating equilibrium of the Spence
signaling game (if parameters are in a range where a separating equilibrium exists). The
justification for this comes from the intuitive criterion (Cho and Kreps (1987)). We are
interested in how changes in individuals’ relative network positions leads to transitions
from only pooling equilibria to separating equilibria (applying the intuitive criterion).
   The first result characterizes whether a separating equilibrium exists depends on these
quantities.
Lemma 3.1. A separating equilibrium exists if
                          cH                                                     cL
yH −                                            > yL > yH −                                            .
     cov (pi· , pj· ) + DCj (A, θ) · DCi (A, θ)             cov (pi· , pj· ) + DCj (A, θ) · DCi (A, θ)
Otherwise, only a pooling equilibrium exists in which all types pool on sL .
Proof. Let q denote the probability that a randomly chosen member of the village has
observed the signaling outcome. Here q is a reduced form for the three probabilities discussed
above. Then it is straightforward to see that
                                       cH               cL
                                yH −       > yL > yH −
                                        q                q
corresponds to a separating equilibrium.29
  Next we decompose q into its constituent parts in our model (derived below):

                               q = cov (pi· , pj· ) + DCj (A) · DCi (A) .

The expected number of times that a given node k receives a signal sourced from j is given
by pjk . Integrating over all the k, we have30
                                    "                   #
                                            (θA)t · 1
                                        X
                                                                = DCj (A, θ) .
                                        t               j

Meanwhile, the probability that i will meet a given k is given by the analogous expression
and therefore again we have
                                    "                   #
                                                 t
                                        X
                                            (θA) · 1            = DCi (A, θ) .
                                        t                   i
29This follows from the fact that

                      qyH + (1 − q) 0 − cH > qyL + (1 − q) 0 > qyH + (1 − q) 0 − cL .
The first inequality ensures that the high type saves high and the second inequality ensures that the low
type does not find it worthwhile to do so. This also clarifies why the normalization at 0 is innocuous.
30In this derivation we ignore the constant of proportionality (or assume that it is 1) for parsimony. This
has no consequence for the result.
                                       SAVINGS MONITORS                                      16


Therefore, the payoffs given a monitor are

               E [rjk mik |j] yH − cH > E [rjk mik |j] yL > E [rjk mik |j] yH − cL .

It is clear that we can write
                                     X
                  E [rjk mik |j] =        pjk (A, θ) pik (A, θ)
                                      k
                                                        X           X
                                 = cov (pi· , pj· ) +       pjk ×       pjk
                                                        k           k
                                 = cov (pi· , pj· ) + DCj (A, θ) · DCi (A, θ) .

The condition above ensures that a responsible type will invest in high savings and an
irresponsible type will not find it worthwhile to represent herself as a responsible type,
exploiting single crossing. Of course, by inspection one can see for low or high enough
probabilities, it should be impossible to satisfy at least one if not both ICs.         

Proposition 3.2. The following describe how monitor effectiveness varies with network
position.
   (1) Centrality of monitor:
        (a) Holding cov (pi. , pj. ) and DCi fixed, for DCj sufficiently high, there exists a
            separating equilibrium with high types attaining sH .
       (b) With the same parameters fixed, for DCj sufficiently low, there remains only a
            pooling equilibrium on sL .
   (2) Saver-monitor proximity:
        (a) Holding DCi and DCj fixed, for cov (pi· , pj· ) sufficiently high, there exists a
            separating equilibrium with high types attaining sH .
       (b) With the same parameters fixed, for cov (pi· , pj· ) sufficiently low, there remains
            only a pooling equilibrium on sL .

   It is worth noting that one can simply interpret cov (pi· , pj· ) as the proximity between
nodes i and j in the graph. The rows pi· count the expected number of paths between i
and some k, and as the distance between j and i decreases, the rows become more similar.
   Thus, we have the following predictions for our monitors: (1) as monitor centrality
increases, a greater proportion of savers should be saving high amounts; (2) as saver-monitor
proximity increases, a greater proportion of savers should be saving high amounts.
   A reasonable question to raise is whether individuals already know each others’ types,
especially those who are socially close. We think that there is significant scope for learning
about even a close individual’s type for several reasons. The first piece of evidence comes
from our own data. 15 months after our intervention, individuals were asked to rate 12
random subjects about whether the subjects reached their goals as well as several questions
concerning their level of responsibility. The respondents were no more likely to rate their
unmonitored friends (who reached their goal throughout the experiment) as responsible
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                      17


as more distant individuals despite there being a positive correlation on average between
responsibility and goal reaching. If anything, they were slightly worse at rating their friends.
Second, the work of Alatas et al. (2012) examines how well individuals are able to rank
others’ wealth in their communities. While individuals are slightly better at ranking those
to whom they are socially closer, the error rates are still very high indicating highly imperfect
local information. Third, we have anecdotal evidence from our subjects that indicate that
there is scope, in their view, to build reputation among even their friends, neighbors or
important individuals in their communities.31 Thus, while it is entirely possible ex ante
for the scope for reputation building to be lower among the socially proximate (due to
heterogeneous priors), our own prior is that this is unlikely to be the case.
   In short, we have described a simple physical process by which both meetings and in-
formation transmission occur. Our framework suggests that we should focus our empirical
analysis on two features of the network, centrality, in particular eigenvector centrality which
follows directly from the model, and proximity.


                  4. The value of Central and Proximate Monitors

4.1. Random Monitors. Our main results analyze how the centrality and proximity of
randomly-assigned monitors influence savings behavior. Before turning to this, we briefly
discuss the average impact of monitors relative to the baseline treatment bundle (non-
monitored treatment). Table 2 presents the results, showing effects on the log of total
savings across all accounts in columns 1-2 and the amount saved in the target account
(which was made visible to the monitors) in columns 3-4. We also include village fixed
effects as well as saver controls for saving goal, age, marital status, number of children,
preference for bank or post office account, whether saver has a bank or post office account at
baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection.
   We find that being randomly assigned to a monitor leads to a 0.3 log point increase in the
total savings across all accounts. This corresponds to a 35% increase in savings across all
savings vehicles of the households. Target account savings also increase by approximately
Rs. 360. This again is a large effect, more than doubling the savings in the non-monitored
group (mean 342.7). In Appendix Table B.3, we show similar impacts on goal attainment
(6.3pp increase, corresponding to an 80% increase in the likelihood relative to non-monitored
savers).
   Given these large impacts on overall savings, we next explore whether this increase is
driven by a few individuals dramatically increasing their savings or by individuals across
the group of savers more broadly. In Panel A of Figure 4, we plot the cumulative distri-
bution functions of the log of total savings normalized by the savings goal for monitored
vs. non-monitored savers. The figure suggests that the average treatment effects are not

31See quotes from participant savers in Appendix Section A.
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                                  18


simply capturing large increases experienced by a small number of savers in the tail of the
distribution. Indeed the intervention shifts savers to save more across the entire distribution.
   In sum, having a randomly-assigned monitor helps increase savings significantly.


4.2. Monitor Centrality and Proximity. We now turn to our main results: how mon-
itor centrality and proximity influence saving behavior. Table 3 presents the results of
regressions of log total savings across all accounts on monitor centrality, saver-monitor
proximity, and a battery of controls. In column 1 we condition on both centrality and
proximity, though in columns 2-3 we present results separately by network characteristic.
All regressions include village fixed effects, controls for the savings goal, saver centrality,
and controls for saver and monitor characteristics including age, marital status, number of
children, preference for bank or post office account (saver only), whether the individual has
a bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home,
and type of electrical connection. We also control for the geographic distance between the
homes of the saver and monitor.32
   Consistent with our model, we find that being assigned to a central monitor or a proximate
monitor generates large increases in savings. Namely, a one-standard deviation increase
in the centrality of the monitor corresponds to a 0.13 log point increase in the log total
savings, or a 14% increase – a large effect. Further, in Panel B of Figure 4, we explore the
distributional effects of receiving a high centrality monitor vs. a low centrality monitor.
Receiving a high centrality monitor does shift most of the distribution to the right, again
suggesting that increases are not only driven by a small number of highly-impacted savers.
   Turning to proximity, moving from a monitor of distance two to three leads to a 16%
increase in the total savings across all accounts – again a large effect.33
   In Appendix Table B.4 we present the results of monitor centrality on the incidence of
the saver reaching her goal. We find that a one standard deviation more central monitor
corresponds to a 2.9pp increase in the likelihood of a goal being met, which is just under
half the effect size of being assigned an average centrality monitor. Similarly going from a
monitor of distance two to three results in a 2pp increase in the likelihood of a goal being
met.

32Results are also robust to controls for measures of the baseline savings behavior of the monitor, available
on request.
33In Appendix Table B.7 we measure the effect of being paired with a direct social connection and investigate
whether this effect is stronger if the saver and monitor also have financial ties. We find large positive effects
of receiving a monitor of social distance one, but no differential effects from receiving a monitor who also
has financial ties. We define a link as having a financial component if the nodes report borrowing or lending
small amounts of money or material goods to one another. In our sample, 27% of direct links have a financial
component. Further, 86% of financial relationships are reciprocated – i.e., savers and monitor both borrow
and lend to one another. The prevalence of reciprocated financial relationships is unsurprising given the
strong risk sharing motives present in village India (Townsend (1994)). Thus we focus on symmetric financial
connections rather than directed lending-only or borrowing-only relationships.
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                             19


   Thus we show that randomly assigning more central and more proximate monitors en-
courages savings across all accounts. That these results hold controlling for numerous de-
mographic characteristics of both savers and monitors suggests that observables that may
be correlated with network position cannot explain our proximity and centrality results.
The covariate controls described above include caste group fixed effects and even the ge-
ographic distance between homes of savers and monitors. Traits such as these could have
been thought to be driving the network effect through omitted variables, but our results
are estimated conditional on this variation. Furthermore, magnitudes and significance are
essentially the same even when entirely removing this bevy of characteristics (available upon
request), which bolsters the idea that the effects are not driven by these characteristics.
   Finally, it is worth noting that given our focus on total savings, our results are likely
not driven by mistaken accounting. Namely, individuals could have unwound the savings
encouragement in the experiment by moving savings from some other account into the target
account. (Recall that the monitor only was informed about the saver’s progress in the target
account.) By looking at results across all household accounts, we indeed document increases
in total savings inside and outside of the target accounts.

                                   5. Supplemental Evidence

   Given our main result, that the monitoring treatment is more effective under a highly
central and socially proximate monitor, we now provide supplemental evidence in support
of the reputational mechanism of Section 3. We also describe how the savers managed to
save during the study period and look for lasting impacts of our intervention after the end
of the six month savings period. Finally we present tests that suggest that the monitor
incentives are not likely to be driving our key results.

5.1. Perception Effects. We make use of novel supplemental data to support the idea
that savings and reputation are linked and that some monitors are better able to affect
reputations than others. One necessary condition for reputation to be at play is for the
monitors and other community members to actually discuss the savings of participants. In
fact, more than 60% report doing so in the last two weeks of the savings period. Further,
40% of monitored savers also report knowing through back-channels that the monitor passed
information about their progress to others.34
   Moreover, we attempt to track this information flow from monitors to other members
of the community. Our follow-up survey, administered 15 months after the end of the
intervention, asks respondents their views about a randomly-chosen set of 12 savers who
participated in our experiment. We ask whether the subject knows if each of these 12
individuals reached their savings goal or not as well as general views about how good these
34This is particularly striking because it requires enough communication and leakage to occur such that
savers hear gossip about themselves. We encourage the reader to reflect on how often this happens in their
own lives.
                                      SAVINGS MONITORS                                        20


individuals are at meeting their goals. We test here whether community members are better
informed about the savings behaviors of others when the saver has a monitor and when that
monitor is central. Further, we ask whether community members update their beliefs about
the saver’s ability to meet goals more in response to their behavior in our experiment when
the monitor is central.
   Table 7 presents the results of this exercise. We examine a regression of whether the
interviewee knows correctly whether the saver reached her goal conditional on the centrality
of the randomly assigned monitor as well as the proximity between the interviewee and the
saver’s monitor (Columns 1-3). We repeat this changing the outcome variable to whether
the interviewee updated her beliefs about the general ability of the saver to reach her goals
in the direction of the saver’s savings goal attainment (Columns 4-6).
   The basic idea is that if the monitor is more central, it may be the case that a random
interviewee in the village is more likely to have both heard of the saver’s success and also
have a better view of the saver’s general responsibility.
   Our regression specifications include no fixed effects, village fixed effects or interviewee
fixed effects, the latter of which therefore captures variation within an interviewee but across
randomly assigned saver-monitor pairs.
   We find that indeed if a saver is randomly assigned a more central monitor, the respondent
is more likely to know if the saver reached her goal and also is more likely to believe that
the saver is good at meeting her goals.
   We note that while interesting, this dynamic is not necessary for our story. Specifically,
it need not be the case that the information has already or immediately spread. What is
important in our framework is that when the saver impresses the monitor, there may be
benefits at some point in the future when a new opportunity arises (much like sending out
a letter of recommendation).
   It should go without saying that this is an admittedly imperfect exercise. We use self-
reported data on whether people chat about others, whether people hear gossip about
themselves through back channels, and several questions about respondents perspectives on
other savers’ responsibility profiles and savings habits in the experiment. The usual caveats
about self-reported data certainly apply here and, further, we are not making a causal
claim that this shift in belief exactly corresponds to the shift in savings. Nonetheless,
we want to emphasize that the evidence provided here is (a) largely consistent with our
framework/story, (b) mostly self-consistent, and (c) agrees with the anecdotal evidence
provided in Appendix A. Further, given the difficulties in digging into such a mechanism in
a networks setting, we argue that this simple idea – simply asking whether conversations
happened, asking whether people changed their views of others, etc. – which has not been
used much in this literature, has tremendous value for this research program.
                                    SAVINGS MONITORS                                      21


5.2. Anecdotal Evidence. Consistent with the perception effects, conversations with
study participants and other villagers support the idea that reputational mechanisms are at
play in our experiment. In fact, our experimental design was based, in part, on a conversa-
tion with a gentleman in a rural village. In Appendix Section A, we present short excerpts
of conversations with participants that we recorded. Many villagers described wanting to
impress their monitor in general and paying special attention when that monitor was im-
portant. Some respondents gave us specific examples of why impressing the monitor would
be helpful in the future.


5.3. How Did They Save? We can use our detailed survey data to explore how savers
who were randomly selected to receive monitors managed to increase their savings balances
over the duration of the experiment.
   Panel A of Table 4 looks at detailed data on expenditures taken from the last month of
the 6-month savings period. It presents regressions of expenditures on various categories
on random assignment to monitors. As before, regressions include village fixed effects and
the standard set of controls for savers. We find that being assigned a monitor leads to
significant declines in expenditures on festivals (by Rs. 224) and transportation (by Rs.
159). A back of the envelope calculation shows that this can roughly explain the increased
savings of those assigned a monitor: (Rs. 159 + Rs. 224 - Rs. 38) = Rs. 345) while the
increase in total savings across all accounts for the last month is approximately Rs. 200.
   Panel B uses retrospective data from the 15-month follow-up survey which asked what
measures agents took to accumulate savings. We find that being assigned a random mon-
itor led to a 6.8pp increase in the probability that a saver increased labor supply, a 2.2pp
increase in savings from business profits, and a 8.6pp increase in the probability of cut-
ting unnecessary expenditures. There is no evidence of changes to interpersonal transfers.
Further, very few individuals report taking any sort of loan in order to save.
   The results in Table 4 corroborate our overall monitor treatment effects and suggest that
increases in savings mainly came at from natural places of slack in the household’s budget,
namely leisure, unnecessary expenditures and festivals. That individuals are not borrowing
to save in response to the monitor treatment adds to the evidence provided below that
savers were likely not facing undue pressure from their monitors and in fact on average
gained from genuine increases in savings.


5.4. Benefits from Saving. Given that our treatment increased total savings across all
household accounts, a natural question to ask is whether we can detect any lasting benefits
of the accrued savings caused by the monitoring treatments. This is a difficult question,
so to address this, in our 15-month follow-up survey, we adopt the methods proposed by
Dupas and Robinson (2013b). We asked subjects about their ability to cope with various
shocks. Given that our intervention helped savers to increase their stock of savings, we can
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                             22


ask if in the subsequent 15 months they were less likely to be in a situation where they did
not have money to be able to cope with a shock.35
   Specifically, we posed a series of questions to the savers as to whether they faced a specific
hardship for which they did not have enough savings to purchase a remedy (e.g., falling ill
and being unable to purchase medicine). Table 5 presents the results. We measure effects on
the total number of shocks (columns 1-2), whether the household experienced fewer shocks
than the median (columns 3-4), incidence of health shocks (columns 5-6) and incidence of
household consumption shocks (7-8). Specifications are shown with and without village fixed
effects, and all regressions use the standard saver controls. We find that being randomly
assigned a monitor leads to a decline in the rate at which individuals face a shock and are
unable to purchase a remedy. For instance, there is a 0.199 decline in the total number of
shocks (on a base of 1.769, column 1). Further, there is a 7.6pp decline in the probability
that a household has greater than median number of instances where they were unable to
cope with the shock. We find suggestive, though not statistically significant effects when
we look at health and household expenditures as separate categories.
   Finally, in the last two columns of Panel B, we present the effects of the random monitor
treatment on log savings balances 15 months after the intervention. Remarkably, the size of
the increase in savings is as large as that reported in Table 2. This suggests that individuals
are able to maintain their savings even after the monitors are no longer actively receiving
information. Appendix Figure B.2 shows that the increases in savings across the distribution
are still apparent 15 months later.
   Taken together, these findings serve to show that there was truly an increase in savings
(since they were better able to make purchases to cope with shocks) that persisted after
the intervention and moreover show that there were important, real consequences of the
increased savings.

5.5. Negligibility of Monitor Incentives. There are two natural questions one may ask
when it comes to monitors in this study. First, is it the case that the presence of the monitor
causes individuals to unwind their savings from other accounts? Second, does the fact that
the monitors received a small incentive drive the results?
   We show evidence against both of these hypotheses. Conditional on reaching her goal, a
saver exceeds 200% of her goal in 65% of the cases. Further, over 75% of individuals who
reach their goal in the target account save in excess of 200% of their target amount across
all accounts. This suggests that individuals are not likely subject to undue pressure. They
save immensely, mostly do not bunch at their goal, and don’t unwind across other accounts.

35Note that this could arise for two reasons. First, and perhaps the ex ante more likely reason, agents
would have more money to deal with the same distribution of shocks. Second, agents could conceivably have
invested in shock mitigation. Like Dupas and Robinson (2013b), our analysis does not need to take a stand
on this.
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                          23


   Turning to the monitor incentives, we do the following exercise. Recall that the monitor
incentive function has two discontinuities. In addition to the payment made at the full
goal, we added a second discontinuity at the half goal to generate a test. Note that in
terms of personal value to the saver, the incentives above and below the half goal should be
smooth. So looking at this threshold should identify how the monitor incentive may have
differentially led to behavior nudging people across the threshold. Turning to the full goal
amount, notice this is a mix of potential monitor incentives but also natural incentives to
simply reach one’s stated goal.
   Table 6 presents the results. We look at the 1/2 goal and full goal savings amounts for
each saver and look within a window of the bonus (Rs. 50 or Rs. 150) of each. Column
1 presents the group without a monitor (so by construction there is no monitor incentive),
column 2 presents data from subjects with a random monitor and column 3 presents data
from subjects with an endogenously chosen monitor. When we look at the half goal marker
we find the share above 1/2 goal in the unmonitored group is 90%, whereas the numbers
drop to 64% and 68% in the cases with monitors. This rejects the bunching hypothesis
since, first, in the monitored groups it is as good as random that people are on either side
of the window but, further, if anything the unmonitored group is more likely to bunch on
the right of the 1/2 goal mark despite not facing any monitor incentives by definition.36 We
believe that this is a good test of the impact of monitor incentives because 1/2 goal is not
a particularly salient milestone for the saver aside from the monitor incentive.
   Turning to the full goal, first note that by construction there is likely to be more bunching
here (ex ante) simply because individuals set goals for themselves. We do observe that 60%
of unmonitored savers fall at or within Rs. 150 above the goal, whereas this fraction is 86%
and 70% for the monitored savers.
   Finally, as seen in Figure B.3, we observe that savers do not rush to make deposits in the
last two weeks of the savings period, as is might be the case if monitors were lending funds
to savers. This supplements the evidence that there is no evidence of bunching or gaming
in the neighborhood of 1/2 goal attainment.
   Because we find so little evidence of gaming, we believe that many of our monitoring
results would still hold even in absence of financial incentives. However, an experimental
test is required to confirm this hypothesis.

                                   6. Endogenous Monitors

  Given the effects on randomly assigned monitors, we now turn to the case of endogenous
monitor selection.

6.1. Central and Proximate Monitors are Chosen. Recall that in every village there
is a surplus of potential monitors. Therefore, we can ask if the network characteristics of
36We find similar patterns when we zoom out to a window size of Rs. 100. Available upon request.
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                    24


the selected monitors in the endogenous-selection villages differ from those in the random-
selection villages. We begin by asking whether savers in the endogenous-choice villages
choose monitors that are both more central and socially close. Panels A and B of Figure 5
present histograms of the social distance between saver-monitor pairs in both the random
and endogenous treatments. The figure clearly shows that individuals are more likely to
choose friends and individuals of closer social proximity in the endogenous treatment relative
to the proportions achieved by random matching. A regression of social proximity on
treatment type indicates that endogenous saver-monitor pairs are 0.14 proximity units closer
than random pairs. Similarly, Panels A and B of Figure 6 show that endogenously-chosen
monitors are also more central in the network than randomly-matched monitors.
   This evidence is consistent with the idea that agents may be sophisticated about the
commitment value of having more central monitors. However, a natural alternative could
be that individuals are simply choosing the closest available network connection. Because
more central individuals are, by construction, closer to others, it could very well be the case
that there is entirely no sophistication on the part of the choosers. To understand this, we
run an algorithm mimicking this “closest neighbor” choice sequence.37 Recall that savers
were allowed to choose in random order. Given this order, the algorithm assumes that the
saver picks the monitor of the closest social proximity from the available pool. If there are
multiple potential monitors available of the same social proximity, then the algorithm draws
the monitor uniformly at random. Once a monitor is chosen, that individual is no longer
available in the choice set for subsequent savers. We present the resulting distributions of
social distance and centrality in Panel C of Figures 5 and 6. Certainly the resulting distri-
bution is more heavily weighted towards more central monitors than in the random monitor
distribution. In fact, this does generate a distribution of centrality comparable to the en-
dogenous choice villages. However, the marginal distribution of distances to partners does
not match the observed distribution in the endogenous villages very well. Saver-monitor
pairs are too close under the algorithm – nearly 75% of savers would have picked monitors
at distance 1 with virtually all other savers picking monitors at distance 2. However, we
find that in the observed endogenous distribution, 37% of savers pick monitors at distance
1, 50% at distance 2, and 12% at distance 3. The social distance distribution generated by
the “closest neighbor” algorithm is easily rejected using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Taken
together, this suggests that agents are picking more central monitors than random, and in
a way that can’t be explained simply by picking their closest available choice.

6.2. Effects of Endogenous Monitors. Given that when randomly assigned, central
and proximate monitors are more effective, and when allowed to choose, savers pick more
central and proximate monitors, it is natural to ask if savers perform better under en-
dogenous choice. We explore the average treatment effects across all three treatments in

37We thank Attila Ambrus for this suggestion.
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                             25


Table 8. We measure the treatments effects separately for savers with randomly-chosen
and endogenously-chosen monitors. In column 2, we include village fixed effects. Thus, the
estimated coefficients measured the effects of receiving a monitor relative to savers in the
same village. Here, we see that the savers who were able to pick their own monitors save
no more across all accounts than the savers who were not assigned to receive a monitor
(insignificant coefficient -0.0830).
   However, when removing the village fixed effects, column 1 suggests that the negative
coefficient can be explained by a large spillover effect on the control group. Relative to the
non-monitored savers in the villages with random monitor assignment (omitted category),
non-monitored savers in the endogenous choice villages increase savings by 0.35 log points.
Moreover, the total savings effect is not statistically different from that of monitored savers
in either monitor treatment.38
   Thus, we find that endogenous monitors are about as good as having a randomly assigned
monitor and, more interestingly, that even the unmonitored individuals in random villages
do about as well.



6.3. Measuring and Calibrating Monitor Spillovers. Next, we use our experimental
variation in monitor assignment in the random villages to look for spillovers from monitored
to non-monitored savers. Non-monitored savers may be affected if their friends receive
monitors and may experience larger spillovers if those monitors are especially effective.39
The random variation in both the assignment of savers to treatment groups and of monitors
to savers in the random selection villages allows us to measure such causal spillover effects.
   Our experiment also contains random variation in the community-level composition of
monitors. We have already shown that the monitors in the endogenous-selection villages are
of higher centrality than those in the random-selection villages. Thus, we can ask if a change
in monitor composition might lead to greater spillovers onto the non-monitored savers.
Moreover, to what extent might this compositional difference also help to explain the large
observed differences in the savings of non-monitored individuals between the endogenous-
and random- selection villages displayed in Table 8? This calibration is the aim of this
section.
   We begin by looking for spillovers onto non-monitored savers in the villages with random
monitor selection. We use the following regression specification:


38Appendix Table B.5 investigates the effects of random and endogenous monitors on goal attainment. There
we see that again, endogenous and random monitors generate similar levels of goal attainment. However,
we do not observe a goal attainment spillover onto the non-monitored savers in the endogenous villages.
39This could happen for a variety of reasons. For instance, “keeping up with the Joneses”, increased mo-
tivation to save, receiving reminders from the friend’s monitor, an overhearing more conversations about
savings, etc.
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                                26



                            X                       X                          X
(6.1)   yir = αr + β1             Aij,r SM j + β2       Aij,r SMj M Cj + β3         Aij,r AttSaverj
                              j                     j                           j

                   +δ 0 Xir + ir .

   This estimating equation allows the savings of non-monitored individuals to depend on
having more friends randomly assigned to receive a monitor (SM) and having more friends
randomly assigned to receive a central monitor (SM*MC).40 All of this is conditional on
the number of friends participating as savers in the experiment and fixed effects for the
number of friends. The standard set of controls is included in X.41 When we move from
the random-selection to the endogenous-selection villages, the distribution of most of the
explanatory variables is held constant by virtue of randomization. The only variable that
differs is MC. Thus, we are particularly interested in β2 .
   Table 9 presents the results estimating Equation 6.1. We find that a one standard devi-
ation increase in the sum of monitor centralities received by one’s friends corresponds a 1.3
log point increase in total savings across all accounts.
   We can now measure the expected change in log total savings for the non-monitored savers
when moving from random assignment to endogenous assignment villages. The incremental
change in the sum of the monitor centralities of one’s friends is 0.036. Multiplying by the
regression coefficient (10.24) we find that the predicted change is 0.368 log points. Note
that this explains essentially the entire gap of 0.35 log points from Table 8. Furthermore,
the standard errors on the computation are such that we cannot reject equality (the null
that we can explain the entire gap). Spillovers alone can explain the pattern of “catch-up”
that we observe in the endogenous selection villages.
   In measuring these spillovers, we are conducting a very different type of analysis from
the core exercise of the paper. The spillovers measured here likely bundle many different
channels of influence including (but not limited to) “keeping up with the Joneses”, increased
motivation to save, receiving reminders from the friend’s monitor, and overhearing more
conversations about savings.42 Our goal here is simply to use the reduced form evidence of
spillovers to reconcile the large savings differences of non-monitored savers between random
and endogenous villages. We make no attempt to unpack or identify any precise mechanism
underlying this reduced form. Anecdotal evidence suggests that conversations between

40More generally, all agents – un-monitored and monitored – may face this type of spillover effect. Also
note that the variation identifying the peer effect is orthogonal to the treatment status of the saver. In
Appendix Table B.6, we show that, unsurprisingly, we can replicate our main results while accounting for
these spillovers in our main regressions.
41Recall that the standard controls include savings goal, gender, age, marital status, widow status, caste,
elite status, material measures of wealth, whether the saver had a pre-existing bank or PO account, preference
for bank or PO account during the savings period, and village fixed effects.
42This multitude of channels is also the reason why we do not try to estimate and instrument a more
structured model of spillovers in the spirit of Bramoulle et al. (2009).
                                     SAVINGS MONITORS                                      27


savers and monitors tend to take place in public and are likely to be overheard by the
saver’s friends.

                            7. Discussion: Towards Policy

   While the aim of our experiment was not to test an already scalable and cost-effective
financial product, we do believe that our experiment provides lessons for policy-makers and
for financial institutions.
   We show that on average, our peer monitoring treatment increases savings substantially
and also results in follow-on economic benefits over the subsequent year. While this positive
effect is even stronger when the “right” members of the community are placed in the role of
monitor (i.e., central and proximate individuals), we also demonstrate that our endogenous
villages also experience positive savings impacts, and that those impacts spill over onto
non-monitored savers. This suggests that even if it is not practical to fully optimize the
matching of savers to monitors, the community can still benefit from more decentralized
product designs that can be low cost and low touch for an implementing organization.
   Our results isolating bilateral relationships also offer a window inside the complex work-
ings of RoSCAs, SHGs, VSLAs and MFIs. An innovative study by Kast et al. (2012) looks
at two experiments. In the first, SHG members (established and maintained by a microlen-
der) were motivated to encourage each other to save by making public commitments in front
of the other SHG members. They found large effects but also found that the results of the
second experiment, where SHG members received SMS-based reminders to save, demon-
strated that the first experiment could be rationalized in their setting through reminders
alone. An interesting distinction with our setting is that in their setting the monitors were
both co-borrowers with the savers and were savers themselves by construction. In one of the
first RCTs measuring the impacts of village savings and loan associations (VSLAs), Bea-
man et al. (2014) show that the technical assistance provided by the implementing NGO
helps endogenously formed groups accumulate savings and lend those savings to one an-
other. Similar to our effects on medium-run savings and shock mitigation, they show that
the main economic impacts of their VSLA intervention are on food security, consumption
smoothing and buffer stock savings.
   One important policy consideration is the cost of implementing and scaling a peer mon-
itoring product. Our specific treatments were implemented with research goals in mind,
and were never meant to be profitable or scalable. However, we do think that there are
many opportunities for financial institutions to reduce the costs of product delivery. One
of our largest costs was personnel. In order for the research team to have more control over
the implementation, we chose to send individuals to each village on a bi-weekly basis to
meet the savers, physically verify the passbooks, and pass the relevant information on to the
monitors. Many financial institutions in India already use the Business Correspondent (BC)
model, in which agents of the bank travel to villages to provide direct in-home customer
                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                                               28


service. This includes account opening procedures and deposit-taking. One could easily
imagine a small tweak to this model, where the BC could intermediate information to oth-
ers in the village after his pre-specified appointments. Further, banks could use technologies
such as SMS to implement a peer monitoring scheme.
   The other main cost associated with our intervention was the incentive given to monitors.
First, as discussed previously, we think that the incentives had negligible effects on savings
outcomes. Second, we certainly did not attempt to “optimize” the size of these incentives.43
Nevertheless in the endogenous monitor case, the aggregate monitor incentives paid to
participants correspond to a 6% semi-annual interest rate on all additional savings that were
caused by our interventions, which – while not cheap – is not outlandish.44 Experimenting
with the size of the incentives would likely yield significant cost reductions.
   In sum, the research done here and in related work suggests that there are likely to
be minimally invasive, low-cost policies that financial institutions could adopt to encourage
savings. This suggests a cheap way forward exploiting the large benefits of peer effects. This
also raises interesting policy questions regarding whether policymaker should encourage
savings through SHGs or goal-setting through business correspondents?

                                            8. Conclusion

   Reputations matter. Our subjects enunciate this both verbally and through their eco-
nomic decisions. When information about their savings is transmitted to others in the
community, participants increase their savings in meaningful enough amounts that they are
better able to mitigate shocks.
   But reputation in whose eyes also matters, and the social network provides an apt lens
to examine this. Individuals benefit from impressing their monitors because, in the future,
they might need to rely either on the monitor directly or on parties who have come to learn
about from the monitor. This motive to impress is undoubtedly asymmetric in communities.
Certain sets of people interact more or less frequently with others, and a network perspective
puts discipline on thinking about how reputational stakes may vary with the position of
one’s monitor in the community.
   Our field experiment is carefully designed to quantify impacts on a measurable and
economically important behavior – savings. Further, we collect evidence pertaining to how
the households managed to save, whether the savings had follow-on benefits, and whether
the savings accumulation persisted into the future. We acknowledge the difficulty in isolating
reputation and make a contribution by attempting to track the information flow itself from
the monitors to other members of the community. The study’s results point to minimally
43In fact, we believe that the optimal incentive would be close to, if not equal to, zero.
44To reach this 6% value, we first calculate the aggregate payments that we made to monitors in the
Endogenous villages. We then calculate the excess savings across all savings vehicles that were caused by
our treatments. We include both the direct effects of receiving a monitor on savings and also the spillovers
onto non-monitored savers.
                                      SAVINGS MONITORS                                        29


invasive, low-cost policies that financial institutions could easily adopt in order to encourage
savings.
                                  SAVINGS MONITORS                                   30


                                     References

Abdulkadiroğlu, A. and T. Sönmez (2003): “School choice: A mechanism design
 approach,” American economic review, 729–747.
Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, A. G. Chandrasekhar, R. Hanna, and B. A. Olken
 (2012): “Network structure and the aggregation of information: Theory and evidence
 from Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper 18351.
Ananth, B., D. Karlan, and S. Mullainathan (2007): “Microentrepreneurs and Their
 Money: Three Anomalies,” Working Paper.
Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin (2006): “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
 from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
 ics, 121, 635 – 72.
Ballester, C., A. Calvó-Armengol, and Y. Zenou (2006): “Who’s who in networks.
 wanted: the key player,” Econometrica, 74, 1403–1417.
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2013): “The
 Diffusion of Microfinance,” Science, 341 (6144).
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2014): “Gos-
 sip: Identifying central individuals in a social network,” NBER Working Paper 20422.
Beaman, L., D. Karlan, and B. Thuysbaert (2014): “Saving for a (not so) Rainy
 Day: A Randomized Evaluation of Savings Groups in Mali,” NBER Working Paper.
Beshears, J., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. Madrian, and J. Sakong (2011): “Self con-
 trol and liquidity: How to design a commitment contract,” RAND Corporation Working
 Paper.
Beshears, J. L., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and K. L. Milkman (2015):
 “The Effect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions,” Journal of
 Finance, Forthcoming.
Besley, T. and S. Coate (1995): “Group lending, repayment incentives and social col-
 lateral,” Journal of development economics, 46, 1–18.
Besley, T., S. Coate, and G. Loury (1993): “The economics of rotating savings and
 credit associations,” The American Economic Review, 792–810.
Bramoulle, Y., H. Djebbari, and B. Fortin (2009): “Identification of peer effects
 through social networks,” Journal of Econometrics, 150, 41–55.
Breza, E. (2014): “Peer Effects and Loan Repayment: Evidence from the Krishna Default
 Criris,” Working Paper.
Breza, E., A. G. Chandrasekhar, and H. Larreguy (2015): “Network Centrality
 and Institutional Design: Evidence from a Lab Experiment in the Field,” NBER Working
 Paper 20309.
Brune, L., X. Giné, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang (2013): “Commitments to Save: A
 Field Experiment in Rural Malawi,” Working Paper.
                                   SAVINGS MONITORS                                    31


Bryan, G. T., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2012): “Referrals: Peer Screening and
  Enforcement in a Consumer Credit Field Experiment,” NBER Working Paper.
Bursztyn, L., F. Ederer, B. Ferman, and N. Yuchtman (2013): “Understanding
  mechanisms underlying peer effects: Evidence from a field experiment on financial deci-
  sions,” Econometrica.
Cai, J., A. de Janvry, and E. Sadoulet (2013): “Social Networks and the Decision to
  Insure,” Working Paper.
Carroll, G. (2012): “When Are Local Incentive Constraints Sufficient?” Econometrica,
  80, 661–686.
Chandrasekhar, A. G., C. Kinnan, and H. Larreguy (2013): “Informal Insurance,
  Social Networks, and Savings Access: Evidence from a lab experiment in the field,”
  Working Paper.
Cho, I.-K. and D. M. Kreps (1987): “Signaling games and stable equilibria,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 179–221.
DeMarzo, P. M., D. Vayanos, and J. Zwiebel (2003): “Persuasion bias, social influ-
  ence, and unidimensional opinions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 909–968.
Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2013a): “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Devel-
  opment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya,” American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 5, 163–92.
——— (2013b): “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health Savings Experi-
  ments,” The American Economic Review, 103, 1138–71.
Giné, X. and D. Karlan (2006): “Group versus Individual Liability: Evidence from a
  Field Experiment in the Philippines,” Yale University Economic Growth Center working
  paper 940.
Golub, B. and M. O. Jackson (2010): “Naive learning in social networks and the wisdom
  of crowds,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 112–149.
——— (2012): “How Homophily Affects the Speed of Learning and Best-Response Dynam-
  ics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1287–1338.
Hagen, L. and A. Kahng (1992): “New spectral methods for ratio cut partitioning and
  clustering,” Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, IEEE Transac-
  tions on, 11, 1074–1085.
Jack, W. and T. Suri (2014): “Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from
  Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution,” The American Economic Review, 104, 183–223.
Jackson, M., T. Barraquer, and X. Tan (2010): “Social Capital and Social Quilts:
  Network Patterns of Favor Exchange,” .
Jackson, M. O. (2008): Social and Economic Networks, Princeton University Press.
Karlan, D. (2007): “Social connections and group banking*,” The Economic Journal,
  117, F52–F84.
                                  SAVINGS MONITORS                                   32


Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman (2010): “Getting to
  the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving,” NBER Working Paper.
Kast, F., S. Meier, and D. Pomeranz (2012): “Under-savers anonymous: Evidence
  on self-help groups and peer pressure as a savings commitment device,” NBER Working
  Paper.
Kast, F. and D. Pomeranz (2014): “Saving More to Borrow Less: Experimental Evi-
  dence from Access to Formal Savings Accounts in Chile,” NBER Working Paper.
Katz, E. and P. F. Lazarsfeld (1970): Personal Influence, The part played by people
  in the flow of mass communications, Transaction Publishers.
King, M. (2015): “Who can you trust? Reputation and cooperation in networks,” Mimeo.
Munshi, K. (2014): “Community networks and the process of development,” The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 49–76.
Pathak, P. A. and J. Sethuraman (2011): “Lotteries in student assignment: An equiv-
  alence result,” Theoretical Economics, 6, 1–17.
Prina, S. (2013): “Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experi-
  ment,” Working Paper.
Schaner, S. (2014): “The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run Impacts of
  Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor,” Working Paper.
Spence, M. (1973): “Job market signaling,” The quarterly journal of Economics, 355–374.
Thaler, R. H. and S. Benartzi (2004): “Save More Tomorrow: Using behavioral eco-
  nomics to increase employee saving,” Journal of political Economy, 112, S164–S187.
Townsend, R. M. (1994): “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62, 539–
  591.
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                             33


                                                  Figures


                     Figure 1. Experimental Design and Randomization




                      Village                                Pure Potential                 Potential
                                                            Control Monitors                 Savers



                       (a) Village                               (b) Individual- level randomization to
                                                                 pure control, monitor pool or savers pool.



                                     Savers                            Chosen
              Monitor                                                  Monitors         BC Monitored
               Pool                  Attend                                            Saver +BC Saver
   Pure                              Meeting                 Pure
                                                                        Excess
  Control                                                   Control
                                                                       Monitors
                                       Savers                                                 Savers
              Monitor                   Not                            Monitor                 Not
              Dropouts               Interested                        Dropouts             Interested
               (c) Participating samples.                        (d) Individual-level randomization of
                                                                 participating savers to treatments. Mon-
                                                                 itors selected.

                     Village A                                                  Village B

               Chosen                                                   Chosen
               Monitors    BC Saver       Monitored                     Monitors     BC Saver    Monitored
                                          +BC Saver                                              +BC Saver
     Pure                                Endogenous           Pure                                Random
    Control     Excess                                       Control     Excess
               Monitors                                                 Monitors
                                       Savers                                                 Savers
               Monitor                  Not                             Monitor                Not
               Dropouts              Interested                         Dropouts            Interested



        (e) Village-level randomization. Village A is randomly assigned to endogenous monitoring treat-
        ment. Village B is randomly assigned to exogenous monitoring treatment.
“BC Saver” refers to our non-monitored treatment (T1) described in section 2.
                                                     SAVINGS MONITORS                                 34



                                           Figure 2. Time Line of Experiment

              Account Opening:                        6 Months                         ~15 Months
            • Bank or PO



Village                            Saving Period Begins:         Saving Period Ends:                  Follow‐Up
Meeting                           • Baseline Survey              • Endline Survey                      Survey
                                  • Bi‐weekly visits start
                                  • Monitors start to get info


                                     Figure 3. Histogram of Baseline Savings Goals
                         .3
    Fraction of Savers
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                              0                     2000                   4000                6000
                                                           Savings Goal

The figure shows the distribution of the baseline savings goals. We clip the top 5% tail of the
                       distribution to make the figure more readable.
                                         SAVINGS MONITORS                                           35




Figure 4. Distributions (CDF) of log(Total Savings/Savings goal) by Treatment

           Non-Monitored Savers vs. Savers with Random Monitors

                  1
                  .8 .6
              Density
            .4    .2
                  0




                          -4       -2              0            2             4                 6
                                        log(Total End Savings/Savings Goal)

                                          Random Monitor               No Monitor




           Savers with High Centrality vs. Low Centrality Monitors
                 1
                 .8  .6
              Density
            .4   .2
                 0




                          -4       -2              0            2             4                 6
                                        log(Total End Savings/Savings Goal)

                               R Monitor: High Centrality           R Monitor: Low Centrality
                                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                         36



Figure 5. Social Distance Between Saver and Monitor by Treatment

                                                    Panel A: Random Treatment




                                          .8
        Fraction of Random Monitors
                                          .7
                                          .6
                                          .5
                                          .4
                                          .3
                                          .2
                                          .1
                                          0




                                               1           2           3           4           5
                                                   Social Distance between Saver and Monitor



                                                   Panel B: Endogenous Treatment
                                          .8
        Fraction of Endogenous Monitors
                                          .7
                                          .6
                                          .5
                                          .4
                                          .3
                                          .2
                                          .1
                                          0




                                               1           2           3           4           5
                                                   Social Distance between Saver and Monitor



                                               Panel C: “Closest Neighbor” Algorithm
                                          .8
        Fraction of Closest Monitors
                                          .7
                                          .6
                                          .5
                                          .4
                                          .3
                                          .2
                                          .1
                                          0




                                               1           2           3           4           5
                                                   Social Distance Between Saver and Monitor
                                                             SAVINGS MONITORS                       37



Figure 6. Centrality Quantile of Monitor by Treatment

                                                    Panel A: Random Treatment




                                     .1
   Fraction of Random Monitors
                                     .08
                                     .06
                                     .04
                                     .02
                                     0




                                           0           .2         .4        .6         .8       1
                                                   Eigenvector Centrality Quantile of Monitor



                                                   Panel B: Endogenous Treatment
                                     .1
   Fraction of Endogenous Monitors
                                     .08
                                     .06
                                     .04
                                     .02
                                     0




                                               0        .2         .4        .6        .8       1
                                                   Eigenvector Centrality Quantile of Monitor



                                           Panel C: “Closest Neighbor” Algorithm
                                     .1
   Fraction of Closest Monitors
                                     .08
                                     .06
                                     .04
                                     .02
                                     0




                                           0           .2         .4        .6         .8       1
                                                   Eigenvector Centrality Quantile of Monitor
                                                                       SAVINGS MONITORS                                                38


                                                                             Tables




                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics, Treatment Assignment, and Attrition
                                                     Treatment (Village Meeting Sample)                          Treatment (Endline Sample)

                                               Mean of Non-     Diff. Random Diff. Endogenous         Mean of Non-     Diff. Random Diff. Endogenous
Dependent Variable                            Monitored Savers vs. No Monitor vs. No Monitor    Obs. Monitored Savers vs. No Monitor vs. No Monitor    Obs.
Age                                                 33.09            -0.147           0.158     1,307      33.45            0.0414          0.0254     1,146
                                                   (0.385)          (0.458)         (0.528)               (0.387)          (0.454)         (0.551)
Female                                              0.756           -0.0411         -0.0253     1,307       0.78           -0.0412         -0.0248     1,146
                                                  (0.0243)         (0.0316)        (0.0343)              (0.0261)         (0.0304)        (0.0339)
Married                                             0.857           -0.0287         -0.0244     1,307      0.875           -0.0334         -0.0409     1,146
                                                  (0.0192)         (0.0208)        (0.0272)              (0.0204)         (0.0218)        (0.0268)
Widowed                                            0.0358          0.00954           0.0151     1,307      0.033            0.0175          0.0246     1,146
                                                 (0.00984)         (0.0126)        (0.0161)              (0.0101)         (0.0137)        (0.0174)
Positive Savings 6 Mos Prior to Baseline            0.717            0.0244          0.0116     1,307      0.725            0.0181          0.0157     1,146
                                                  (0.0319)         (0.0346)        (0.0358)              (0.0333)         (0.0371)        (0.0370)
Has Post Office or Bank Acct. at Baseline           0.378           -0.0111          0.0404     1,307      0.396         -0.00964           0.0241     1,146
                                                  (0.0316)         (0.0362)        (0.0340)              (0.0329)         (0.0367)        (0.0354)
Has BPL Card                                         0.84            0.0197       -0.00175      1,307      0.842            0.0150          0.0112     1,146
                                                  (0.0211)         (0.0251)        (0.0269)              (0.0235)         (0.0296)        (0.0280)
Savings Goal                                        1838             -239.1           131.1     1,307      1751             -207.7           185.8     1,146
                                                   (117.1)          (117.4)         (165.2)               (126.6)          (117.8)         (166.2)
Savings Goal (1% outliers trimmed)                  1650             -106.5          -55.07     1,286      1538             -35.75           34.54     1,127
                                                   (76.04)          (78.99)         (101.0)               (75.69)          (81.40)         (103.4)
Log Savings Goal                                    7.253           -0.0631        0.00868      1,307      7.209           -0.0350          0.0467     1,146
                                                  (0.0398)         (0.0415)        (0.0464)              (0.0421)         (0.0408)        (0.0476)
Projected Income - Projected Expenses               3175             -204.6          -975.5     1,307      2878             -295.0          -1,103     1,146
                                                   (349.8)          (607.4)         (943.8)               (376.1)          (596.0)         (1,035)

Endline Survey Administered (Non-Attriters)                                                                 0.889          -0.0272          -0.00390   1,307
                                                                                                          (0.0179)        (0.0252)          (0.0219)
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                                 39

                        Table 2. Effect of Random Monitors on Savings
                                                   (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                Log Total       Log Total      Target Account Target Account
Dependent Variable                               Savings         Savings          Savings        Savings
Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment              0.301           0.370             360.6          368.2
                                                 (0.155)         (0.148)           (174.5)        (188.4)

Observations                                      544             544              673             673
R-squared                                        0.123           0.025            0.031           0.013
Dependent Variable Mean (Omitted Group)          7.647           7.647            342.7           342.7
Fixed Effects                                    Village         Village          Village         Village
Controls                                         Saver             No             Saver             No
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings
vehicle – the target account and any other account – by the saver. Target account savings is the amount
that is saved in the target account associated with the experiment. Controls include the following saver
characteristics: savings goal, age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office
account, whether the individual has a bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of
rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. All regressions include village fixed effects.




              Table 3. Total Savings by Network Position of Random Monitor

                                                         (1)             (2)           (3)
                                                     Log Total      Log Total       Log Total
          Dependent Variable                          Savings        Savings         Savings
          Monitor Centrality                           0.129          0.178
                                                     (0.0734)       (0.0736)
          Saver-Monitor Proximity                      0.899                          1.146
                                                      (0.337)                        (0.343)

          Observations                                  422            424            422
          R-squared                                    0.160          0.150          0.150
          Fixed Effects                               Village        Village        Village
                                                      Saver,         Saver,         Saver,
          Controls                                    Monitor        Monitor        Monitor

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings
vehicle – the target account and any other account – by the saver. Controls include savings goal, and the
following variables for each monitor and saver: age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank
or post office account (saver only), whether the individual has a bank or post office account at baseline,
caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. We also control for the
geographical distance between the homes of the saver and monitor. All regressions include village fixed
effects.
                                                              SAVINGS MONITORS                                               40




                                                  Table 4. How Did the Savers Save?

                                      Panel A: Expenditures During Month 6 of Savings Period
                                                (1)           (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)         (7)          (8)               (9)
                                               Log                                        Meals Eggs and     Other                    Entertainment
Dependent Variable                        Expenditures Festivals Pan      Tea             Away     Meat       Food     Transport.      and Phone
Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment         -0.0655     -224.1 17.04 37.58               19.75   -47.80     -160.7      -159.4           -2.623
                                            (0.0716)    (130.2) (25.57) (18.83)          (40.97) (62.68)    (130.9)     (79.93)          (29.35)

Observations                                   522           578        581     580     573       574        578           578               577
R-squared                                     0.068         0.035      0.021 0.027 0.060         0.097      0.112         0.084             0.057
Fixed Effects                                 Village       Village    Village Village Village   Village    Village       Village           Village
Controls                                      Saver         Saver      Saver Saver Saver         Saver      Saver         Saver             Saver



                                     Panel B: Retrospective Assessment from Follow-Up Survey
                                                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)                    (6)
                                                      Increased                       Cut     Money from Reduced
                                                        Labor         Business   Unnecessary Family and Transfers to           Took a
       Dependent Variable                               Supply         Profits   Expenditures  Friends     Others               Loan
       Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment             0.0680         0.0224       0.0761      -0.0244    0.0164              -0.0224
                                                       (0.0332)       (0.0163)     (0.0447)    (0.0342)   (0.0119)            (0.0192)

       Observations                                      528            528             528        528           528               528
       R-squared                                        0.074          0.056           0.025      0.057         0.055             0.031
       Fixed Effects                                    Village        Village         Village    Village       Village           Village
       Controls                                         Saver          Saver           Saver      Saver         Saver             Saver

                   Notes: Panel A measures the effect of receiving a randomly assigned monitor on selected measures of
                   expenditures in the sixth month of the savings period measured at the end of the monitoring intervention.
                   Panel B reports survey responses from the 15 month follow-survey. Standard errors clustered at the village
                   level. Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings goal, age, marital status, number of
                   children, preference for bank or post office account, whether the individual has a bank or post office
                   account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. All
                   regressions include village fixed effects.
                                                                SAVINGS MONITORS                                                  41

                                Table 5. Shock Mitigation for Monitored Savers in Random Villages


                                          (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)          (8)            (9)        (10)
                                         Total      Total Greater than Greater than                      HH          HH      log(Tot. Sav.) log(Tot. Sav.)
Dependent Variable: Shocks             Number     Number     Median       Median      Health  Health Expenditure Expenditure    15 mos.        15 mos.
Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment    -0.199     -0.249    -0.0757      -0.0944    -0.0752 -0.103    -0.0521     -0.0721       0.324          0.290
                                       (0.128)    (0.131)   (0.0416)     (0.0441)   (0.0615) (0.0670) (0.0384)    (0.0419)      (0.196)        (0.190)

Observations                            1,153     1,153      1,153        1,153      1,153     1,153     1,153        1,153        1,152         1,152
R-squared                               0.021     0.021      0.019        0.016      0.020     0.020     0.010        0.011        0.074         0.083
Mean of Dep. Var (Control)              1.769     1.769      0.577        0.577      0.862     0.862     0.500        0.500        3.779         4.264
Fixed Effects                           Village    No        Village       No        Village    No       Village       No          Village        No
Controls                                Saver     Saver      Saver        Saver      Saver     Saver     Saver        Saver        Saver         Saver

                    Notes: The outcome variables are all measures of shocks experienced by the savers between the end of the
                    six month savings period and the 15 month follow-up survey. The total number of shocks measures the
                    number of types of shocks experienced, including deaths, family illnesses, health shocks causing missed
                    work, livestock shocks, unexpected HH expenditures. Standard errors clustered at the village level.
                    Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings goal, age, marital status, number of children,
                    preference for bank or post office account, whether the individual has a bank or post office account at
                    baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. Columns 1, 3,
                    5, and 7 include village fixed effects.
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                               42

                         Table 6. No Evidence of Bunching or Gaming

                                                                    (1)        (2)           (3)
                                                                   Number of Savers by Treatment
                                                                    No      Random Endogenous
   Within Rs. 50 of Half Goal                                     Monitor   Monitor       Monitor
   Target acct savings ϵ [half goal‐50, half goal)                   1          5             6
   Target acct savings ϵ [half goal, half goal+50]                   9          9            13
   Target acct savings ϵ [half goal‐50, half goal+50]               10         14            19
   Fraction above half goal given near half goal                   90%        64%           68%

                                                                    (1)        (2)           (3)
                                                                   Number of Savers by Treatment
                                                                    No      Random Endogenous
   Within Rs. 150 of Full Goal                                    Monitor   Monitor       Monitor
   Target acct savings ϵ [goal‐150, goal)                            2          3             6
   Target acct savings ϵ [goal, goal+150]                            3         18            14
   Target acct savings ϵ [goal‐150, goal+150]                        5         21            20
   Fraction above goal given near goal                             60%        86%           70%
Notes: The top panel shows the number of savers reaching within Rs. 50 of 1/2 of the savings goal by
treatment. Rs. 50 is the size of the incentive received by the monitor if the saver reaches or surpasses 1/2
of the goal. The bottom panel shows the number of savers reaching within Rs. 150 of the full savings goal
by monitor status. Rs. 150 is the size of the additional incentive received by the monitor if the saver
reaches or surpasses the full goal.
                                                             SAVINGS MONITORS                                                 43

                                     Table 7. Beliefs About Savers and Monitor Centrality

                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                   Reached         Reached        Reached            Good at       Good at       Good at
Dependent Variable: Beliefs about Saver               Goal            Goal           Goal          Meeting Goals Meeting Goals Meeting Goals
Monitor Centrality                                   0.0206          0.0157         0.0157            0.0389        0.0374        0.0353
                                                   (0.00937)       (0.00804)      (0.00854)          (0.0144)      (0.0140)      (0.0148)
Respondent-Monitor Proximity                        0.00357         -0.00252       -0.00160           0.0476        0.0181        0.0360
                                                    (0.0194)        (0.0196)       (0.0239)          (0.0422)      (0.0366)      (0.0342)

Observations                                         4,743          4,743          4,743              4,743           4,743          4,743
R-squared                                            0.026          0.020          0.342              0.030           0.023          0.314
Fixed Effects                                         No            Village      Respondent            No             Village      Respondent
Controls                                             Saver          Saver          Saver              Saver           Saver          Saver
                Notes: The dependent variables are measured in the 15 month follow-up survey and capture the beliefs of
                respondents about savers in the random monitor villages. “Reached Goal” measures whether the saver
                reached her goal and the respondent correctly believed this to be true. “Good at Meeting Goals” is
                constructed as 1(Saver reached goal)*1(Respondent indicates saver is good or very good at meeting goals)
                + (1-1(Saver reached goal))*1(Respondent indicates saver is mediocre, bad or very bad at meeting goals).
                Standard errors clustered at the village level. Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings
                goal, age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office account, whether the
                individual has a bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home
                and type of electrical connection. Columns 2 and 5 include village fixed effects. Columns 3 and 6 include
                respondent fixed effects.




                                           Table 8. Random vs. Endogenous Monitors

                                                                                             (1)              (2)
                                                                                        Log Total       Log Total
                    Dependent Variable                                                   Savings         Savings
                    Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment Village                          0.298           0.298
                                                                                         (0.145)         (0.148)
                    Monitor Treatment: Endogenous Assignment Village                     -0.0722         -0.0830
                                                                                         (0.146)         (0.161)
                    Non-Monitored Treatment: Endogenous Assignment Village                0.354
                                                                                         (0.202)

                    Observations                                                            1,042         1,042
                    R-squared                                                               0.145         0.125
                    Fixed Effects                                                            No           Village
                    Controls                                                                Saver         Saver

                Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings
                vehicle – the target account and any other account – by the saver. Controls include the following saver
                characteristics: savings goal, age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office
                account, whether the individual has a bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of
                rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. All regressions include village fixed effects.
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                               44




             Table 9. Spillovers from Monitored Savers: Non-Monitored Sample

                                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                                  Log Total     Log Total     Log Total
   Dependent Variable                                              Savings       Savings       Savings
   Number of Friends Assigned a Monitor                             0.833         0.372         0.640
                                                                   (0.315)       (0.287)       (0.286)
   Sum of Centralities of Friends' Monitors                                       10.24
                                                                                 (3.749)
   Number of Friends Assigned a High Centrality Monitor                                         0.753
                                                                                               (0.499)
   Number of Friends Attending Meeting                              0.795         0.650         0.270
                                                                   (1.240)       (1.257)       (1.274)

   Observations                                                      123           123           123
   R-squared                                                        0.541         0.584         0.571
   Fixed Effects                                                    Village       Village       Village
   Controls                                                         Saver         Saver         Saver

Notes: Sample is restricted to non-monitored savers in villages with random monitor assignment. Standard
errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings vehicle – the
target account and any other account – by the saver. The mean of the variable ’Sum of Centralities of
Friends’ Monitors’ is 0.14 with a standard deviation of .13. One standard deviation of this variable is
.Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings goal, age, marital status, number of children,
preference for bank or post office account, whether the individual has a bank or post office account at
baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. All regressions
include village fixed effects.
                              SAVINGS MONITORS                                       45


            Appendix A. Supplemental Appendix: Quotes

“For those who want to save in a bank or post office account but do not
have the habit of doing so, having a monitor may help... Having a more
important person as a monitor may help in comparison to a person who is
not well known by people in the village. A person may save more if it is
an important person knowing they might get more benefits from this person
later on.” – Subject 1




“If the monitor was a very important person in the village, and the saver
did not meet a goal that she set, the monitor would lose trust in the saver.
The monitor will feel that if in the future he or his friends gives her some
job or tasks or responabilities, the saver may not fulfill them.” – Subject 2




“When paired with an important person, they will save more to build the
monitor’s confidence in them. That way the person builds trust with me
[sic]... If the person does not fulfill savings, the monitor will be disappointed
and think ‘I used to place trust in that person but now I can’t’. They would
speak less to the saver and feel ‘cheated to trust’ [sic]. They may tell others...
But if someone is too irresponsible then monitor or no monitor, the saver
will not save.” – Subject 3




“People will only reach their goals if their monitors are family, friends, neigh-
bors, or important people.” - Subject 4




“I would like to choose the important person except if there are close friends.
Then I may hesitate if I do not know him well.” – Subject 5
                                                              SAVINGS MONITORS                                        46


                                Appendix B. Supplemental Appendix: Tables and Figures




                               Figure B.1. Intensity of Baseline Use of Available Savings Vehicles

Savings Vehicle                       Males       Females     Std. Dev. Min     Max      Obs
         45%
Cash in Home                           0.421745     0.32377    0.441625       0        1       270        Males
  Fraction of Total Savings




ROSCA                                  0.223824    0.043027    0.370462       0        1       270
Insurance Policy                        0.17228    0.115173    0.315401       0 0.998613       270        Females
Bank                                    0.09788    0.087669    0.222074       0        1       270
Self Help Group                        0.033181    0.348792     0.15053       0        1       270
         30%
Post Office                            0.021626     0.03771    0.109229       0        1       270
MFI Account                                   0    0.006932            0      0        0       270



                              15%
Variable                              Mean              Std. Dev. Min           Max      Obs
                                       0.087669          0.204289             0        1      784
                                        0.03771          0.155505             0        1      784
                                       0.115173          0.270022             0        1      784
                              0%       0.348792          0.388887             0        1      784
                                        0.32377
                                     Cash   in           0.405271
                                                    ROSCA Insurance           0 Bank 1        784Help
                                                                                            Self        Post Office
                                       0.036927          0.151112             0        1      784
                                     Home
                                       0.043027                 Policy
                                                         0.169425             0 0.989011     Group
                                                                                              784
                                       0.006932          0.070119
                                                                   Savings Vehicle
                                                                              0 0.988142      784
                                       SAVINGS MONITORS                                           47



Figure B.2. Distributions (CDF) of log(Total Savings/Savings goal) by
Treatment

        Non-Monitored Savers vs. Savers with Random Monitors


               1
               .8 .6
           Density
         .4    .2
               0




                       -10                -5                     0                      5
                                      log(Total EL2 Savings/Savings Goal)

                                        Random Monitor               No Monitor




        Savers with High Centrality vs. Low Centrality Monitors
              1
              .8  .6
           Density
         .4   .2
              0




                       -10                 -5                      0                          5
                                      log(Total EL2 Savings/Savings Goal)

                             R Monitor: High Centrality           R Monitor: Low Centrality
                                                          SAVINGS MONITORS                          48



                                         Figure B.3. Aggregate Timing of Savings Deposits
                                        500




Average Target Account Deposits (Rs.)
                                        450

                                        400

                                        350

                                        300

                                        250

                                        200

                                        150

                                        100

                                         50

                                          0
                                              1   2   3   4   5    6   7     8   9   10   11   12
                                                           Bi-weekly Visit Number
                                    SAVINGS MONITORS                                49

     Table B.1. Endline Survey Summary Statistics: Non-Monitored Savers

Summary Statistics: Sample Villages                    Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.
Network Characteristics
Number of Households                                    60     222.12     65.85
Average Degree                                          60      17.57      3.96
Average Clustering                                      60       0.30      0.05
Average Path Length                                     60       2.34      0.19




     Table B.2. Endline Survey Summary Statistics: Non-Monitored Savers

Summary Statistics: Non-Monitored Savers, R Villages   Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.
Endline Survey: Conclusion of Intervention
Total Savings                                          123    8890.44   17616.18
Log Total Savings                                      123      7.67      1.83
Log Total Expenditures (past month)                    120      8.62      0.79
Expenditure Categories (past month):
   Festivals                                           133    824.81    1335.38
   Pan                                                 132    197.73     219.89
   Tea                                                 132    277.05     227.49
   Meals Away                                          131    259.39     478.09
   Eggs and Meat                                       131    606.72     783.06
   Other Food                                          133    1526.92   1347.66
   Transport                                           132     641.14   1061.75
   Entertainment and Phone                             133     244.64    213.72

Final Endline Survey: 15 Months Following Conclusion
Total Savings                                          133    9263.29   16124.83
Log Total Savings                                      133      7.65      2.08
How the Savers Saved:
   Increased Labor Supply                              117     0.15       0.36
   Business Profits                                    117     0.03       0.18
   Cut Unnecessary Expenditures                        117     0.15       0.35
   Money from Family and Friends                       117     0.19       0.39
   Reduced Transfers to Others                         117     0.01       0.09
   Took a Loan                                         117     0.04       0.20
Shocks
   Total Number of Shocks                              133     1.77       1.43
   Greater than Median Number of Shocks                133     0.58       0.50
   Health Shock Indicator                              133     0.86       0.66
   HH Expenditure Shock Indicator                      133     0.50       0.50

Beliefs about Non-Monitored Savers in R Villages
Reached Goal                                           2141    0.03       0.18
Good at Meeting Goals                                  2141    0.21       0.41
Respondibility Index Raw Data (5 point scale)          1467    2.00       0.97
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                                50

                   Table B.3. Effect of Random Monitors on Goal Attainment
                                                                 (1)            (2)
                                                              Reached        Reached
           Dependent Variable                                   Goal           Goal
           Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment                0.0630         0.0606
                                                              (0.0316)       (0.0313)

           Observations                                         673            673
           R-squared                                           0.021          0.012
           Dependent Variable Mean (Omitted Group)             0.073          0.073
           Fixed Effects                                       Village        Village
           Controls                                            Saver            No
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Reached Goal is a dummy for whether the saver
(weakly) exceeded her savings goal. Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings goal, age,
marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office account, whether the individual has a
bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of
electrical connection. All regressions include village fixed effects.




            Table B.4. Goal Attainment Network Position of Random Monitor

                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)
                                                   Reached       Reached        Reached
        Dependent Variable                           Goal          Goal          Goal
        Monitor Centrality                          0.0285        0.0339
                                                   (0.0161)      (0.0156)
        Saver-Monitor Proximity                      0.120                         0.149
                                                   (0.0717)                      (0.0658)

        Observations                                 521            523            521
        R-squared                                   0.053          0.048          0.046
        Fixed Effects                              Village        Village        Village
                                                   Saver,         Saver,         Saver,
        Controls                                   Monitor        Monitor        Monitor

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Reached Goal is a dummy for whether the saver
(weakly) exceeded her savings goal. Controls include savings goal, and the following variables for each
monitor and saver: age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office account
(saver only), whether the individual has a bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status,
number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. We also control for the geographical
distance between the homes of the saver and monitor. All regressions include village fixed effects.
                                           SAVINGS MONITORS                                              51

                         Table B.5. Random vs. Endogenous Monitors

                                                                              (1)               (2)
                                                                          Reached           Reached
      Dependent Variable                                                    Goal              Goal
      Monitor Treatment: Random Assignment Village                         0.0631            0.0613
                                                                          (0.0322)          (0.0311)
      Monitor Treatment: Endogenous Assignment Village                     0.0646            0.0604
                                                                          (0.0220)          (0.0230)
      Non-Monitored Treatment: Endogenous Assignment Village              -0.00408
                                                                          (0.0334)

      Observations                                                           1,277            1,277
      R-squared                                                              0.024            0.022
      Fixed Effects                                                           No              Village
      Controls                                                               Saver            Saver

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Reached Goal is a dummy for whether the saver
(weakly) exceeded her savings goal. Controls include the following saver characteristics: savings goal, age,
marital status, number of children, preference for bank or post office account, whether the individual has a
bank or post office account at baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of
electrical connection. All regressions include village fixed effects.




        Table B.6. Random Monitor Treatment Effects: Robustness to Inclusion
        of Spillovers

                                                      (1)           (2)               (3)
                                                   Log Total     Log Total      Log Total
                 Dependent Variable                 Savings       Savings        Savings
                 Monitor Centrality                  0.137         0.179
                                                   (0.0734)      (0.0718)
                 Saver-Monitor Proximity             0.935                           1.075
                                                    (0.369)                         (0.377)

                 Observations                         422           424               422
                 R-squared                           0.300         0.289             0.294
                 Fixed Effects                      Village       Village           Village
                                                    Saver,        Saver,            Saver,
                 Controls                           Monitor       Monitor           Monitor

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings
vehicle – the target account and any other account – by the saver. Controls include savings goal, and the
following variables for each monitor and saver: age, marital status, number of children, preference for bank
or post office account (saver only), whether the individual has a bank or post office account at baseline,
caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. They also include the
number of friends, the number of monitored friends, and the sum of the centralities of the monitors of the
friends. We also control for the geographical distance between the homes of the saver and monitor. All
regressions include village fixed effects.
                                            SAVINGS MONITORS                                               52

       Table B.7. Random Monitor Analysis: Financial Component of Network Only




                                                                                  (1)                (2)
                                                                              Log Total           Log Total
Dependent Variable                                                             Savings             Savings
Saver and Monitor Direct Friends: Any Relationship                              0.560               0.516
                                                                               (0.211)             (0.255)
Saver and Monitor Direct Friends: Borrowing or Lending Relationship                                 0.154
                                                                                                   (0.437)

Observations                                                                     422                422
R-squared                                                                       0.143              0.143
Fixed Effects                                                                  Village            Village
Controls                                                                    Saver, Monitor     Saver, Monitor

  Notes: Standard errors clustered at the village level. Total savings is the amount saved across all savings
  vehicle – the target account and any other account – by the saver. We define a link as having a financial
  component if the nodes report borrowing or lending small amounts of money or material goods to one
  another. In our sample, 27% of direct links have a financial component. Controls include savings goal, and
  the following variables for each monitor and saver: age, marital status, number of children, preference for
  bank or post office account (saver only), whether the individual has a bank or post office account at
  baseline, caste, elite status, number of rooms in the home and type of electrical connection. We also
  control for the geographical distance between the homes of the saver and monitor. All regressions include
  village fixed effects.
