NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO ‘CHEESEBURGER BILLS’ WORK? EFFECTS OF TORT REFORM FOR FAST
FOOD
Christopher S. Carpenter
D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo
Working Paper 21170
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21170
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We are grateful to Jim Blumstein, Chuck Courtemanche, Richard Daynard, Kate Fritzdixon, Jon Klick,
Ben McMichael, Max Schanzenbach, Jennifer Shinall, Kip Viscusi, and seminar participants at McMaster
and Vanderbilt Universities for extremely helpful comments. We are grateful to Pedro Salcido for
valuable research assistance at the early stages of this project and to Steve Rogers for providing state
political variables. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Christopher S. Carpenter and D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do ‘Cheeseburger Bills’ Work? Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food
Christopher S. Carpenter and D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo
NBER Working Paper No. 21170
May 2015, Revised August 2015
JEL No. I12,I18,K13
ABSTRACT
After highly publicized lawsuits against McDonald’s in 2002, 26 states adopted Commonsense Consumption
Acts (CCAs) – aka ‘Cheeseburger Bills’ – that greatly limit fast food companies’ liability for weight-related
harms. We provide the first evidence of the effects of CCAs using plausibly exogenous variation in
the timing of CCA adoption across states. In two-way fixed effects models, we find that CCAs significantly
increased stated attempts to lose weight and consumption of fruits and vegetables among heavy individuals.
We also find some evidence that CCAs increased employment in fast food. Finally, we find that CCAs
significantly increased the number of company-owned McDonald’s restaurants and decreased the number
of franchise-owned McDonald’s restaurants in a state. Overall our results provide novel evidence
supporting a key prediction of tort reform – that it should induce individuals to take more care – and
show that industry-specific tort reforms can have meaningful effects on market outcomes.
Christopher S. Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu
D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
daniel.s.tello@vanderbilt.edu

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

1. Introduction
In 2002 McDonald’s corporation was the subject of two high profile lawsuits
alleging liability for weight-related health claims. In the first, Caesar Barber, a
severely obese 56 year old man from the Bronx, accused McDonald’s and other
popular fast food chains of intentionally withholding nutritional content
information from customers, causing him to consume unhealthy food without his
knowledge.1 In the second, the parents of Ashley Pelman and Jazlen Bradley –
two severely obese teenagers – sued McDonald’s on the basis of deceptive
marketing. Although both of these cases were ultimately dismissed, McDonald’s
and other fast food restaurants viewed the threat of lawsuits as non-trivial.
Around this same time period, McDonald’s eliminated its ‘super-size’ option,
provided nutrition information on food packaging, and added healthier options
such as salads and fruit to its menu, and other restaurants took similar actions.2
Regardless of the legal merits of claims such as those in the Barber and
Pelman cases, there is strong popular belief that holding food companies legally
responsible for obesity-related claims is unwarranted at best and ridiculous at
worst. In response to the potentially costly effects of these and similar lawsuits,
states quickly began to adopt laws that explicitly limited liability of food

1

Barber also sued Burger King, Wendy’s, and Kentucky Fried Chicken.
McDonald’s is no stranger to high profile lawsuits and has paid out very large jury awards and
settlements in the 1994 hot coffee case, the 2005 acrylamide case, and others. More recently, in
2010 the Center for Science in the Public Interest sued McDonald’s, alleging that toys in Happy
Meals constituted deceptive marketing to children.

2

1

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

companies in weight-based claims. Termed ‘Commonsense Consumption Acts’
(henceforth CCAs) but more commonly known as ‘Cheeseburger Bills’, these
laws were promoted by the National Restaurant Association and achieved a great
deal of success beginning as early as 2003. In June of that year, Louisiana
became the first state to adopt a CCA; by the end of 2004, 12 other states had
followed suit. Today, 26 states have adopted some limit on legal liability for the
food industry. A federal version titled ‘American Personal Responsibility in Food
Consumption Act’ was introduced to Congress by Florida Republican and selfacknowledged fast-food lover Ric Keller in both 2004 (HR339) and 2005
(HR554). Both times it passed in the House but did not pass the Senate.
Commonsense Consumption Acts effectively serve as tort reform for the
food industry (in particular, the fast-food industry, which is the subject of most of
the legal attention). These laws share several common features, and in fact many
share a nearly identical structure and language (see Appendix A for an example).
Specifically, the modal CCA protects food manufacturers, packers, distributors,
carriers, holders, sellers, marketers, and advertisers from civil actions for claims
arising out of weight gain, obesity, health conditions associated with weight gain
or obesity, or other known conditions likely to result from long-term consumption
of food. CCAs also generally clarify the conditions under which protection is not
extended: if there is a violation of the adulteration or misbranding requirement or
if there is any other knowing and willful material violation of state or federal laws

2

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

pertaining to manufacture, sale, distribution, marketing, or labeling of food. Most
laws explicitly define ‘food’ using the Food and Drug Administration definition
that includes beverages. Some CCAs also contain explicit exceptions for altered
products, deceptively advertised products, or fraudulent claims. Thus, proponents
of CCAs claim that they still provide adequate protection to consumers while at
the same time limiting frivolous lawsuits.
Opponents of CCAs (including the Center for Science in the Public
Interest) claim that the laws are simply designed to help the large and powerful
food industry – particularly fast food and the National Restaurant Association,
which was the primary supporter and financial sponsor of state and federal CCA
lobbying activity – make more money and avoid their responsibilities to society.
Opponents also claim that the fact there have been no successful obesity-related
lawsuits suggests that, in fact, the legal system in this realm is not broken – and
thus there is no need to fix it.3
Indeed, the success of any such weight-based claim hinges critically on a
link that many legal experts agree is the fundamental problem with such cases:
establishing a causal connection between consumption at a particular restaurant

3

There are examples of successful obesity-related lawsuits against McDonald’s in other countries.
For example, in a 2010 case in Brazil, McDonald’s was ordered to pay $17,500 to one of its
managers who alleged the company contributed to his 65 pound weight gain over 12 years in part
by supplying him free meals. The manager also claimed that ‘mystery shoppers’ sent by the firm
to the store required him to eat the food to make sure it passed quality standards (Hartenstein
2010). Legal scholars have also identified other possible social benefits of nontrivial obesityrelated legal threats to fast food companies. For example, such threats may increase consumer

3

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

(e.g., McDonald’s) and weight-related harms.

Despite this inherent legal

challenge, two trends suggest that legal action against fast food companies is
unlikely to go away. First, there has been a well-documented and high-profile
dramatic rise in population rates of obesity. Second, there has been a concomitant
reduction in the relative price of calories consumed away from home, particularly
at fast food restaurants. These factors give many observers reason to believe that
from a legal standpoint obesity could become the next tobacco: that is, just as the
largest US tobacco companies were on the losing end of class-action lawsuits and
huge jury awards for smoking-related illnesses two decades ago, experts have
suggested that we might see similar obesity-related legal activity for economic
and non-economic damages pertaining to weight-based health problems.4
Documenting the effects of Commonsense Consumption Acts is important
for several reasons. First, our results help inform a large and growing literature in
law and economics on the effects of other more traditionally studied tort reforms.
Specifically, our study provides direct evidence on whether parties take more care

awareness of obesity and nutrition issues, and it also may incentivize fast food companies to
voluntarily change menus or alter their marketing practices (Mello et al. 2003).
4
In the debates over obesity litigation, many parallels are made with tobacco litigation. In both
cases the products in question are harmful to public health if consumed in excess quantity and are
potentially addictive, and in both cases there are claims that companies may have deceived
consumers about the content, safety, and addictiveness of the products. Moreover, in both cases
the public thought it was implausible that plaintiffs would win large jury awards. The release of
tobacco industry documents through the 1998 Master Settlement Agreement – which was
negotiated after several state Attorneys General filed class action lawsuits against the largest
tobacco companies in the United States (RJ Reynolds and Lorillard) – helped fuel big awards.
Notably, Altria Group (formerly Phillip Morris), one of the largest tobacco companies worldwide,
actively lobbied for adoption of the federal cheeseburger bill. As of 2014, lawyers in at least 16

4

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

when they are less able to sue companies for the harmful effects of products. This
is a central idea behind tort reform and has been studied extensively in the context
of medical malpractice.

For example, multiple studies have found that tort

reforms such as caps on economic damages and establishment of joint and several
liability rules are associated with significant changes in the way doctors practice
medicine and in health outcomes (e.g. mortality and birth outcomes) (Currie and
McLeod 2008). Second, our study provides direct evidence on whether the laws
are having their intended effects, as one explicit goal of CCAs was to induce
people to take more personal responsibility for their food consumption and
weight. Debate over these regulations remains at the top of the legislative agenda
in many states: North Carolina’s CCA went into effect in October 2013, while
Governor Mark Dayton of Minnesota vetoed his state’s CCA in May 2011. There
is substantial latitude for the remaining states to adopt their own CCAs or for a
federal version of a CCA to be reintroduced.
In this paper we provide the first empirical evidence on the effects of
CCAs on investments in weight-related health, population weight, fast-food
prices, and fast-food market size. We use several datasets and a two-way fixed
effects empirical framework that identifies the effects of CCAs on outcomes using
quasi-random variation in the timing of policy adoption across states, net of area
(city or state) and year fixed effects, linear area-specific time trends, state

states have lobbied state Attorneys General to require the food industry to pay for obesity-related

5

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

unemployment rates and other state characteristics, and other state policies related
to tort-reform (e.g., damage caps) and obesity prevention (e.g., menu labelling
laws).
To preview, we find that CCAs significantly increased the likelihood that
individuals state they are currently trying to lose weight. We also find that CCAs
significantly increased healthy food consumption as measured by the number of
servings of fruits and vegetables consumed per day. In both cases, we find that
these effects are concentrated among heavy individuals. We do not find any
effects of CCAs on exercise, nor do we find that the CCA-induced changes in
weight

loss

attempts

and

healthy

food

consumption

translated

into

contemporaneous changes in body weight. These null weight effects are precise:
our large samples of individual data allow us to rule out effects of CCAs on
population weight larger than 0.2 percent. We find no consistent effects of CCAs
on prices of fast food or other food items. Regarding the fast-food market, we
find some evidence that CCAs increased employment in fast food restaurants
within the state. Finally, we show that CCAs significantly increased the number
of company-owned McDonald’s restaurants and reduced the number of franchiseowned McDonald’s restaurants in a state. Our results are important because they
provide novel evidence supporting a key tenet of tort reform – that it should

health care costs (Evich 2014).

6

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

induce parties to take more care – and demonstrate that industry-specific tort
reform can affect market-wide outcomes.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines the mechanisms through
which CCAs could plausibly have affected health and market outcomes and
provides a brief literature review. Section 3 describes the data and outlines the
empirical approach. Section 4 presents the results, and Section 5 discusses and
concludes.

2. Mechanisms and Literature Review
a. Mechanisms
How might Commonsense Consumption Acts affect individual and market
outcomes in fast food? There are several possible mechanisms. First, for health
outcomes, there is a straightforward moral hazard explanation. This mechanism
predicts that because CCAs eliminate the ‘insurance’ function of litigation, heavy
individuals should be more likely to invest in weight-related health. That is,
individuals in states without CCAs (or prior to CCA adoption) could reason that if
they became sick due to their food consumption, they could plausibly have legal
recourse to recover health costs and personal damages by suing food
manufacturers. CCAs make this avenue substantially less attractive by providing
those manufacturers some degree of immunity from weight-based claims, and as

7

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

such the laws should be expected to induce shifts toward healthier consumption
and weight loss attempts.5
A challenge with the pure moral hazard mechanism is that it requires
individuals to credibly believe that they might successfully sue fast-food
companies for their weight-related health costs in the absence of CCAs and to be
aware of CCA adoption in their state substantially eroding this possibility. While
major national newspapers and television programs covered debates over the
federal Cheeseburger bill and some of the state laws, it is difficult to know who
saw and read those news stories. Google Trends data confirm that there was a
spike in national searches for the phrase ‘Cheeseburger Bill’ in late 2005 when
the federal law passed the House, as well as in 2011 (when Minnesota adopted a
CCA before its governor vetoed it) and in late 2013 (when North Carolina
adopted a CCA) (shown in Figure 1). Unfortunately, Google Trends does not
provide comparable data for individual states due to insufficiently low search
volume for the specific term.6 We note that even if people did not know about
CCAs in their state from local newspaper and television reports – which would be

5

These effects should be concentrated among heavy individuals, as they are the most likely to
suffer weight-related harms. People who are underweight may also experience increased risk for
some health problems, but in those cases it is more difficult to imagine them suing food
manufacturers in an attempt to recover health costs and noneconomic damages.
6
Using Google Trends to provide complementary evidence for the results on weight loss
intentions and healthy food consumption is complicated by two further challenges. First, Google
Trends does not have any data before 2004; given that most states adopted in 2004, we cannot
implement the quasi-experimental approach used in the main analyses. Second, it is not clear
what the right search terms would be for each of the health outcomes for which we find significant

8

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

a problem for the moral hazard story – it could be that trial lawyers seek out
clients for weight-based claims, thereby disseminating relevant information.7
Another mechanism for any health effects is information. Specifically, the
debates about CCA could cause individuals (particularly heavy individuals) to
learn or be reminded about society’s views and expectations regarding personal
responsibility and weight. Even if individuals had no intentions of ever suing
fast-food companies, this information channel could have changed people’s
behavior.
Regarding market size, CCAs should be expected to increase entry into
and reduce exit from the fast food industry (thus increasing the overall fast-food
market size) by lowering costs of operation, especially litigation costs and liability
insurance costs, which prior work has shown is responsive to tort reform (Born et
al. 2009, Viscusi and Born 2005). Prices should be plausibly affected by simple
supply and demand forces: if CCAs reduce demand for fast food due to either of
the channels described above for individual health outcomes and if CCAs weakly
increase supply of fast food restaurants, then prices of fast food should decline.8
b. Literature Review

associations. For example, for weight loss intentions one could imagine numerous possible search
terms such as ‘lose weight’, ‘diet’, ‘diet foods’, and others.
7
Both the Barber and the Pelman cases were brought by the same lawyer (Samuel Hirsch).
8
A relevant issue is the degree of latitude franchisees have at setting prices. Our price data
suggest there is substantial latitude for individual restaurants to set prices, as there is a great deal
of variation across locations, even within the same quarter. This basic finding is confirmed in
recent work using a panel of McDonald’s prices in the Bay Area (Ater and Rigbi 2007).

9

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Regarding prior literature related to CCAs, we are not aware of any
studies in economics that evaluate their effects. Despite this gap in the literature,
scholars in health policy and law have studied the public health and legal issues
related to obesity litigation in general (Mello et al. 2003, Courtney 2006) and
CCAs in particular (Jones 2005, Wilking and Daynard 2013). And despite the
lack of specific economics evaluations of CCAs, there is a substantial literature in
empirical health economics that studies the causes of the obesity epidemic (see,
for example, Courtemanche et al. 2014), including studies that specifically focus
on the role of restaurants (e.g., Currie et al. 2010, Chou et al. 2004).
Our work is also related to a well-developed literature in law and
economics on the effects of policies such as caps on non-economic damages, caps
on punitive damages, joint and several liability rules, collateral source rules, and
others on outcomes such as insurance premiums (e.g. Viscusi et al 1993, Born et
al 1998, Born et al. 2009, Avraham et al. 2012), defensive medicine (Kessler and
McClellan 1996, Sloan and Shadle 2009), and health outcomes such as mortality
and birth outcomes (Currie and McLeod 2008). More recent work has suggested
that movements toward national standards of care are also important in this
context (Frakes 2014).

3. Data Description and Empirical Approach
a. Data Description

10

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

We use multiple datasets to test for effects of CCAs on outcomes. Our primary
outcome data for adult weight-related outcomes come from public use versions of
the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS).

These telephone

surveys are fielded every year by state health departments and are coordinated by
the Centers for Disease Control who compiles them into an annual individual
level dataset that is designed to be representative at the state level. As most of the
laws we study were adopted in the mid-2000s, our primary analysis sample is
2000-2012.
Individuals in the BRFSS are asked to state their height and weight
(weight without shoes on).9 We use these responses to create body mass index
(BMI) which equals weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. In
addition to height and weight, individuals are also asked about several other
weight-related outcomes and behaviors. We examine BRFSS outcomes related to
exercise and healthy food consumption as two possibilities. Regarding exercise,
the BRFSS asks respondents: “During the past month, other than your regular job,
did you participate in any physical activities or exercises such as running,
calisthenics, golf, gardening, or walking for exercise?” We create a variable
called ANY EXERCISE that equals one if the person reported any past month
exercise. Regarding healthy food consumption, the BRFSS asks respondents in
several years (2000-2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011, and 2012) about the number of

11

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

servings of fruits and vegetables the individual reports eating on a usual day.10
We create a variable called TOTAL FRUITS AND VEGETABLES SERVINGS
PER DAY that represents the number of total servings of fruits and vegetables the
respondent reports eating per day. Finally, for a limited set of years (2000-2003,
and 2005) and states we also observe responses to a question about weight
intentions.

Specifically, individuals are asked: “Are you now trying to lose

weight?”. We therefore examine an indicator variable for TRYING TO LOSE
WEIGHT.
We also examine fast food prices using data from the ACCRA/C2ER
database.

ACCRA data were originally designed to provide cost of living

estimates for urban professionals and have been collected quarterly since 1976.
Typically volunteers from local Chambers of Commerce would collect
information on prices of several local goods in multiple locations, and
ACCRA/C2ER compiled these into a city-specific index. These data have been
used extensively in the existing literature on obesity in part because of the large
number of participating cities. From 2000-2012 we observe three relevant fast-

9

We used adjustments for self-reported height and weight based on gender, race and age (Cawley
2004, Cawley and Burkhauser 2008, Courtemanche et al. 2014).
10
Specifically, from 2000-2009 the BRFSS asks: “These next questions are about the foods you
usually eat or drink. Please tell me how often you eat or drink each one. … Include all foods you
eat, both at home and away from home.” Respondents can report numbers of servings consumed
per day, per week, per month, or per year; we convert all responses into average number of
servings consumed per day. The specific foods asked include: fruit juices such as orange,
grapefruit, or tomato; fruit not counting juice; green salad; potatoes not including French fries,
fried potatoes, or potato chips; carrots; and vegetables not counting carrots, potatoes, or salad. For

12

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

food prices: a McDonald’s Quarter Pounder with Cheese; an 11”-12” Pizza Hut or
Pizza Inn thin crust cheese pizza; and a thigh and drumstick from either Kentucky
Fried Chicken or Church’s Chicken. We also observe prices of other food items
which serve as placebo or falsification outcomes: a half gallon of whole milk, a
loaf of bread, a ten pound sack of potatoes, and an overall grocery price index.11
We measure all prices in real 2010 US dollars.
We use data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW) to study effects on market size. These data are published by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS) and contain quarterly counts of employment and wages
reported by employers who cover 98 percent of all U.S jobs. Importantly, these
data also identify the relevant industry for each employer. We use data from
2000-2012 on the number of establishments and wages for different industries,
including limited-service restaurants (i.e., fast food establishments who should be
most

directly

affected

by

CCAs),

full-service

restaurants

(generally

establishments with ‘sit down’ table service that may also be partly affected by
CCAs but which were not targeted in most of the lawsuits), and other industries
such as gas stations with convenience stores and grocery stores which should have
been unaffected by CCAs and therefore serve as controls or placebo outcomes.

the years 2011 and 2012 the vegetables questions ask about beans, green vegetables, orange
vegetables and other types of vegetables.
11
We note that the sampling of the ACCRA data has some limitations, most obviously that we do
not observe prices in rural markets.

13

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

We supplement the QCEW data with information on the number of
McDonald’s franchises and McDonald’s company owned stores in each state and
year from 2000-2012. These data are reported in annual Uniform Franchising
Offering Circulars (UFOC, later called Franchise Disclosure Documents after
2008). These are legal documents that the Federal Trade Commission requires
each parent company to provide to potential franchisees; recent years are
available on various state commerce department websites, and we supplemented
these by purchasing individual years from Frandata.com. We chose McDonald’s
given their involvement in the major court cases that led to CCA adoption.
b. Empirical Approach
To estimate the effect of the CCAs across all the datasets, we estimate
standard difference-in-differences models that rely on plausibly exogenous
variation in the timing of adoption of CCAs across states. For the BRFSS-based
analyses of individual level data we estimate the following model:
(1) Yist = β0 + β1Xist + β2(COMMONSENSE CONSUMPTION ACT)st + β3Zst
+ β4Ss + β5Tt + β6Ss*TREND + εist
where Y are the weight-related health outcomes available in the BRFSS data. We
estimate linear probability models on the dichotomous BRFSS outcomes for ease
of interpretation. Xist is a vector of individual characteristics available in the
BRFSS, including: gender, age and its square, race/ethnicity (Hispanic, black,
Asian, other), education (elementary, some high school, high school, some

14

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

college, college or above), and marital status (divorced, widowed, separated,
never married, member of an unmarried couple).

COMMONSENSE

CONSUMPTION ACT is an indicator variable equal to one in the states and
periods when a CCA is in effect which we coded according to Wilking and
Daynard (2013) and which is reported in Table 1.12 The coefficient of interest is
β1 and in the presence of state and year dummies (described below) is identified
from within-state changes in outcomes coincident with variation in the timing of
CCA adoption across states. The key identifying assumption is that weight and
health outcomes would have evolved identically in states with and without CCAs
had the laws not been adopted.
Zst is a vector of other potentially relevant state obesity-related public
policies, some of which have been studied in prior work. These include: soda
taxes (Fletcher, Frisvold, and Tefft 2008), complete streets laws, state and local
menu labeling laws (Restrepo 2014), and cigarette taxes (Chou et al. 2004, Gruber
and Frakes 2006, Courtemanche 2009).13 The Z vector also includes controls for
more traditionally studied tort reforms (Avraham 2014), state unemployment

12

The coding of the CCA variable for the BRFSS outcomes takes the value of 1 if the individual’s
interview date is on or after the law’s effective date in the state and 0 otherwise. For the UFOC
outcomes, the CCA variable takes the value of 1 for all years after the law is in effect and 0
otherwise, with the exception that for the year of adoption we set the CCA variable equal to the
fraction of the year the law was in effect in the state. For the ACCRA and QCEW outcomes, the
CCA variable takes the value of 1 for all the quarters after the quarter the law was effective in the
state and 0 otherwise, with the exception that if a law is effective in the middle of a quarter we set
the CCA variable in that quarter equal to the fraction of the quarter the law was in effect in the
state.

15

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

rates, and state demographic characteristics (fraction female; fraction black,
Hispanic, and other non-white races; fraction of individuals with high school
degrees and college or more, fraction of individuals under 21 and between 21-64;
and fraction of individuals below the federal poverty line).14 Ss and Tt are a full
set of state and year dummies, respectively. We also control for state-specific
linear time trends where we interact each state fixed effect with a variable
TREND that equals 1 in 2000, 2 in 2001, and so forth. In these BRFSS models
we also control for (but do not show in equation 1) month dummies to account for
seasonality in the weight-related health investments (e.g., exercise).

We use

sample weights provided by BRFSS, and we cluster standard errors at the state
level (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).15

13

Other state policies aimed at reducing obesity were also rolled out over this time period but
were mainly focused on school environments and children as opposed to the adults we study here.
14
State unemployment rates come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. State demographic
characteristics are from the Census Bureau.
15
In results not reported but available upon request, we estimated models that predicted the
number of years a CCA was in effect in a state as a function of state economic and demographic
characteristics, as well as state policies related to obesity and tort reform (but excluding state fixed
effects). We also controlled for the vote share to the Democratic candidate in the most recent
Presidential election (to account for citizen ideology) and the share of the state legislature that is
Democratic (since Democratic legislators might be friendlier to trial lawyers). Most state
demographic characteristics were not significantly associated with the CCA variable except the
fraction of individuals aged 65 or older in a state and the fraction of the state below the federal
poverty level which were negatively and positively related to the number of years a CCA was in
effect in a state, respectively. Obesity-related policies and tort reforms – either measured
individually or as an index – were not meaningfully associated with the CCA variable. State
unemployment rates were generally negatively related to the number of years a state had a CCA in
effect. Political variables were significant predictors of CCAs, but there was a not a simple
relationship: while the democratic share of the state legislature was negatively related to the
number of years a CCA was in effect in a state (as expected), we also found that the vote share to
the democratic candidate in the most recent Presidential election was positively related to the
number of years a CCA was in effect in a state. Our main findings are robust to inclusion of these
political variables.

16

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

For the analysis of fast food prices we account for the city-quarter nature
of the observations and estimate the following model (estimated using OLS):
(2) Ycst = β0 + β1 (COMMONSENSE CONSUMPTION ACT)st + β2Zst + β3Cc
+ β4Tt + β5Cc*TREND + εcst
where Z is as previously defined and where Ycst are the city-specific fast-food
prices in city c in state s in quarter t. We replace the state dummies from equation
(1) with city dummies in equation (2), and we also replace the year fixed effects
with a full set of fixed effects for each unique quarter in the data. We also control
for smooth linear city-specific time trends in equation (2) in place of the statespecific linear time trends in equation (1). We continue to cluster the standard
errors at the state level for the prices analysis, and the key identifying assumption
remains: that the evolution of local prices in states without CCAs represents what
would have occurred to prices in CCA states in the absence of policy adoption.
For the QCEW data, we write the two-way fixed effects model (also
estimated using OLS) as:
(3)

Yst = β0 + β1 (COMMONSENSE CONSUMPTION ACT)st + β2Zst + β3Ss
+ β4Tt + β5Ss*TREND + εst

where Yst are the outcomes of interest (e.g., number of establishments, number of
employees, and average weekly wage). All other variables are as described above
in equation (1). For analyses of the number of McDonald’s restaurants using
UFOC data we modify equation (3) by studying as our outcome variable the

17

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

number of McDonald’s restaurants per state (total and separately by franchiseowned and company-owned).

For both the QCEW and UFOC analyses we

continue to cluster standard errors at the state level, and we weight these
regressions by annual state population counts.16

4. Results
a. Weight-Related Health Investments
We begin by presenting descriptive statistics for the weight-related health
investments and individual demographics in the BRFSS data. Table 2 presents
means of key variables relating to CCA prevalence, weight-related outcomes, and
demographic characteristics from the BRFSS 2000-2012 sample.

We report

descriptive statistics for the full sample (column 1) and separately for individuals
living in states that ever adopt CCAs (column 2) and individuals living in states
that do not adopt CCAs (column 3). For the full sample, we find that about 41
percent of respondents report trying to lose weight.17 Fully 75 percent of the
sample reports any past month exercise, while individuals report consuming 3.67
servings of fruits and vegetables per day. Average BMI in the sample is 27.61
(i.e., overweight), and nearly 30 percent of the sample is obese. Notably, 3

16

Results were qualitatively similar when we estimated models in logs instead of levels or
estimated outcomes on a per capita basis within each state (available upon request).
17
In addition we find that 77 percent of the sample report trying to lose or maintain weight (not
reported in the table). Of those trying to lose or maintain weight, 26 percent report eating less to
lose weight, while 29 percent reporting exercising more.

18

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

percent of the sample satisfies the definition of Class-3 obesity (i.e., BMI>40). In
general we find few meaningful differences in average outcomes and
characteristics for people in states with CCAs compared to those in states without
CCAs.
In Table 3 we present estimates of the effects of CCAs that take explicit
advantage of the plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of policy adoption
across states on three measures of weight-related investments in health: the
likelihood that an individual reports trying to lose weight (top panel), the number
of servings of fruits and vegetables per day the individual reports consuming
(middle panel), and the likelihood the person reported vigorous exercise in the
past month (bottom panel). Each estimate in the table is the coefficient on the
CCA variable from a separate difference in differences model with linear state
trends. The first column reports estimates for the full sample, and the subsequent
columns report estimates for models that restrict attention to people in each of the
various (mutually exclusive) weight categories. We also report in the row just
above each panel of estimates the average for each outcome variable across the
various weight categories (and for the full sample for column 1). Notably, stated
weight loss attempts are increasing in objective weight category, while fruit and
vegetable consumption and exercise are both decreasing in objective weight
category conditional on being at least normal weight. These patterns lend face
validity that the data are plausibly measuring meaningful underlying constructs.

19

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

The results in the top panel of Table 3 provide strong evidence that
Commonsense Consumption Acts increased stated weight loss attempts among
heavy individuals. For example, the estimate in the top panel of column 7 of
Table 3 indicates that CCAs were associated with a 3.3 percentage point increase
in the likelihood an individual with Class-3 obesity reports trying to lose weight.
Relative to the average rate for this group, this represents about a 4.3 percent
effect. For obese individuals in column 5 we find a 4 percentage point increase in
weight loss intentions, or a 6.2 percent effect relative to the mean, and this
estimate is statistically significant. Notably, we find that most of the estimated
effects of CCAs on weight loss attempts for individuals in the lighter weight
categories are smaller in magnitude and statistically insignificant.
The middle and bottom panels of Table 3 further investigate investments
in weight-related health by examining healthy food consumption and exercise,
respectively, from the preferred specification with state and year fixed effects and
linear state trends. For fruit and vegetable consumption in the middle panel of
Table 3, we find strong evidence that CCAs were associated with statistically
significant increases in healthy food consumption, and these effects are
particularly large in magnitude and statistically significant for the heaviest
individuals. Among individuals with Class-3 obesity in column 7, we estimate
that CCAs increased consumption of fruits and vegetables by a statistically
significant 0.25 servings per day, or about 7.3 percent relative to the sample

20

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

average for that group. We estimate smaller (in both absolute and relative terms)
but statistically significant increases for overweight individuals in column 4 and
for the full sample in column 1, while the estimates for underweight and normal
weight individuals are both small and statistically insignificant.18 Turning to
exercise participation in the bottom panel, we find no effects of CCAs: none of
the estimates in the bottom panel of Table 3 are economically or statistically
significant, indicating that CCAs did not meaningfully affect exercise activity for
any group, let alone those most likely to have been treated by CCAs (i.e., heavy
individuals).19
In Table 4 we report results for the effects of CCAs on weight for the full
sample period 2000-2012. All estimates are from the preferred specification with
state and year fixed effects and linear state trends.

18

Notably, we find no

Sample sizes differ across the panels of Table 3 because the weight intentions questions were
only asked by a subset of states and were not asked in 2004 or after 2005. There is an emerging
understanding of appropriate inference in settings with a small number of clusters; when we
estimated p-values using the Wild-cluster bootstrap method (Cameron et al. 2008), the estimate in
the top panel of Table 3 is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels. Note that the
weight intention outcome is the only one for which we have a small number of clusters due to the
BRFSS sampling structure.
19
Results for the number of minutes of exercise similarly did not indicate any meaningful effects
of CCAs on exercise. In results not reported but available upon request we performed many
robustness exercises for the results in Table 3. Restricting the healthy food consumption analysis
to the same years the weight loss attempts questions were asked (2000-2003 and 2005) did not
change the main result on healthy food consumption. Those same results were also robust to
excluding 2011 and 2012 to account for a change in the BRFSS sampling structure that accounts
for cellphones. Results were also robust to the choice of included states; for example, dropping
each CCA adopter one at a time did not change the results. Results were also similar when we
excluded the linear state trends, as well as when we allowed for quadratic state trends in addition
to linear trends. Adding a control for whether the state would adopt a CCA in the next year did
not materially alter the significant coefficients in the top and middle panels of Table 3, and the
coefficient on future CCA adoption itself was not statistically significant.

21

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

meaningful effects of CCAs on average BMI, and these null findings are precise:
the estimate in column 1 can rule out reductions in BMI larger than about 0.05, or
about 0.2 percent relative to the average BMI in the population (27.9).20 We
similarly find very small CCA estimates on the likelihood of being at or above
any of the standard weight thresholds. Even when measured against the very low
rate of Class-3 obesity in the population (3.81 percent), the estimate in column 7
of Table 4 can rule out reductions in the likelihood of Class-3 obesity larger than
about 2.6 percent.21
b. Fast Food Prices
In Table 5 we turn to prices of fast-food and other food items from the
ACCRA data. Table 5 shows the coefficient on the CCA indicator separately for
several food-related prices in fully saturated models that include controls for city
and year-quarter fixed effects and linear city-specific time trends as well as all the
other policy controls and state level controls. Three prices are for fast-food items
that should have been directly affected by CCAs (a McDonald’s Quarter Pounder
with Cheese, a Pizza Hut medium cheese pizza, and a Kentucky Fried Chicken
thigh and drumstick), and we also show results for prices of three food items that
20

Event study specifications – which replace the single CCA indicator variable with a series of
variables representing months relative to CCA adoption in the state – confirm the null findings on
population average BMI and are presented in Figure 2 for a two year period around CCA
adoption. Event study figures for the probability of being at or above other weight thresholds
(e.g., obese) were similar and are available upon request. Note that because height and weight
were asked in every survey wave we have good coverage of data surrounding each state’s CCA;
most other outcomes that were not asked in every year do not support such detailed models.
21
Controlling for fast food prices had no meaningful effect on any of the BRFSS-based outcomes.

22

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

should not have been directly affected by CCAs (a half gallon of milk, a loaf of
bread, and a ten pound sack of potatoes) as well as a summary grocery price
index.
The results in Table 5 provide little evidence that CCAs affected prices at
fast food restaurants. Estimates on the CCA variable for the three fast-food prices
are all small in magnitude. The estimate in column 1 for a hamburger indicates
that CCAs were associated with decreases in prices of about 1 percent, and the
standard errors can rule out reductions in prices of larger than about 3 percent.22
Coefficient estimates on the other food prices and the grocery price index are also
small and statistically insignificant with the exception of the price of a sack of
potatoes which we estimate a statistically significant reduction in price of about
6.6 percent.23
c. Fast Food Market Size
In Table 6 we turn to the effects of CCAs on market size as measured by
the QCEW data on the number of establishments, the number of employees, and
average weekly wages across industries in each state and year from 2000-2012. If
CCAs provide valuable protection to new entrepreneurs considering opening a

22

Demand effects could differ across restaurants for a number of reasons; for example, some
restaurant chains are likely more able to substitute items across a healthy/unhealthy food spectrum
than others. As such, the predictions on specific fast food prices need not be the same.
23
ACCRA also consistently tracked prices of other food items over our sample period, including:
one pound of Blue Bonnet or Parkay margarine, one pound of bananas, one head of lettuce, one
11.5 ounce can of Maxwell House, Hills Brothers, or Folgers coffee, and one 29 ounce can of
Hunt’s, Del Monte, Libby’s, or Lady Alberta peaches. Results on those other items are not shown

23

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

restaurant or to existing firm owners in fast-food restaurants who are considering
closing establishments, we might expect to see CCAs increasing the number of
fast-food establishments. Moreover, we would expect weaker or no effects on
establishments in other industries.
Table 6 presents estimates of the effects of CCAs on the number of
establishments separately for fast-food restaurants, full service restaurants,
grocery stores, and gas stations with convenience stores. Each entry in Table 6
presents the coefficient on the CCA indicator in a fully-saturated separate model
with state and year fixed effects and linear state trends; the top panel reports
estimates for the number of establishments, the middle panel reports estimates for
the number of employees, and the bottom panel reports estimates for the average
weekly wage. At the top of each panel we also report the average within each
industry for the respective outcomes.
The results in Table 6 provide some evidence that CCAs increased
employment in fast-food, consistent with our preferred supply-side mechanism.
The point estimates on the CCA variable for number of establishments and
number of employees suggest 2.2 percent and 4.5 percent increases, respectively,
and the latter is statistically significant at the ten percent level. 24 We find no
effects on average weekly wages in fast-food, nor do we find effects on outcomes

but are available upon request.
association with CCAs.

None indicated a statistically or economically significant

24

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

in other industries.

The patterns in Table 6 suggest that CCAs may have

increased employment in fast-food, primarily by increasing employment per store
(as opposed to increasing numbers of stores).
Finally, in Table 7 we perform the parallel exercise on the number of
McDonald’s restaurants in each state from 2000-2012, controlling for state and
year fixed effects, linear state trends, and all the state/time varying controls
include in the QCEW models above. Column 1 reports the effect of CCAs on the
total number of McDonald’s restaurants in the state, while columns 2 and 3
separate company-owned from franchise-owned stores, respectively. The results
in column 1 indicate that CCAs did not significantly change the total number of
McDonald’s stores in a state, but the results in columns 2 and 3 indicate that
CCAs significantly increased the number of McDonald’s restaurants within the
state that are company owned and decreased the number of McDonald’s
restaurants within the state that are franchise-owned.25

5. Discussion and Conclusion
The results above provide the literature’s first evidence on the effects of
Commonsense Consumption Acts – more commonly known as ‘Cheeseburger

24

Although we do not observe specific restaurants in the QCEW data, it is worth noting that the
supply side effects could also vary across restaurants.
25
Unfortunately, we do not have data on the frequency of obesity-related lawsuits, nor do we
know who is named in such lawsuits (i.e., the McDonald’s corporation or the individual
franchisee). We are not aware of data that would allow us to measure lawsuits against different
types of named defendants, which would be useful for interpretation.

25

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Bills’ – which greatly limit food companies’ liability in weight-based claims. An
interesting example of tort reform for a single industry, CCAs were adopted with
the explicit goal of inducing people to take more personal responsibility for their
weight (a central tenet of tort reform more generally). We are the first to examine
how CCAs affected weight-related investments in health, finding that the laws did
induce heavy people to take more care by consuming healthy food and trying to
lose weight. We also show CCAs had no effects on population weight or food
prices. We provide some evidence that CCAs increased employment in fast-food
restaurants in a state. Finally, we show that for one specific restaurant targeted by
obesity-related lawsuits (McDonald’s), CCAs were associated with significant
increases in the likelihood that restaurants are company-owned as opposed to
franchise-owned.
There are some important limitations to the current study that should be
noted. First, all of the weight, consumption, and exercise data are self-reported,
though we have adjusted the reports of weight using the method outlined in
Cawley and Burkhauser (2008). It is unlikely that reporting biases or errors are
systematically correlated with the timing of CCA adoption, however. Second,
although we observe healthy food consumption as measured by the number of
servings of fruits and vegetables consumed per day, we do not observe either total
food consumption or unhealthy food consumption. We interpret increases in
healthy food consumption as likely evidence of substitution from unhealthy to

26

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

healthy foods given the findings on stated weight loss intentions, though we
cannot directly show that unhealthy consumption falls following adoption of
CCAs.26 Third, we do not observe the activities of state public health departments
to reduce adult obesity. While we have controlled flexibly for state trends and
other state initiatives that have been previously studied in the literature on
determinants of weight, we cannot rule out that there are other state-specific
factors (e.g., outreach) that are correlated both with CCA adoption and with the
weight-related outcomes we study here.27
Fourth, we do not have data on the frequency and nature of obesity-related
lawsuits.

This means that we do not, for example, know how frequently

individual franchisees are named in such lawsuits (as opposed to the larger
corporate entity), and we similarly do not know how concentrated the legal
activity is toward individual companies. This information would be useful for
interpreting our findings on prices, market size, and McDonald’s restaurants.28

26

While we cannot directly comment on unhealthy food consumption, we can disaggregate the
components of fruit and vegetable consumption for the period 2000-2009 when the specific items
were asked consistently. In results not reported but available upon request we find that the CCAinduced increases in fruits and vegetables consumption is concentrated among fruits, fruit juices,
and green salads as opposed to potatoes and carrots. To the extent that the former are likely to be
relatively healthier than the latter, this is suggestive evidence in favor of an overall improvement
attributable to CCAs.
27
We did not, however, find significant associations between state expenditures on health or
personal health care and the presence of a state CCA.
28
The UFOC documents do list pending litigation against the company to inform potential
franchisees about legal risk, but annual versions of these documents over our sample period were
prohibitively expensive (approximately $270 per restaurant per year).

27

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Finally, we do not observe other firm responses to CCAs beyond the
outcomes in the QCEW and UFOC for McDonald’s. For example, it is plausible
that McDonald’s restaurants located in states with CCAs were slower to roll out
‘healthier’ menu options (such as salad, milk, and fruit), eliminate the ‘Super
Size’ option, or adopt packaging with calories posted on the menu (to the extent
that such decisions are not made nationally at the company level) following CCA
adoption, but we do not observe these outcomes. We also do not know how
seriously food companies take such weight-based claims (either in the presence or
absence of CCAs), though we do know that there have been multiple high profile
lawsuits filed and that the food industry has lobbied strenuously for CCAs,
suggesting a nontrivial legal threat. Relatedly, we do not observe how liability
insurance premiums responded to CCAs. While the protection afforded by the
laws should have reduced insurance premiums for fast food companies, we cannot
directly demonstrate this channel. A better understanding as to whether and to
what extent fast food companies and the insurance industry responded to CCAs is
an important area for future research.
Despite these limitations, our results are the first in the literature to
evaluate the effects of CCAs and should provide valuable information to
policymakers considering similar adoptions (as occurred as recently as 2013 in
North Carolina). In doing so, our results provide novel new empirical evidence

28

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

supporting a central tenet of tort reform that parties take more care and also show
that industry-specific tort reforms can affect market-wide outcomes.

29

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ater, Itai and Oren Rigbi (2007). “Price Control in Franchised Chains: The Case
of McDonald’s Dollar Menu,” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy
Research Discussion Paper No. 06-22.
Avraham, Ronen (2014). “Database of State Tort Law Reforms, 5th Edition”.
Accessed at: http://www.utexas.edu/law/faculty/ravraham/dstlr.html on
September 30, 2014.
Avraham, Ronen, Leemore Dafny, and Max Schanzenbach (2012). “The Impact
of Tort Reform on Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Premiums,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 28(4): 657-686.
Born, Patricia, W. Kip Viscusi, and Tom Baker (2009). “The Effects of Tort
Reform on Medical Malpractice Insurers’ Ultimate Losses,” Journal of
Risk and Insurance, 76(1): 197-219.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much
Should We Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.
Born, Patricia H., and W. Kip Viscusi (1998). “The Distribution of the Insurance
Market Effects of Tort Liability Reforms,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics, pp. 55-100.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller (2008). “BootstrapBased Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414-427.
Cawley, John (2004). “The Impact of Obesity on Wages,” Journal of Human
Resources, 39(2): 451-474.
Cawley, John and Richard Burkhauser (2008). “Beyond BMI: The Value of More
Accurate Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research,”
Journal of Health Economics, 27(2): 519-529.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer (2004). “An Economic
Analysis of Adult Obesity: Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System,” Journal of Health Economics, 23: 565-587.

30

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Courtemanche, Charles (2009). “Rising Cigarette Prices and Rising Obesity:
Coincidence or Unintended Consequence?” Journal of Health Economics,
28(4): 781-798.
Courtemanche, Charles, Josh Pinkston, Christopher Ruhm, and George Wehby
(2014). “Can Changing Economic Factors Explain the Rise in Obesity?”
working paper.
Courtemanche, Charles, Josh Pinkston, and Jay Stewart (2014). “Adjusting Body
Mass for Measurement Error with Invalid Validation Data,” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19928.
Courtney, Brooke (2006). “Is Obesity Really the Next Tobacco? Lessons
Learned from Tobacco for Obesity Litigation,” Annals of Health Law,
15(1): 61-106.
Currie, Janet, Stefano DellaVigna, Enrico Moretti, and Vikram Pathania (2010).
“The Effect of Fast Food Restaurants on Obesity and Weight Gain,”
American Economic Journal – Economic Policy, 2: 32-63.
Currie, Janet and Bentley McLeod (2008). “First Do No Harm? Tort Reform and
Birth Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 795-830.
Evich, Helena B. (2014). “The plot to make Big Food pay,” Politico article,
February
12,
2014.
Available
here:
http://www.politico.com/story/2014/02/food-industry-obesity-health-carecosts-103390.html (accessed March 4, 2015).
Fletcher, Jason, David Frisvold, and Nathan Tefft (2010). “The effects of soft
drink taxes on child and adolescent consumption and weight outcomes,”
Journal of Public Economics, 94(11): 967-974.
Frakes, Michael (2013). “The Impact of Medical Liability Standards on Regional
Variations in Physician Behavior: Evidence from the Adoption of
National-Standard Rules,” American Economic Review, 103(1): 257-76.
Gruber, Jonathan and Michael Frakes (2006). “Does falling smoking lead to
rising obesity?,” Journal of Health Economics, 25: 183-197.
Hartenstein, Meena (2010). “McDonald’s ordered to pay ex-employee $17,500
for 65 pounds he gained on the job in Brazil,” New York Daily News

31

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

article,
October
28,
2010.
Available
here:
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/mcdonald-ordered-pay-exemployee-17-500-65-pounds-gained-job-brazil-article-1.192584 (accessed
December 4, 2014).
Jones, Norah Leary (2005). “The Illinois Commonsense Consumption Act: End
of the Road for Fast Food Litigation in Illinois?” Loyola University
Chicago Law Journal, 36(3): 983-1044.
Kessler, Daniel and Mark McClellan (1996). “Do Doctors Practice Defensive
Medicine,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 353-390.
Mello, Michelle M., Eric B. Rimm, and David M. Studdert (2003). “The
McLawsuit: The Fast-Food Industry and Legal Accountability for
Obesity,” Health Affairs, 22(6): 207-216.
Orlando Sentinel (2005). “Keller has heart surgery,” October 20, 2005. Accessed
September 14, 2014 at: http://articles.orlandosentinel.com/2005-1020/news/MCFBRIEFS20_5_1_ric-keller-heart-arrhythmia-cheeseburger.
Restrepo, Brandon (2014). “Calorie Labeling in Chain Restaurants and Body
Weight: Evidence from New York,” Max Weber Programme Working
Paper 2014/05.
Silver, Diana, and James Macinko. State Health Policy Research Dataset
(SHEPRD): 1980-2010.
ICPSR34789-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor],
2014-09-24.
Sloan, Frank A. and Justin G. Trogdon (2004). “The Impact of the Master
Settlement Agreement on Cigarette Consumption,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 23(4): 843-855.
Sloan Frank A. and John H. Shadle (2009) “Is there empirical evidence for
defensive medicine? A reassessment” Journal of Health Economics,
28(2):481–91
Wilking, Cara L. and Richard A. Daynard (2013). “Beyond Cheeseburgers: The
Impact of Commonsense Consumption Acts on Future Obesity-Related
Lawsuits,” Food and Drug Law Journal, 68(3): 229-239.

32

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Viscusi, W. Kip and Patricia Born (2005). “Damages Caps, Insurability, and the
Performance of Medical Malpractice Insurance,” The Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 72(1): 23-43.
Viscusi, W. Kip, Richard J. Zeckhauser, Patricia Born, and Glenn Blackmon
(1993). “The Effect of 1980s Tort Reform Legislation on General Liability
and Medical Malpractice Insurance,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, vol.
6 (1993), pp. 165-186.

33

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Figure 1
Searches for ‘Cheeseburger Bill’ – Google Trends

34

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Figure 2
Event Study Estimates of CCAs on Population Average BMI

Month Eve nt S tudy for
BMI Adjus te d Eve ryone
.5

0

-.5
-2 4

-1 8

-1 2

-6
0
6
12
Months From C CA Ena ctme nt

35

18

24

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 1:
Timing of CCA Adoption
Citation
ALA. CODE §§ 6-5-730 to 6-5-736 (2012)
ARIZ. REV. STAT. ANN. §§ 12-683, 12-688 (2012)
COLO. REV. STAT. §§ 13-21-1101 to 13-21-1106 (West
2012)
FL
5/21/2004
5/21/2004
FLA. STAT. ANN § 768.37 (West 2012)
GA
5/14/2004
5/14/2004
GA. CODE ANN. §§ 26-2-430 to 26-2-436 (West 2102)
ID
4/2/2004
7/1/2004
IDAHO CODE ANN. §§ 39-8701 to 39-8706 (2012)
IL
7/30/2004
1/1/2005
ILL. COMP. STT. ANN 43/1 to 43/20 (West 2012)
IN
3/17/2006
7/1/2006
IND. CODE ANN. §§ 34-30-23-1 to 34-30-23-3 (West 2012)
KS
4/15/2005
-KAN. STAT. ANN. § 60-4801 (2012)
KY
3/8/2005
-KY. REV. STAT. ANN §§ 411.600 to 411.640 (West 2012)
LA
6/2/2003
6/3/2003
LA. REV. STAT. ANN § 9:2799.6 (2012)
ME
6/9/2005
-ME. REV. STAT. ANN. tit. 14, § 170 (2012)
MI
10/7/2004
10/7/2004
MICH. COMP. LAWS ANN. § 600.2974 (West 2012)
MO
6/25/2004
1/1/2005
MO. ANN. STAT. § 537.595 (West 2012)
ND
3/3/1/2005 3/31/2005
N.D. CENT. CODE §§ 19-23-01 to 19-23-03 (2012)
OH
-4/7/2005
OHIO REV. CODE ANN. § 2305.36 (West 2012)
OK
5/22/2009
11/1/2009
OKLA. STAT. ANN. tit. 76, §§ 34 to 37 (West 2012)
OR
7/27/2005
-OR. REV. STAT. ANN. § 30.961 (West 2012)
SD
3/9/2004
-S.D. CODIFIED LAWS §§ 21-61-1 to 21-61-4 (2012)
TN
4/30/2004
7/1/2004
TENN. CODE ANN. § 29-34-205 (West 2012)
TX
6/18/2005
6/18/2005
TEX. CIV. PRAC. & REM. CODE ANN. §§ 138.001 to
138.004 (Vernon 2012)
UT
3/19/2004
5/3/2004
UTAH CODE ANN §§78b-4-301 to 78B-4-306 (West 2012)
WA
3/26/2004
6/10/2004
WASH. REV. CODE ANN. § 7.72.070 (West 2012)
WI
-3/28/2008
WIS. STAT. ANN. § 895.506 (West 2012)
WY
2/24/2005
-WYO. STAT. ANN. §§ 11-47-101 to 11-47-103 (2012)
Source: Wilking & Daynard (2013). This list excludes Minnesota which passed a CCA that was
subsequently vetoed by its Governor in 2011. It also excludes North Carolina which adopted a
CCA that did not take effect until October 2013, after the end of our sample period.
AL
AZ
CO

Enacted
-4/8/2004
5/17/2004

Effective
5/23/2012
-5/17/2004

36

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 2:
Descriptive Statistics, 2000-2012 BRFSS Data
(1)
Full sample

(2)
Individuals in
states that ever
adopt a CCA

(3)
Individuals in
states that
never adopt a
CCA

0.41
3.67

0.40
3.59

0.42

0.75

0.75

0.75

27.61
0.02
0.34
0.36
0.18
0.07
0.03

27.70
0.02
0.33
0.36
0.18
0.07
0.03

27.52
0.02
0.34
0.37
0.18
0.07
0.03

0.51
45.99
0.12
0.30
0.27

0.51
46.06
0.12
0.31
0.28

0.51
45.92
0.13
0.28
0.26

0.58
0.10
0.03
0.04
0.14

0.59
0.10
0.02
0.03
0.11

0.56
0.10
0.04
0.04
0.18

Variable

Weight Intentions
Trying to lose weight
# servings of fruits and vegetables per
day
Any exercise last month
Weight Outcomes
BMI
Underweight (BMI: less than 18.5)
Normal weight (BMI:18.5 - 24.9)
Overweight (BMI: 25.0 to 29.9)
Obese (BMI: 30.0 & above)
BMI > 35
Class-3 obesity (BMI > 40)
Demographics
Female
Age
Less than high school degree
High school degree
Some college
BA or more
Married
Black
Asian
Other race
Hispanic
Weighted means.

37

3.76

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 3:
CCAs Induced Modest Improvements in Weight-Related Health Investments among Heavy Individuals
BRFSS 2000-2012
Sample is 

Trying to lose weight (avg )
CCA
R squared
N
# fruit/veggie per day (avg )
CCA
R squared
N
Exercised past month (avg )
CCA
R squared
N

(1)
Full sample

(2)
Under
weight
BMI<18.5

.42
0.009
(0.019)
.05
590653

.03
0.008
(0.023)
.06
9669

(3)
Normal
Weight
18.5≤BMI<
25
.20
-0.018
(0.013)
.08
191266

(4)
Overweight

(5)
Obese
30≤BMI<35

(6)
Severe
Obese
35≤BMI<40

(7)
Class III
Obese
40≤BMI

25≤BMI<30
.46
-0.001
(0.013)
.09
188779

.65
0.040**
(0.013)
.05
87925

.72
-0.001
(0.014)
.04
31517

.77
0.033
(0.025)
.04
15076

3.676
0.058**
(0.028)
.05
2339201

3.678
0.113
(0.113)
.07
33913

3.862
0.061
(0.042)
.05
679503

3.668
0.130***
(0.033)
.05
752056

3.533
0.063
(0.0654)
.05
387990

3.441
0.0014
(0.051)
.04
149813

3.380
0.246**
(0.105)
.05
76680

.74
-0.005
(0.004)
.08
4404754

.66
-0.003
(0.023)
.09
63149

.80
-0.008
(0.006)
.08
1260866

.77
-0.004
(0.007)
.08
1414696

.70
-0.001
(0.006)
.07
737495

.63
0.010
(0.009)
.08
285528

.54
-0.012
(0.13)
.08
146694

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Results are from linear probability models and use BRFSS sampling weights.
All models include controls for individual demographic characteristics (age, gender, race, education level, marital status); state, month, and
year fixed effects; linear state-specific time trends; soda and cigarette taxes; menu labelling laws; complete streets laws; other tort-reforms;
state unemployment rates; and state demographic characteristics (fraction female, fraction black, Hispanic, and other races, fraction of
individuals of age 21 to 64 and 64 to 65, fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below the
federal poverty level). Standard errors clustered at the state level. All include weights provided by BRFSS.

38

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 4:
CCAs Had No Effects on Population Weight
BRFSS 2000-2012
Outcome is 

(1)
BMI

(2)
Pr(BMI≥18.5)

(3)
Pr(BMI≥20

(4)
Pr(BMI≥25)

(5)
Pr(BMI≥30)

(6)
Pr(BMI≥35)

(7)
Pr(BMI≥40)

Sample average 

27.88

.984

.954

.661

.299

.110

.038

0.004
(0.004)
.038
3,931,002

0.003
(0.002)
.026
3,931,002

0.001
(0.001)
.018
3,931,002

CCA

0.029
-0.001
0.000
0.000
(0.042)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.003)
R squared
.062
.009
.025
.065
N
3,931,002
3,931,002
3,931,002
3,931,002
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See notes to Table 3.

39

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 5:
CCAs Had No Systematic Effects on Fast Food or Other Food Prices
ACCRA/C2ER 2000-2012
Outcome is 

Average price 

(1)
McDonald’s
quarter
pounder with
cheese
2.52

(2)
Pizza Hut
medium
cheese pizza
11.01

(3)
Kentucky
Fried Chicken
thigh and
drumstick
1.18

CCA

(4)
Half gallon of
milk

(5)
Loaf of bread

(6)
Ten pound
sack of
potatoes

(7)
Grocery price
index

2.16

1.28

3.81

99.95

-0.028
-0.007
0.024
0.039
-0.024
-0.252***
-0.767
(0.027)
(0.086)
(0.017)
(0.031)
(0.018)
(0.060)
(0.839)
R-squared
.69
0.76
0.67
0.77
0.75
0.76
0.88
N
14938
14938
14938
14938
14938
14398
14398
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Each entry is from a separate model and shows the coefficient on the CCA
variable on the local price for the item at the top of each column. All models include controls for city and quarter fixed effects; linear cityspecific time trends; soda and cigarette taxes; menu labelling laws; complete street laws; other tort-reforms; and state unemployment rates; and
state demographic characteristics (fraction female, fraction black, Hispanic, and other races, fraction of individuals of age 21 to 64 and 64 to
65, fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below the federal poverty level). Standard
errors are clustered throughout at the state level. All include state population weights.

40

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 6:
Some Evidence that CCAs Increased Employment in Fast Food
QCEW 2000-2012
Industry is 
Number of establishments (avg )
CCA
R squared
N
Number of Employees (avg )
CCA
R squared
N
Average weekly wage (avg )
CCA
R squared
N

(1)
Limited-service
restaurants (fast-food)
3781.9
82.97
(79.18)
.99
662

(2)
Full-service
restaurants
3983.6
-20.19
(85.73)
.99
662

(3)
Grocery stores
689.7
11.01
(24.68)
.99
660

(4)
Gas station with
convenience store
1786.9
-.33.01
(46.43)
.99
660

65316.5
2908.49*
(1584.87)
.99
662

84469.62
1655.95
(1644.22)
.99
662

13763.27
321.87
(372.15)
.99
660

146682.5
-523.33
(409.95)
.99
660

246.83
-2.29
(1.89)
.98
662

300.31
-0.18
(2.00)
.99
662

894.26
10.84
(7.37)
.97
660

350.78
-1.46
(4.33)
.93
660

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Each entry is from a separate model and shows the coefficient on the CCA
variable on the outcome at the top of each panel (number of establishments, number of employees, and average weekly wage) for the industries
in each column (limited service restaurants, full service restaurants, grocery stores, and gas stations with convenience stores). All models
include controls for state and year fixed effects; linear state-specific time trends; soda and cigarette taxes; menu labelling laws; complete street
laws; other tort-reforms; and state unemployment rates; and state demographic characteristics (fraction female, fraction black, Hispanic, and
other races, fraction of individuals of age 21 to 64 and 64 to 65, fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more,
and fraction below the federal poverty level). Standard errors are clustered throughout at the state level. All include state population weights.

41

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

Table 7:
CCAs Increased Company-Owned and Reduced Franchise-Owned McDonald’s
UFOC/FDD 2000-2012
Outcome is 
(avg )

(1)

(2)

(3)

Total # McDonald’s in the state

# Company-Owned McDonald’s
in the state
36.43

# Franchise-Owned McDonald’s
in the state
232.65

269.07

CCA

2.27
11.16***
-8.891**
(2.64)
(3.62)
(3.86)
R squared
0.99
0.98
0.99
N
662
662
662
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Each entry is from a separate model and shows the coefficient on the CCA
variable. All models include controls for state and year fixed effects; linear state-specific time trends; soda and cigarette taxes; menu labelling
laws; complete street laws; other tort-reforms; and state unemployment rates, fraction female, fraction black, Hispanic, and other races, fraction
of individuals of age 21 to 64 and 64 to 65, fraction of individuals with high school degree and with some college or more, and fraction below
the federal poverty level). Standard errors are clustered throughout at the state level. All include state population weights.

42

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

APPENDIX A
Sample Commonsense Consumption Act (Missouri)
TITLE 36. STATUTORY ACTIONS AND TORTS (Chs. 521-538)
CHAPTER 537. TORTS AND ACTIONS FOR DAMAGES
COMMONSENSE CONSUMPTION FUND
§ 537.595 R.S.Mo. (2014)
§ 537.595. Citation -- definitions -- immunity from liability for claims relating to
weight gain or obesity, when, exceptions -- petition, contents -- effective date
1. This section may be known as the "Commonsense Consumption Act".
2. As used in this section, the following terms mean:
(1) "Claim", any claim by or on behalf of a natural person, as well as any
derivative or other claim arising therefrom asserted by or on behalf of any other
person;
(2) "Generally known condition allegedly caused by or allegedly likely to
result from long-term consumption", a condition generally known to result or to
likely result from the cumulative effect of consumption and not from a single
instance of consumption;
(3) "Knowing or willful violation of federal or state law", that:
(a) The conduct constituting the violation was committed with the intent to
deceive or injure consumers or with actual knowledge that such conduct was
injurious to consumers; and
(b) The conduct constituting the violation was not required by regulations,
orders, rules, or other pronouncements of, or statutes administered by, a federal,
state, or local government agency;
(4) "Other person", any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society, joint-stock company, or any other entity, including any
governmental entity or private attorney general.
3. Except as exempted in subsection 4 of this section, a manufacturer, packer,
distributor, carrier, holder, seller, marketer, retailer, or advertiser of a food, as
defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(f)), as
amended, but shall not include alcoholic beverages, or an association of one or
more such entities shall not be subject to civil liability under any state law,
including all statutes, regulations, rules, common law, public policies, court or
administrative decisions or decrees, or other state actions having the effect of law,

43

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

for any claim arising out of weight gain, obesity, or a health condition associated
with weight gain or obesity.
4. The provisions of subsection 3 of this section shall not preclude civil
liability where the claim of weight gain, obesity, health condition associated with
weight gain or obesity, or other generally known condition allegedly caused by or
allegedly likely to result from long-term consumption of food is based on:
(1) A material violation of an adulteration or misbranding requirement
prescribed by statute or regulation of the state of Missouri or the United States
and the claimed injury was proximately caused by such violation; or
(2) Any other material violation of federal or state law applicable to the
manufacturing, marketing, distribution, advertising, labeling, or sale of food,
provided that such violation is knowing and willful, and the claimed injury was
proximately caused by such violation. The provisions of subsection 3 of this
section shall not preclude civil liability for breach of express contract or express
warranty in connection with the purchase of food.
5. In any action exempted under subdivision (1) or (2) of subsection 4 of this
section, the petition initiating such action shall state with particularity the
following: the statute, regulation, or other state or federal law that was allegedly
violated, the facts that are alleged to constitute a material violation of such statute
or regulation, and the facts alleged to demonstrate that such violation proximately
caused actual injury to the plaintiff. In any action exempted under subdivision (2)
of subsection 4 of this section, the petition initiating such action shall also state
with particularity facts sufficient to support a reasonable inference that the
violation occurred with the intent to deceive or injure consumers or with the
actual knowledge that such violation was injurious to consumers. For purposes of
applying this section the pleading requirements under this section are deemed part
of state substantive law and not merely procedural provisions.
6. In any action exempted under subsection 4 of this section, all discovery and
other proceedings shall be stayed during the pendency of any motion to dismiss
unless the court finds upon the motion of any party that particularized discovery is
necessary to preserve evidence, resolve the motion to dismiss, or to prevent undue
prejudice to that party. During the pendency of any stay of discovery under this
subsection and unless otherwise ordered by the court, any party to the action with
actual notice of the allegations contained in the petition shall treat all documents,
data compilations, including electronically recorded or stored data, and tangible
objects that are in the custody or control of such party that are relevant to the
allegations as if they were the subject of a continuing request for production of
documents from an opposing party under the Missouri rules of civil procedure.

44

Effects of Tort Reform for Fast Food

7. The provisions of this section shall apply to all covered claims pending on
or filed after January 1, 2005, regardless of when the claim arose.
HISTORY: L. 2004 H.B. 1115 § 537.900
NOTES:
EFFECTIVE 1-1-05

45

