NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN AND NATIVE SKILLED WORKERS:
WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM H-1B LOTTERIES?
Giovanni Peri
Kevin Shih
Chad Sparber
Working Paper 21175
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21175

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

I have received funding as PI in the last 2 years from the UC Davis Interdisciplinary Frontier in Humanities
and Art Grant. I have received funding in the last 2 years as co-PI from a Volkswagen Foundation
Grant. Kevin Shih acknowledges funding from the NBER Predoctoral fellowship in high skill immigration.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21175.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Foreign and Native Skilled Workers: What Can We Learn from H-1B Lotteries?
Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber
NBER Working Paper No. 21175
May 2015
JEL No. F22,J61,O33,R10
ABSTRACT
In April of 2007 and 2008, the U.S. randomly allocated 65,000 H-1B temporary work permits to foreign-born
skilled workers. About 88,000 requests for computer-related H-1B permits were declined in each of
those two years. This paper exploits random H-1B variation across U.S. cities to analyze how these
supply shocks affected labor market outcomes for computer-related workers. We find that negative
H-1B supply shocks are robustly associated with declines in foreign-born computer-related employment,
while native-born computer employment either falls or remains constant. Most of the correlation between
H-1B supply shocks and foreign employment is due to rationing that varies with a city's initial dependence
upon H-1B workers. Variation in random, lottery-driven, unexpected shocks is too small to identify
significant effects on foreign employment in the full sample of cities. However, we do find that random
rationing affects foreign employment in cities that are highly dependent upon the H-1B program. Altogether,
the results support the existence of complementarities between native and foreign-born H-1B computer
workers.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
Kevin Shih
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
kyshih@ucdavis.edu

Chad Sparber
Department of Economics,
Colgate University,
13 Oak Drive,
Hamilton, NY, 13346.
csparber@mail.colgate.edu

1

Introduction

Access to foreign talent has long been considered one of the key ingredients for U.S. scientific and technological
success. Many studies have noted that U.S. global leadership in science and technology heavily depends upon
foreign-born workers who are responsible for a large share of U.S. innovation (measured in Nobel laureates,
patents, or journal articles, for example).1 But do these foreign workers crowd out natives from desirable
jobs and push them into lower paid ones? Mixed results have been presented on this topic. While some
recent papers emphasize that foreign skilled workers have improved macroeconomic productivity and the
labor market opportunities for natives (Peri, Shih, and Sparber, 2015; Moser, Voena, and Waldinger, 2014)
others have argued that high-skilled foreign labor has displaced native-born Americans and reduced their
opportunities (Borjas and Doran, 2012).
This paper explores the short-term effects of high-skilled foreign labor flows on labor market outcomes for
college-educated natives at the metropolitan area level. We exclusively focus on computer-related workers2
and the labor market effects generated by the H-1B program — the primary channel through which computerrelated foreign-born workers enter the United States each year. The program is popular among employers
and many foreign-workers, but is opposed by individuals concerned that it might harm the job prospects
of native-born workers, especially those in computer-related occupations (e.g. Matloff, 2008; Hira, 2007).3
This paper focuses on this issue and makes important progress along two dimensions.
First, our identification strategy uses random variation in the allocation of H-1B workers across metropolitan areas in the U.S. resulting from the H-1B lotteries of 2007 and 2008. The number of new H-1B applications filed in the first month of acceptance far exceeded the 65,000 annual limit of available permits in those
years. The U.S. government responded by holding a lottery to allocate permits. Applications submitted
by April 3, 2007 and April 7, 2008 were put in a common pool during their respective years. In each year,
65,000 applicants were randomly selected. This produced a random shock to the supply of H-1B workers —
some cities were successful in the lottery and received many of the workers they requested, while other cities
1 See

for instance Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), and Peri (2007).
occupations” are those defined as such by the DOT classification found in the Labor Certification
Applications for the H-1B program. They include Census occupations Computer-System Analyts, Computer Scientists, and
Software Developers and Programmers of Numerically Controlled machines (IPUMS occ1990 codes 64, 229, and 233).
3 See Peri et al. (2014) for a similar discussion in the non-academic literature.
2 “Computer-related

2

received fewer workers than anticipated. Our methodology exploits this lottery-induced shock.
Second, we recognize that the effects from H-1B restrictions operate through two channels. One is an
“average rationing” effect. Cities that are heavily dependent upon foreign-workers might feel the effects of
national-level rationing more acutely than those hiring a small percentage of foreign employees. That is,
cities in which foreign workers represent a large share of employment will have a large potential flow of
workers who are immediately affected by changes in federal policy. The other channel is an “unexpected
shock” effect above and beyond this average rationing channel. That is, cities might expect to receive a
specific number of foreign-born workers given national rationing rates and city-level dependence upon the
H-1B program, but the actual number of H-1B workers deviated from this expectation for random reasons
during lottery years.
What makes our paper’s innovations particularly important is that they help to reconcile results from the
previous literature in three important ways. First, the majority of scholarly articles analyzing the impact
of the H-1B program on employment and wages (Peri, Shih, and Sparber, 2015), innovation (Kerr and
Lincoln, 2010), or firm sales and total factor productivity (Ghosh, Mayda, and Ortega 2014) tend to identify
the consequences of the first channel’s variation in foreign dependency. They rely on pre-existing variation
in demand for foreign skilled workers across labor markets (metropolitan areas) or firms interacted with
aggregate flows of skilled immigrants affected by changes in policy (the cap of new H-1B issuances allowed).
An unavoidable objection to this approach is that large foreign-dependence could be systematically associated
with other features affecting productivity and labor demand. The presence of persistent unobserved demand
shocks for highly skilled workers, possibly correlated with dependence on foreign-born workers, could generate
a positive spurious correlation between outcomes of foreign and native-born skilled workers that bias the
estimates obtained with this method. This limitation therefore muddles clean identification of the effects of
policy restrictions. By instead relying upon random variation generated by an H-1B lottery, we come closer
to using a truly exogenous source of variation. Importantly, we largely support previous work by finding
that negative H-1B shocks are associated with native and foreign-born employment losses.
Second, we improve upon past methods by identifying the impact of the unexpected supply shocks. Such
shocks exhibit very small variance at the city level, thus making it difficult to identify effects from this

3

channel. However, following previous literature that emphasizes how only highly dependent firms and labor
markets are affected by H-1B policy variation, we also explore heterogeneity of effects across cities. We find
that unexpected losses in H-1B workers reduce foreign and native employment for cities highly dependent
upon H-1B workers, but not for the full sample of cities. This result complements work by Ghosh, Mayda
and Ortega (2014) who find that H-1B restrictions negatively affect outcomes for firms that are in the top
quintile of H-1B employers.
Third, our results are helpful in understanding important related work by Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2014),
who also exploit random H-1B variation. Our framework is based on data from a broad cross-section of cities
during fiscal years (FYs) 2008 and 2009 when all cap-dependent H-1B permits were distributed by lottery.
This ensures external validity by including all firms relying upon the H-1B program in those years. Doran,
Gelber, and Isen (2014) exclusively rely on the small cross-section of firms during FYs 2006 and 2007 whose
desired employees submitted an H-1B application on the day the cap was reached. Only a small fraction of
H-1B permits (about 4-5%) were distributed by lottery in those years. While the authors’ firm-level data
provide an excellent and important step toward using exogenous data variation, the reliance upon a subset
of H-1B participants, small shocks at the firm level, weak power in the impact of shock on foreign-labor
supply, and external validity challenges are significant limitations of their approach.
Our analysis is based on a simple empirical model. We regress city-level employment and wage growth
rates for foreign and native-born, college-educated, computer-related workers on negative H-1B supply shocks
experienced by those cities. The outcome variables are taken from the Census and American Community
Survey (ACS). We calculate these labor market outcomes in years 2005 (pre-lottery) through 2011 (3 years
after the second lottery). The more innovative aspect of our analysis lies in the calculation of the explanatory
variable. It is a measure of excess demand for foreign labor that is driven by exogenous supply shocks, and
it is calculated as the difference between the desired number of new H-1B workers and the lottery allocation
of permits. This requires the merger of two datasets. The first source comes from publicly-available Labor
Condition Applications (LCAs). Firms wishing to hire an H-1B worker must first file an LCA stating the
nature of the work. Since this data identifies job vacancies directed by employers to foreign workers, it
serves as a measure of foreign labor (H-1B) demand. Foreign individuals who then go on to apply for a

4

permit must submit an I-129 form. We acquired information from I-129 forms from United States Citizen
and Immigration Services (USCIS) through a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request. Only the I-129
records for lottery winners — those randomly selected for processing — are available. Thus, they serve as
our measure of capped labor supply. We aggregate these supply and demand figures at the city level and
calculate the negative H-1B supply shock as the number of unfilled jobs that were subject to the H-1B quota.
To establish the random and exogenous nature of the explanatory variable, we regress foreign-born
employment growth between 2000 and 2005/06 (before the lottery) on the negative H-1B shock. We find no
statistical evidence for a correlation between our explanatory variable and this pre-policy outcome, but we
must caution that point estimates and standard errors are large. We then proceed by examining whether
the net growth of foreign-born employment between 2005/06 and 2008/09, 2009/10, or 2010/11 (one, two,
or three years after the lottery) was affected by the random negative H-1B supply shock. The presence of a
significant correlation confirms that labor markets that were randomly denied the number of desired foreign
workers experienced reduced foreign employment growth. The randomness of the lottery facilitates causal
interpretation of our regression estimates. For a negative H-1B supply shock equal to one percentage point of
initial computer-related employment in the city, the growth rate of college educated foreign-born computer
workers was between 0.5 and 2 percentage points slower in that metropolitan area three to five years later.
Equivalently, this translates to about 0.7 foreign jobs lost for every unfilled H-1B position.
Our attention then turns to the impact of the H-1B supply shocks on the employment and wage growth
rates of college-educated, native-born, computer-related workers. Wage effects are usually small and insignificant. However, we also find that college-educated, computer-related, natives working in cities with larger
negative H-1B shocks exhibit slower employment growth. The effects are estimated with some noise, but the
point estimate is always negative and usually significant: a random negative H-1B shock of 1 percentage point
of initial employment results in an approximate 0.5 percentage point decline in the native college-educated
employment growth rate. That is, about 0.2 jobs for college-educated native-born computer workers were
lost for every unfilled H-1B position.
Interestingly and importantly, however, this result appears to be driven by differences in average rationing
that arises from the interaction of national-level policy and city-level H-1B dependency. The random unex-

5

pected shock component of H-1B supply across cities is much smaller and its effects are much less precisely
estimated. Only by restricting the analysis to cities that have the highest dependence on the H-1B program
do we see that random, unexpected, negative H-1B supply shocks reduce foreign-born employment growth
and, in turn, might cause a mild decline in the employment growth rate of native-born, college-educated,
computer workers.
Taken together, our results contradict the idea that by reducing H-1B permits in a labor market, employers
would increase their demand for native skilled workers and/or the wages paid to them. To the contrary, the
results suggest that foreign workers are complementary to native workers and/or stimulate the productivity of
natives in computer-related occupations. One might speculate about the mechanism at work: H-1B rationing
might reduce firm expansion; firms might have to cancel projects when a sufficient number of team members
are unavailable; productivity growth might suffer due to diminished skill complementarity. In any case, we
find no evidence that H-1B workers displace native-born computer-related workers in a local labor market.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the H-1B program and the 2007 and
2008 lotteries. Section 3 provides a simple framework to understand the effect of negative random supply
shocks of foreign workers on the demand for native workers. Section 5 describes the data, identification, and
power of the lottery in affecting supply. Section 6 presents our empirical framework and results. Section 7
discusses the advantages and limits of our approach and relates our findings to other recent studies in this
area. Section 8 translates our results into foreign and native jobs lost due to restrictive H-1B limits. Section
9 concludes.

2

The H-1B Program and the 2007 and 2008 Lotteries

The H-1B program provides temporary permits to foreign-born skilled-workers in specialty-occupations wishing to work in the United States.4 The permit can be approved for up to a three-year period and can be
renewed to a maximum of six total years. Five aspects of the H-1B program are important in the context of
this paper.
4 The program has been studied by many papers in the immigration literature. See program descriptions in Clemens (2010),
Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2014), Kato and Sparber (2013), Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015), and Peri
et al. (2014).

6

First, the work permit has been subject to a cap (or quota) since its inception in 1990. Initially set
at 65,000 new issuances per fiscal year, the quota was not reached until 1997 and again in 1998. Congress
responded by raising the cap to 115,000 for 1999 and 2000, then to 195,000 for 2001 through 2003. 2001 also
marked the advent of a policy exempting employees of higher-education, non-profit, and government-research
organizations from the quota. Trends in increasing permit availability reversed in 2004 when the cap reverted
to 65,000, though 20,000 additional permits were granted for workers who earned a master’s degree or Ph.D.
from a U.S. institution. The H-1B quota on new H-1B issuances to people working at for-profit firms has
been reached before the end of each fiscal year ever since.
Second, Table 1 demonstrates that the final receipt date — the date on which USCIS has received more
H-1B applications than are available through the quota — occurred increasingly quickly from 2004 through
2009. Applications are accepted beginning on April 1, six months prior to the October 1 start of the federal
fiscal year. The cap for FY 2004 was reached almost a year after the first date of acceptance. For FY 2007,
the final receipt date was reached after two months. In 2007 and 2008, USCIS received more than 65,000
cap-bound applications within the first week of eligibility for FYs 2008 and 2009.
This popularity is important for the third relevant characteristic of the H-1B program. In principle, new
H-1B permits for employees of for-profit firms are distributed on a first-come first-served basis. Then all
applications received on the final receipt date are processed randomly until the quota has been met. Doran,
Gelber, and Isen (2014) exploit the randomness of the applications received on the August 10, 2005 and May
26, 2006 final receipt dates in their firm-level analysis. However, the speed with which people applied for
H-1Bs in April 2007 and 2008 led USCIS to distribute all cap-bound permits by lottery for fiscal years 2008
and 2009. Our methodology effectively uses the randomness in H-1B distributions that occurred in these
two years.
To exploit this randomness, we must rely on a fourth characteristic of the H-1B program: Trends in
program popularity changed firm behavior. A firm wishing to hire an H-1B worker must first file an LCA
with the department of labor describing the nature of the job. The form includes information on the prevailing
wage of the occupation, the wage to be paid to the prospective worker, where the work will occur, and the
beginning and end dates of the position. A worker wishing to secure an H-1B must submit an I-129 form

7

that is accompanied by an approved LCA. The permit, if approved, belongs to an employee. However, it is
only valid to work for the firm and location specified on the forms.
The rising popularity of the H-1B program altered firm behavior. Since an LCA cannot be filed more
than six months prior to intended employment, a firm wishing to hire a worker to begin work at the start
of the fiscal year might be expected to file an LCA on April 1 at the earliest. However, trends in H-1B
scarcity led firms to “predate” LCAs in 2007 and 2008. That is, firms filed LCAs in January through April
that specified a start date five to six months in the future, even though they knew that new H-1B workers
would only be eligible to work beginning on October 1. This process is advantageous in that all desired H-1B
workers would have an approved LCA in hand when applying for an H-1B on April 1. The disadvantage
is that the firm would lose one or more months of job approval at the end of the desired work period since
LCAs are applicable only up to a three year period.
Pre-dating behavior is important for our methodology because it allows us to measure demand for foreignborn skilled labor. There is no limit on the number of LCAs that a firm can file. Firms can file LCAs
throughout the course of the year because they can use approved LCAs to hire existing H-1B workers who
are exempt from quotas. Pre-dated LCAs, however, provide a sense of the demand for new H-1B workers in
lottery years. Figure 1 illustrates this behavior. Non-profit firms, whose employees are exempt from H-1B
caps, file roughly 13% of their LCAs in January through April with work start dates occurring five to six
months after LCA submission. This figure is constant from 2002 through 2011. For-profit firms, in contrast,
almost never adopted this behavior when H-1B permits were plentiful. As they became scarcer, firms began
pre-dating at such extreme levels that more than 40% of LCAs filed by for-profit firms were pre-dated in
2007 and 2008. Pre-dating was the only way for such firms to hire new H-1B workers in these years. As a
result, USCIS received roughly 120,000 and 160,000 cap-dependent I-129 H-1B applications in the first weeks
of acceptance in 2007 and 2008, respectively.5 USCIS randomly selected applications for processing until the
65,000 available permits were allocated. According to Clemens (2010), records for unselected applications
do not exist for these years.
The number of H-1B applications in April 2007 and 2008 was roughly double the number of available
5 See “USCIS Updates Count of FY 2008 H-1B Cap Filings,” US Citizenship and Immigration Services, April 10, 2007; and
“USCIS Runs Random Selection Process for H-1B Petitions,” US Citizenship and Immigration Services, March 31, 2008 (date
on press release is clearly wrong).

8

permits. There is no data on individuals who would have applied for an H-1B later in the year in the
absence of a quota. As noted, USCIS responded to rising H-1B popularity by randomly distributing permits
among individuals who applied in April. This lottery generated a random negative shock in the supply of
workers to firms and metropolitan areas. Our methodology examines the short term employment and wage
consequences for labor markets that randomly received rationing shocks.
The fifth and final characteristic of the H-1B program relevant to our study pertains to the occupational
composition of the program displayed in Figure 2. Although there is no statutory preferential treatment for
any particular occupation among the specialty-occupations recognized by the program, two thirds of capbound permits were for computer-related workers in 2007 and 2008. This is true whether one takes a firm’s
perspective (pre-dated LCAs filed by for-profit firms) or an individual’s (approved I-129 H-1B applications
that count toward the quota). This is particularly striking when considering that computer-related workers
accounted for just 3% of the urban workforce in 2005. Overall, the importance of the H-1B program for these
occupations encourages us to focus exclusively on computer-related work in our analysis. Note, however,
that trends indicate a massive rise in the popularity of the program for computer-related work leading up to
lottery years. This implies that we need to be careful about considering pre-trend behavior in our analysis.
Before thoroughly describing the data and conducting that analysis, however, we begin with a simple supply
and demand framework to provide context for the empirical model.

3

The Effects of a Negative Foreign Labor Supply Shock: A Framework

Our empirical analysis organizes data into metropolitan area cells and focuses on computer-related occupations — by far the largest group of H-1B applications. While we can generally think of foreign-born labor
supply as constrained in the short-term by the limits and quotas imposed by national policy, different labor
markets experience heterogeneous constraints due to their varied degree of reliance upon foreign workers
and, in 2007 and 2008, due to the randomness produced by the lotteries across labor markets.6
6 Note that firms experience heterogenous constraints much like cities do, and would provide an interesting alternative level of
analysis. One difference is that firms have a greater opportunity to respond to negative H-1B shocks by hiring other foreign-born
workers. For example, if a single firm receives a negative H-1B supply shock but the local market has a relatively large supply

9

Let us illustrate the potential effects of a negative supply shock on the wages and employment of native
workers in the same labor market (computer occupations in a metropolitan area) under two different sets of
assumptions. In the first case we assume that foreign and native computer workers are perfect substitutes.
Foreign workers have no effect on firm total factor productivity, but they are hired before native workers
due to lower cost per unit of productivity. In the second case we assume that foreign computer workers are
possibly complementary to native workers and/or that their presence has a positive productivity effect on
firms. These two effects are strong enough that increased foreign employment raises native productivity.
Figure 3 illustrates the first case. It represents the demand and supply for native (left panel) and foreignborn (right panel) computer workers in one market (metropolitan area). The two types of workers are
perfectly substitutable, and hence the demand for natives shifts one-for-one with foreign labor supply. In
particular, the vertical axis measures wages per unit of productivity for each type of worker. The demand
and supply for foreign computer workers are represented in the right panel and they cross at the point F0 .
Foreign-born supply is given by the maximum number of H-1Bs that can be obtained in that market. The
demand for native computer workers is obtained as the residual demand for a perfectly substitutable foreign
worker. Hence at the wage per unit of productivity corresponding to the point F0 , demand for natives will
be zero (reported on the left panel) and will increase as the wage decreases. The equilibrium employment
and wage for native workers will be at N0 — the crossing point with the native supply of computer workers
0
0
— with native wages per unit of productivity equal to wN
and employment of natives at EN
.

Now consider an identical market in which lottery rationing denies D H-1B workers (permits). That
market will have a foreign labor supply equal to F − D and the equilibrium would be at F1 . This equilibrium
implies a corresponding shift up by the amount D of the residual demand for native computer workers, which
is now represented by the line DN1 . The shock implies higher native employment and wages if the labor
supply is upward sloping, or only higher native wages if the labor supply is vertical due to tight labor markets
close to full employment (as was possibly the case in 2007). Figure 3 implies that the larger is the number of
 1

0
denied permits (D) relative to unconstrained supply, the larger native employment EN
and wages
− EN
of previously hired H-1B workers (or is less constrained by the shock overall), then a firm could respond to lottery losses by
hiring existing foreign workers from other firms. In contrast, if a whole local labor market is restricted then it would represent
a complete reduction in the local supply of foreign computer-related workers. We focus our attention on this latter city-wide
shock.

10

 1

WN − WN0 would be relative to a market that did not receive rationing. This stems from the fact that the
demand for natives is a residual from the demand for foreign labor in the case of perfect substitution.
A very different scenario is depicted in Figure 4. In this case foreign and native computer workers are
not perfect substitutes. Instead, they are differentiated types of labor (different inputs in production) with
the native-born labor market characterized in the left panel and the foreign-born labor market depicted in
the right panel. In this case the demand for native computer workers, DN1 (EF ), is a function of foreign
employment (EF ) but not in a residual way. In particular, it could be an increasing function of foreign
labor either because the two workers are complementary or because foreign workers increase the overall
productivity of firms and their native-born employees. Alternatively, if native and foreign-born computer
workers are neither complements nor substitutes but are instead segmented types of workers, a change in
foreign employment might have no effect on native-born employment (no native demand shift).
Figure 4 illustrates the case of complementarity — a negative foreign labor supply shock equal to D
produces a decline (left shift) in the demand for natives and possibly in their wages. The equilibrium for
labor markets with larger negative demand shocks (D) implies lower native-born employment and wages.
Differences in underlying assumptions cause theoretical models to generate opposing predictions for the
native wage and employment consequences of foreign labor supply shocks. However, observed H-1B lottery supply shocks vary substantially across metropolitan areas, and this allows us to empirically identify
whether foreign skilled workers substitute for natives or complement them. In the former case, native workers
promptly replace foreign ones when H-1B rationing occurs. In the latter, foreign labor enhances the productivity of natives so that rationed H-1B supply does not help, but potentially hurts, native employment and
wages.

4

Data and Measuring the H-1B Negative Supply Shock

Our data are from multiple sources. H-1B lottery information comes from 2007 and 2008 LCA and I-129
data. Wage and employment information comes from the Census and American Community Surveys from
2000 through 2011.
Our main explanatory variable is a measure of excess demand for H-1B workers driven by exogenous
11

supply shocks. Measures of firm demand for foreign labor come from U.S. Department of Labor LCA data
on employer name, location (city and zip code), occupation, number of H-1B employees requested, the filing
date, work start date, and work end date by year. As noted above, we infer whether the firm is trying to
hire a cap-dependent worker in 2007 and 2008 from these data by accounting for the pre-dating behavior.
Namely, we assume that LCAs filed by for-profit firms in January through April with a work start date five
to six months in the future represent demand for cap-dependent H-1B workers for the following fiscal year.
Measures of realized H-1B labor supply come from I-129 H-1B applications, which we acquired from the
USCIS through a FOIA. Available information includes employer name, location (city and zip code), occupation, and several individual characteristics of the applicant. Forms also provide more explicit indicators
for whether a person would count toward the H-1B quota. First, we limit our study to individuals who file
I-129 petitions in April, and assume that the applicants are to begin work in the following fiscal year (i.e.,
in October). Second, we classify cap-exempt workers as those who work for colleges, universities, and other
non-profit firms; applicants for H-1B extensions, renewals, and job changes; and citizens of countries effectively exempt from H-1B limits due to special bilateral trade agreements (Australians, Canadians, Chileans,
Mexicans, and Singaporeans).
We compute city-level (c) excess demand for foreign labor (Dc ) by first removing H-1B workers that were
not subject to the cap (Xc ) from the total LCAs filed (Lc ), and then subtracting the cap-dependent H-1Bs
awarded to the city (Hc ). We combine data for 2007 and 2008 to create a single cumulative measure of
excess demand for 238 cities whose scale and variation combine those two lotteries.7 Importantly, this excess
demand measure varies across cities due to supply shocks caused by different levels of H-1B rationing and
the randomness of the lottery.
Clearly, an equivalent number of H-1B permits denied to two cities will represent a much larger shock
for small markets than for large ones. In order to better capture the impact and magnitude of this shock
on the local market, we scale the absolute measure of excess demand (i.e., the number of jobs unfilled due
to rationing) by pre-lottery (2005/06) total computer-related employment (Emplc,2005/06 ; we average the
2005/06 data in the ACS to have a larger and more reliable sample). Hence, our key explanatory variable
7 As noted, we do this only for computer-related occupations given the importance of the H-1B program for this type of
work. Unfortunately, extending the analysis to other fields results in small occupation-by-metropolitan area cells with large
measurement error, so we elect not to pursue that avenue.

12

— defined in Equation (1) — measures normalized excess demand (dc ), or equivalently, the negative supply
shock as percentage of initial employment.

dc =

Dc
Lc − Xc − Hc
=
Emplc,2005/06
Emplc,2005/06

(1)

These normalized negative supply shocks vary significantly across cities, with a standard deviation equal
to 0.09 (i.e., 9 percentage points of initial employment). The dc term captures the total rationing effect of
the lottery on different labor markets. Later sections will decompose it into two components: One is linked
to average rationing, which varies across cities due to heterogenous dependence upon foregone workers.
That is, since cities maintain different levels of foreign labor demand (per unit of employment) the common,
national-policy-driven, percentage of job rationing will generate heterogeneous effects across cities. The other
component is due to random, unexpected, supply variation attributable to the lottery realization alone.
The dependent variables in our regressions use the 2000 5% Census and 2005-2011 1% American Community Surveys to construct the growth in employment and wages for computer-related workers in a metropolitan area. Employment changes are calculated between 2005/06 and periods one, two, and three years past
the lottery (2008/09, 2009/10, and 2010/11, respectively).8 We select civilian employees age 18-65 who do
not live in group quarters, are not enrolled in school, and reside in metropolitan areas. Only those who
worked in the previous year, earned positive wages, and are currently employed full time (more than 39
weeks per year and 34 hours worked per week) are included. By creating this average wage and employment
growth at the metropolitan area level and merging it with our LCA and I-129 data, we can assess whether
the random negative employment shocks to local labor markets affected outcomes for native and foreign-born
workers in those markets.

5

Identification and Power

The primary interest of this paper is in analyzing the effect of foreign-labor shocks on the employment
and wage outcomes of native-born, college-educated, computer-related workers. In order for the results to
8 We

merge two years into single periods in order to create a more representative and larger sample of cities.

13

be interpreted as reasonably causal, we must first establish that our H-1B rationing variable is random
and/or unrelated to other shocks that could affect the dependent variables. We turn to both descriptive and
analytical data for this task.
One concern is that firms applying early in the H-1B cycle could be fundamentally different from other
firms. If, for example, the only firms (and cities) participating in the lottery were those that faced strong
economic pressure to act early, then the model will suffer from a selection bias. The 2007 fiscal year offers
suggestive evidence both for and against this possibility. The H-1B filing period in that year lasted 56
days (from April 1 through May 26, 2006). Figure 5 illustrates that in the beginning of the filing period,
roughly 55% of the cap-bound H-1B permits were awarded to computer-related workers while the rest went
to individuals in other occupations. This percentage rises during the first month of the application period
and stabilizes around 75-80% until the quota was met. If firms wishing to hire computer-related workers are
slower to submit LCAs and make job offers, then the very short filing period for FYs 2008 and 2009 could
create a further rationing of those jobs. However the very prominent pre-dating behavior documented above
implies that most companies, and certainly those most dependent on the H-1B program, were getting ready
to apply earlier due to the shorter period of availability.
Figure 6, on the other hand shows that the type of workers that firms hired, as measured by annual
salary, did not change much over approval date. This figure displays the median wage paid to approved
computer-related H-1B workers subject to the FY 2007 cap for each day of the filing period. Although a
large amount of dispersion is present and the median wage was somewhat higher for those workers hired on
the first day of the eligibility, the time profile appears relatively flat throughout the filing period. Moreover,
the (nominal) median wage for such workers was $55,000 in FY 2007. This compares closely to the $55,000
and $60,000 (nominal) median wages in FYs 2008 and 2009, suggesting that productivity of employees and
employers was comparable across years.
Regressions can provide more rigorous identification tests. One important check involves testing prelottery trends. If the negative supply shock is truly exogenous, it should be uncorrelated with the pre-lottery
growth of foreign-born college-educated workers in computer-related occupations. Consider the following

14

specification.
foreign-com puter-col lege
= β 0 + β pre−lottery · dc + εc
%∆Emplc,2000−2005/06

(2)

The explanatory variable is the normalized negative supply shock in a metropolitan area for computerrelated occupations (dc ) as defined in (1) and derived from the LCA and I-129 data. The dependent variable
is the growth rate of college-educated, foreign-born, computer-related employment in a metropolitan area
between 2000 and 2005/06 — that is, employment growth before the lottery years.
Panel A of Table 2 displays estimates of β pre−lottery . All regressions throughout this paper are estimated
with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Columns are differentiated by weighting conventions. Regressions are unweighted in the first column. The second column weights observations by H-1B dependence
(specifically, the number of LCAs filed in a city relative to its 2005/06 total computer-related employment).
Column 3 weights observations by the logarithm of this dependence.9 The results are encouraging in that
they do not find statistical evidence for a correlation between the random H-1B rationing supply shock and
pre-lottery foreign-employment growth. Though the point estimates are insignificant, two of them are quite
large with large standard errors, indicating some noise in the data.10
While the regressions of Panel A provide evidence for exogeneity, the regressions in Panel B explore
the power of the lottery-based H-1B variable in explaining foreign-born employment growth as specified
in equation (3). This model mimics that of equation (2) but replaces the dependent variable with foreignborn, college-educated computer-related, employment growth between 2005/06 and period t (combined years
2008/09, 2009/10, and 2010/11). We also include the lagged value of the dependent variable as a regressor
— as a way of controlling for potential lingering correlation with pre-lottery trends across cities.

foreign-col lege
foreign -col lege
= β 0 + β 1 · dc + β 2 · %∆Emplc,2000−2005/06
+ εc
%∆Emplc,2005/06−t

(3)

This model serves to verify the power of the lottery by assessing whether the variation in the lottery
9 The choice to weight observations is motivated by a desire to mitigate problems associated with potential measurement
error in LCA data. Logged H-1B dependence weights are less susceptible to influence from potential outliers.
1 0 Throughout this paper, we rely on regressions of pre-lottery foreign employment growth to examine the exogeneity of our
H-1B shock variable. The appendix discusses pre-lottery native employment growth regressions, which do find some correlation
that is driven by the dependency channel. This correlation does not appear among highly rationed cities. While this is
problematic for a fully causal interpretation of regression results, we will alleviate the problem by including pre-lottery growth
variables in all regressions that examine the main outcomes of interest.

15

results actually corresponds to a change in post-lottery college-educated, foreign-born, computer-related
employment growth within a city. Foreign-born substitutes for new H-1B workers exist, so it is possible
for firms to respond to H-1B denials by seeking alternative routes for hiring foreign labor. These might
include attracting existing H-1B workers from other labor markets, hiring recent foreign graduates from U.S.
colleges through the Optional Practical Training (OPT) program, bypassing the quota by sub-contracting to
a local non-profit lab, or hiring foreign-born workers with L-visas (provided the company has an international
presence). Hence, equation (3) provides a valuable check on whether the H-1B negative supply shocks are
significantly and negatively correlated with the post lottery growth of foreign-born college-educated workers
in computer-related occupations across cities. If this correlation is not present, then the policy instrument
has no power in moving the actual supply of foreign computer-related workers.
Notice also that if an unobservable positive demand shock in a city increases demand for H-1B workers,
other foreign workers, and native workers, it would produce a positive bias in the coefficient β 1 in (3)
and erroneously argue for substitutability between foreign and native workers.11 This is because increased
demand in January-April of the lottery year could raise the average size of rationing dc (by increasing the
variable Lc ) and increase native and foreign-born employment after the lottery. In contrast, if the main
variation of dc is driven by supply changes then we would observe a negative value of β 1 as increased H-1B
rationing would slow foreign employment growth.
Panel B of Table 2 shows that β 1 is significantly negative. Regressions are based on employment growth
one, two, and three years after the lottery. Estimates are presented for the three aforementioned weighting
schemes. The point estimate for each regression is negative, and it is significant in all but one case. A
negative H-1B shock in a city equal to one percentage point of employment caused a reduction in the collegeeducated, computer-related, foreign employment growth rate in that city between 0.5 and 2 percentage
points. The effect is smallest when weighting cells by H-1B dependence, but every specification demonstrates
a significant slowdown in foreign employment growth when cities experience a larger negative shock in the H1B lottery. Also, the negative effect seems to exhibit some reasonable non-permanent persistence: Two and
three years after the lottery, cities that lost the lottery still show a lower than normal cumulative foreign-born
1 1 The same is also true if d proxies for the unattractiveness of a city to foreign workers (i.e., the inability to hire such workers).
c
This would imply a negative correlation between dc and the foreign-born share in pre-lottery years, and no correlation after the
lottery.

16

employment growth.
We recognize that while H-1B allocation was entirely random, the construction of our normalized excess
demand variable is subject to criticism that omitted factors could be correlated with Lc − Xc . This would
call into question the true randomness of the explanatory variable. Despite these concerns, however, we
show that our normalized excess demand variable is reasonably exogenous and we control for pre-lottery
trends. Overall our estimates suggest that the size of a city’s H-1B shock exhibits no statistical correlation
with foreign-born hiring growth before the lottery. In contrast, foreign-born computer-related employment
grew at much slower rates after the lottery in cities receiving larger negative H-1B shocks. We now consider
whether these negative H-1B shocks (and slower foreign-born employment growth) were associated with
improved employment and wage growth for natives.

6

Empirical Specification and Results

We estimate equation (4) to analyze whether labor market outcomes for college-educated, native-born,
computer workers were affected by lottery-driven supply shocks (dc ).

native
native
%∆yc,2005/06−t
= β 0 + β 1 · dc + β 2 · %∆yc,2000−2005/06
+ εc

(4)

native
The dependent variable ∆yc,2005/06−t
uses ACS data to measure the growth rate of outcome y (alter-

natively employment or wages) for college-educated, native-born, computer-related workers in metropolitan
area c. Growth rates are calculated between the base period of 2005/06 and period t (alternatively 2008/09,
2009/10, and 2010/11). Our main explanatory variable, dc , measures excess demand for H-1B workers as a
percentage of pre-lottery total computer-related employment. Its value is driven by exogenous supply shocks,
and it can equivalently be described as the negative supply shock as a percentage of initial employment in
a metropolitan area for computer-related occupations, or as the total supply shock due to H-1B rationing.
The above analysis argued that it is reasonable to assume that dc is orthogonal to other unobserved determinants of %∆yc,2005/06−t captured by the random measurement error term εc . However, our regression also
native
to control for possible persisincludes the pre-lottery trend of the dependent variable, %∆yc,2000−2005/06

17

tence arising from past local labor market conditions. Under these assumptions, the Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) estimates of the coefficient β 1 consistently identify the causal effect of the negative supply shock on
native outcomes. To account for the fact that the variance of the outcomes and the exogenous regressor can
be different in small and large cells, we use robust standard errors and, in some specifications, we weight
observations by the size of cities’ H-1B dependence.

6.1

Baseline Effects on Native Employment and Wages

Table 3 shows the estimated effect (β 1 ) of the negative H-1B supply shock on the employment and wage
growth rate of college-educated, native-born, computer-related workers in a city. Panel A reports employment
outcomes, while Panel B describes wage consequences. Different rows display the lottery impact on the
cumulative growth of the dependent variable since pre-lottery period 2005/06 up to years 2008/09 (i.e., one
year after the lotteries), 2009/10 (two years), and 2010/11 (three years). Columns are distinguished by
alternative weighting mechanisms.
The top panel shows evidence that negative H-1B shocks reduce native employment. A random negative
shock to H-1B supply equal to 1 percentage point of initial employment is associated with an employment
growth rate reduction between 0.4 and 0.6 percentage points — an estimate between one third and one half of
the employment losses for foreign-born workers. No specification finds a positive and statistically significant
response to the negative random H-1B shock. All point estimates are negative. Hence these results are not
consistent with the hypothesis that H-1B workers displace similar native workers. Rather, the estimates
are consistent with the idea that cities that randomly won the opportunity to hire many H-1B workers
responded by hiring more native workers as well, potentially because they could guarantee a certain work
flow, undertake scheduled projects, or ensure that they could employ workers in specific jobs.
Wage results are in Panel B of Table 3. Weighted regressions uncover no evidence that larger negative
H-1B supply shocks are associated with significant changes in the wage growth rate one, two, and three years
after the lottery. Negative point estimates are found in unweighted regressions, but the coefficients are small
and barely significant. Altogether, negative H-1B shocks seem to have no significant effect on native wages
in the subsequent one to three years.12
1 2 Peri,

Shih, and Sparber (2015) uncover a positive relation between H-1B workers and native wages in the long run.

18

6.2

Decomposing H-1B Shocks

We now turn our attention to the important task of sharpening our identification and separating our explanatory variable dc into two parts: one that is more strictly random and another that is driven by the
interplay between average national-level lottery rationing and city-level reliance upon H-1B workers.
At the heart of the matter is that two different mechanisms generate variation in normalized excess
demand across cities. First, national-level policy rationed permits by approving, on average, about 42% of
requests. This disproportionately affected cities that employ a large number of H-1B workers as a share of
total city employment. This is largely the variation that research by Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Peri, Shih,
and Sparber (2015), and Ghosh, Mayda, and Ortega (2014) exploit. They find that cities (or firms) that
heavily used the H-1B program in the past and continue to maintain high demand suffer losses when the
federal government limits the total number of foreign-workers that can be hired. This rationing mechanism
is present every year, and it becomes more stringent when the total number of permits is reduced or when
the average demand for computer-related workers increases. Second, cities experience an additional and
unexpected shock during the lottery years. For completely random reasons, the lottery causes some cities to
receive more or fewer H-1B workers than was expected from national rationing rates. A way of describing
this is that local labor markets expect a rationing of permits proportional to the satisfied H-1B quota at
the national level, but they might also experience a random unexpected restriction to supply (that might be
positive or negative) in addition to this effect.
To separate these channels, first define the national H-1B winning percentage (W ) as in equation (5).
This expression simply calculates the national win rate as the aggregate sum of cap-bound H-1Bs awarded
divided by the sum of LCAs filed net of cap-exempt H-1B employees of for-profit firms.

W =

Hc

c

(Lc − Xc )

(5)

c

Second, by substituting this value into the expression defining city-level normalized excess foreign-labor
demand (dc ) in equation (1), one can compute the equivalent identity in equation (6) .

19

dc =

(1 − W ) · (Lc − Xc ) W · (Lc − Xc ) − Hc
+
Emplc,2005/06
Emplc,2005/06


 



(6)

du
c

G
dAV
c

This expression provides additional insight into the mechanisms through which H-1B shocks affect cityG
level labor supply. The first term in (6), dAV
, represents an average rationing effect in city c from the H-1B
c

distribution in 2007 and 2008. It multiplies a city’s dependence upon the H-1B program by the national-level
of H-1B rationing (or loss rate). As policy becomes more restrictive at the national level, this rationing effect
rises, thus limiting a city’s ability to hire foreign workers. As noted, this is effectively the channel of H-1B
policy analyzed in papers like Kerr and Lincoln (2010) and Ghosh, Mayda, and Ortega (2014). The second
term in (6), duc , represents the unexpected shock. The W · (Lc − Xc ) component reflects the number of new
H-1Bs a city could reasonably expect to receive given national policy, whereas Hc represents the number of
new cap-bound H-1Bs that a city actually receives. The difference therefore represents a random deviation
from average induced by variation in lottery success across cities. It is an unexpected shock that, when
positive, represents a random negative shock to hiring as many H-1B workers as expected.
G
and
The regressions in this subsection alter the specifications in (2), (3), and (4) by replacing dc with dAV
c

duc and allowing estimation of separate coefficients for these rationing and unexpected shock terms. Importantly, interpretation of the relative magnitudes of the coefficients has to account for the very different
standard deviations of the variables. In Table 4 we report the unweighted mean, standard deviation, and
90/10 percentile range of the total, average, and unexpected rationing variables. While the mean of unexpected rationing is 0 by construction, we notice that the key difference is that most of the variation in
G
the negative supply shock is driven by average rationing. The standard deviation of dAV
(0.096) is 12
c

times larger than the standard deviation for duc (0.008). Similarly, the 90/10 percentile range for the average
rationing (0.09) is ten times larger than for the unexpected rationing.
Figure 7 shows the histogram for the whole distribution of duc and we see that most of the mass corresponds
to shocks that are very small (between +/-0.005, i.e. half a percentage point of initial employment).13 This
clearly indicates that the purely random variation of the negative supply shock, while theoretically useful for
identifying a causal effect, may be far too small to produce empirically relevant responses (though attenuation
1 3 The

figure omits four outliers for illustration purposes.

20

at the aggregate local labor market level should be less severe than one would find doing an analysis at the
firm level).
G
and duc from specifications that are otherwise
Table 5 shows the coefficients on the variables dAV
c

identical to those estimated in Tables 2 and 3. Panel A provides an exogeneity test by regressing pre-lottery
foreign-born employment growth on the two components of rationing. Interestingly, we find no evidence
that the variation of average rationing is correlated with pre-trend foreign-born growth so that even if this
variable is not purely exogenous, we can at least argue that it is not significantly correlated with foreign-born
employment growth in previous years. As expected, the unexpected lottery shock is not correlated with pretrends. However, its correlation is estimated very imprecisely due to the very small variation of this term
relative to city employment. In particular, an unexpected negative random shock to a city’s H-1B supply
equal to 0.01 (one percentage point) of computer employment is associated with pre-lottery growth as large
as 29% or as low as -8% (this is roughly the 99% confidence interval). Hence, no pre-lottery outcome can be
ruled out.
Panel B explores whether shocks are correlated with subsequent foreign-born employment growth (between 2005/06 and 2008/09). Recall that Table 2 confirmed that overall negative lottery shocks were associated with decreased foreign-born employment growth. Table 5 can only detect a statistically significant effect
operating through the average rationing channel. This means that cities more heavily dependent upon the
H-1B program see foreign-born employment losses when national-level policy reduces the number of permits
available. This result complements previous work exploiting the combination between national-level policy
and city-variation in foreign-born dependence to examine the effects of immigration. However, the regressions find no statistically significant evidence of an effect from random unexpected cross-city shocks. That is,
when a city randomly receives fewer H-1B workers than expected from national rationing behavior, that city
and its firms do not respond by hiring fewer foreign workers overall. The magnitude of the estimates and of
the coefficients, however, emphasizes how this zero result is really arising from the lack of power rather than
from a small point estimate. The coefficient on the random shock has a standard error between 4.8 and 8.1,
which is too large to identify any reasonably sized effect. If we imagine for a moment that a reasonable effect
of rationing on foreign-born hires could be equal to a one percentage point reduction in foreign employment

21

growth for each percentage point of H-1B rationing (roughly the effect estimated using average rationing)
then even with the correct point estimate we could not rule out effects as large as +10 percentage points or
-10 percentage points. These responses are unreasonably large in magnitude.
In the bottom of Panel B we examine the employment and wage consequences for native-born workers.
The results again mirror previous findings. The native employment growth losses found in Table 3 appear
to occur through the average rationing channel. Comparing a city with zero rationing to one with an
average level results in reduced native college-educated computer-related employment growth between 2.1
(unweighted results) and 9.7 (dependence-weighted results) percentage points between 2005/06 and 2008/09
— a large effect that should be interpreted with some caution. Conversely, coefficients on the unexpected
component of the shock are again insignificant and their standard errors too large to say anything meaningful.
The final panel’s results for native wages fails to uncover any statistical effect, concurring with our earlier
results suggesting that the H-1B program does not have immediate wage consequences for natives.
Table 5 is informative as it emphasizes a trade-off in the use of lottery data to identify the impact of
H-1B rationing. First, while the city is an appropriate unit of analysis to find effects of changing the supply
of H-1B workers, we find that the variation introduced by the pure random realization of the lottery are too
small to identify any reasonable effect. Second, we establish that identification based on differences in H-1B
dependence across metropolitan areas is consistent with exogeneity of the shock to pre-trends, has predictive
power on foreign-born employment growth, and shows no crowding out of native employment or wages. In
fact it finds mild evidence of crowding-in. Third, since the random shock has very small variance (one tenth
of the variation of average rationing across cities) we might only be able to leverage that small variance on
some subset of cities with certain characteristics.
This partially motivates our next stage of analysis. Ghosh, Mayda and Ortega (2014) argue that H-1B
restrictions generate particularly strong and negative effects for firms highly-dependent upon H-1B workers.
This is consistent with our rationing results and makes it worth examining whether the effect of the unexpected shock also depends on how tightly a city is constrained by the average rationing. Table 6 explores
this by only selecting the 30 cities which have the highest levels of average rationing. Table 7 uses a slightly
different selection criteria and includes only the cities that have above average computer-related employment

22

in 2005/06 and above average H-1B demand according to LCA filings. Only 22 cities in the dataset meet
these criteria and are referred to as “Large H-1B Cities.”
Table 6 follows the same structure as Table 5 but displays average city-level rationing and the unexpected
lottery shock coefficients only for highly rationed cities. The top part of the panel confirms exogeneity of the
lottery by regressing pre-trends in foreign-born employment growth on the H-1B variables. The lottery is not
associated with pre-lottery behavior, though point estimates and standard errors on the unexpected shock
are very large.14 Results for post-lottery foreign-born employment growth are interesting. In two cases
the unexpected negative shock to H-1B supply is now significantly associated with reduced foreign-born
employment growth in the computer-sector of the city (though only at the 10% level). The magnitude and
significance of the coefficient on average rationing are similar to those in Table 4. Thus, for highly rationed
cities, the small unexpected negative H-1B supply shocks seem to be associated with decreases in foreign
employment growth.
As the lottery satisfies these exogeneity and power tests, we can look at the impact on native employment
and wages. Though no point estimate is significant, we find that even in this case all point estimates are
negative. This implies that a reduction in H-1B permits, either via average rationing or randomly, do not
produce any increase in native employment or wages, but are rather associated with insignificant declines in
both.15
Examination of large H-1B cities in Table 7 shows similar correlations of average and unexpected rationing
with native employment and wage growth. Cities experiencing larger negative supply shocks, either due to
dependence or to randomness, do not exhibit any positive change in employment and wages of natives.
Rather, they experience insignificant negative effects. However, for these cities the average rationing seems
somewhat correlated with pre-lottery foreign employment growth, reminding us that this component of the
variation may not be perfectly random. At the same time the unexpected shock is small and not strongly
correlated with the post-lottery change in foreign-born workers, hence the identification power of our strategy
for these cities is limited.
1 4 Note also that the standard deviation of unexpected shocks for small cities is just 0.0038, so the point estimate of a
one-standard deviation shock to such cities is 0.17.
1 5 This regression can, of course, be run for other groups of cities as well. For example, unreported regressions — analogous
to those of Table 6 — for both the second 30-city tier of rationing and the 30 least rationing cities find insignificant effects on
employment growth in all but one case.

23

7

Discussion: What Can We Learn from Cities, Firms, and H-1B
Lotteries?

This paper is the first to combine LCA data on labor demand and I-129 data on H-1B permits awarded
in 2007 and 2008 to measure excess demand for temporary foreign workers. The random assignment of all
H-1B permits due to the national lottery in those years allows us to exploit random variation in foreign labor
supply to analyze consequences for native employment and wages. We aggregate the data on computerrelated occupations to the metropolitan level. The resulting 238 cities serve as labor markets and units of
observations for our analysis. This methodology helps to improve upon, understand, and reconcile related
work in the literature in two important ways.
First, our work is directly comparable to previous papers that use local labor markets as units of analysis.
Such work generally finds complementarities between foreign and native-born labor. One advantage of our
approach is that we can identify effects through random, lottery-driven, exogenous changes in labor supply
(as opposed to using conventional instrumental variables methods). Another advantage is that we recognize
that H-1B rationing has two components. The component emphasized by previous studies (e.g., Kerr and
Lincoln, 2010; Ghosh, Mayda, and Ortega, 2014; and Peri, Shih, and Sparber, 2015) leverages the change in
aggregate work permits interacted with a city’s dependence on foreign workers. It is reasonable to expect
that a decrease in the total number of available H-1B permits would mostly affect cities (and firms) who
rely on foreign workers as a large percentage of employment. The other component is more clearly random
and attributable to the lottery realization. It records that some labor markets received a higher (or lower)
shock than expected.
Second, our work is comparable to Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2014), which also exploits random variation
to identify the effects of H-1B supply shocks. Their work does not find complementarity between foreign and
native-born labor. One advantage of our approach is that we rely on variation across cities, whereas they
exploit variation across firms. Their approach is potentially problematic if firms are able to compensate for
H-1B losses by drawing from local supply of other foreign workers such as existing H-1B workers or those
working on OPT status after graduating from local universities. It might not be so easy for cities to make

24

the same types of substitutions. Another advantage of our approach is that we use 2007 and 2008 H-1B data
when all permits were distributed by lottery. Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2014), by contrast, exploit random
variation from the 2005 and 2006 lotteries when only the small number of applications submitted on the last
day of receipt were subject to a lottery. Taken together, the variation in H-1B availability at the firm level
used by Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2014) is small. It is not surprising, therefore, that the authors find that
lottery-driven shocks fail to produce significant firm-level variation in the number of foreign workers hired
or of innovation output. It appears that losing one new H-1B worker could be easily offset by a firm with
a foreign local hire, at least in the context of the small lotteries of 2005 and 2006. That paper address the
policy question of whether there would be any significant employment and innovation effect at the firm level
of marginally relaxing (by a few thousand) the H-1B quota. Our analysis, instead, considers whether there
would be an effect at the local labor market level (on jobs and wages) of significantly relaxing the H-1B
quota.
Ultimately, our results suggest that H-1B workers do not crowd out, and may even crowd in, native-born
workers. Evidence is supported by our analysis of effects operating through both the average rationing and
unexpected shock channels.
From an average rationing perspective, our results clearly support prior evidence that average H-1B
rationing reduces foreign-employment and harms labor market opportunities for native-born workers. We
must acknowledge that this channel remains subject to the same limitations of past research. Namely, if
demand shocks are correlated with employment growth and H-1B dependence, then our model could suffer
from omitted variables bias. However, we also found that H-1B variation across cities driven by foreign
dependence exhibits no statistical correlation with pre-lottery foreign employment trends. Hence, there is no
prima facie evidence that an omitted variables bias would exist. Moreover, when controlling for pre-lottery
trends in the model, we find that negative shocks to H-1B supply exhibit insignificant or negative correlation
with subsequent native employment growth. Thus, crowding out does not exist, but crowding in might.
From an unexpected shock perspective, we find that this more purely random shock component of H1B rationing exhibits extremely small variation. A priori it has the potential to establish causality more
convincingly than past work, but the standard errors do not allow for identification of reasonable effects in

25

the full sample of cities. It is only when we restrict the sample to cities that are highly-dependent upon H-1B
workers that we find random, unexpected, negative H-1B shocks reduce foreign-born employment growth.
It is still not the case, however, that cities compensate for H-1B losses by hiring more native-born workers.
Thus, the model and data have the power to identify first-order foreign-born employment effects, and yet
we still find no evidence that H-1B workers crowd out native-born, college-educated, computer workers from
employment opportunities.

8

H-1B Rationing and Jobs

Before concluding, and keeping in mind the caveats about causality expressed above when using the normalized excess demand as a measure of the negative supply shock generated by H-1B rationing, we would
like to translate our coefficients into number of jobs lost. To do so, we multiply each city’s normalized excess demand (dc ) by the coefficients identified in the unweighted regressions of employment growth through
2008/09 in Tables 2 and 3 (-2.235 for foreign-workers; -0.510 for native-born workers). We then multiply
this value by pre-lottery employment to calculate the predicted change in the number of jobs for foreign and
native-born workers through 2008/09 (a year after the lottery). We do this for each city and then sum across
cities to obtain the aggregate effect on jobs. Finally, we divide these values by excess demand in order to
calculate the number of jobs lost per denied H-1B permit (that is, an unfilled LCA job opening).
Table 8 displays the figures for the 22 Large H-1B cities and the U.S. as a whole. Column 1 displays excess
demand. Columns 2 and 3 show the corresponding negative effect on foreign and native college-educated
computer-related employment. The final columns display the foreign and native jobs lost per denied H-1B
permit, or more precisely, per unit of excess demand.
The first row (in bold) demonstrates that, economy-wide, each denied H-1B permit corresponded to an
average of 0.7 fewer jobs for foreign-born workers by 2008/2009. This is very reasonable. Either because firms
file an excess number of LCAs, or because firms might find alternative ways to hire foreign-born workers, the
conversion of excess demand to foreign employment is less than one-to-one but still economically meaningful.
The resulting effect of rationing on jobs for native-born Americans is also plausible: one denied H-1B costs
0.2 native jobs. In aggregate, H-1B rationing was associated with 207,627 fewer jobs for foreign-born workers
26

and 63,942 fewer jobs for Americans. This is consistent with the effects found by other papers that leveraged
H-1B policy changes and found a positive contribution of the program on innovation, productivity, the size
of firms, and native employment (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010; Peri, Shih, and Sparber,2015; Ghosh, Mayda, and
Ortega, 2014). With all the needed caveats about causality, this is also consistent with the idea that skilled
foreign workers complement and positively affect the productivity of skilled American workers.

9

Conclusions

This paper used a simple framework to analyze an important question: If we reduce the number of H-1B
skilled foreign worker permits, will native workers employed in computer-related jobs experience employment
and wage benefits, losses, or no effect? We estimate the consequences of a random rationing of H-1B permits
that took place in April 2007 and 2008 due to excess demand relative to the quota. In those years, some
foreign-born individuals with job offers who requested a new permit were randomly awarded one while others
were not. By corollary, some firms (and the cities in which they are located) were randomly unable to employ
the individuals they had intended to hire.
We grouped employers of computer-related occupations by metropolitan area. We then estimated the size
of the negative lottery rationing in each city and examined the consequences of these shocks on native-born
computer-workers in the same metropolitan area. A priori, it is conceivable that native and foreign-born
skilled workers are close substitutes. By denying a foreign H-1B worker to a firm, the lottery could prompt
that firm to search for a similar native worker. If firms hiring foreign workers do so hoping to depress
wages, then the unexpected negative shock should push firms to pay native workers more in order to lure
them away from competitors. This would imply that the negative H-1B shock should be positively and
significantly related to native employment and wages. In other words, a positive value of the estimated
effects on native employment and wages would be a sign that immigrants are close substitute for natives and
more immigration would hurt the labor market opportunities of natives.
On the other hand, it is also conceivable that native and foreign-born computer workers are complementary, or that foreign-born workers improve the productivity of firms, thereby leading firms to expand their
hiring. In this case denying firms the ability to hire foreign workers reduces the need for complementary
27

natives as well. It might also reduce productivity growth and hence employment growth. Demand and wages
could stagnate or decline for all workers. Additional H-1B workers would cause firms to expand while native
computer specialists would not be crowded out and could even experience improved labor market opportunities. In other words, a negative or zero value of the estimated effects on native employment and wages
would be a sign that immigrants complement natives and/or improve productivity, and more immigration
would not hurt the employment and wage opportunities of natives.
Our estimates support this second conclusion: Employers of computer-related workers did not hire more
natives when the foreign workers they intended to hire were denied H-1B permits. Instead the employment
and wages of natives in similar occupations was at best unchanged and at worst harmed. This is consistent
with the notion that H-1B workers complement native computer workers and/or increase the productivity of
the firm, and that skilled foreign-born workers have improved (or at worst left unchanged) the labor market
opportunities of natives. In this sense, our results complement work by Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015)
who used decennial Census information and found that for each new foreign STEM worker (driven by H-1B
variation), between 0.5 and 0.6 native STEM jobs are created in the longer term.
This paper further advances the literature by decomposing the H-1B lottery into two effects: One is driven
by average rationing — the interaction between national-level restrictions and city-specific H-1B dependence.
The other arises from unexpected shocks — the difference between H-1B permits expected (given nationallevel rationing) and the actual number of permits received. We find that most of the negative effects of H-1B
restrictions result from the average rationing effect. This largely complements work by Kerr and Lincoln
(2010). Unexpected shocks, which are much smaller, are not associated with effects on either foreign or
native employment growth for the full sample of cities. However, further analysis reveals that such shocks
may be detrimental to cities that were strongly dependent on foreign workers and therefore heavily rationed
in 2007 and 2008 — a result consistent with Ghosh, Mayda and Ortega (2014). Combining randomness in the
lottery and the non-random degree of dependence on foreign-born labor may be crucial to properly analyze
the effect of H-1B policy changes. Overall, the results confirm that restrictive H-1B policy does not benefit,
and may harm, native-born, college-educated, computer-related employment, even in the short-run.

28

References
Borjas George J. and Kirk B. Doran, (2012). “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity
of American Mathematicians,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, Vol. 127(3),
pages 1143-1203.
Clemens, Michael (2010). “The Roots of Global Wage Gaps: Evidence from Randomized Processing of U.S.
Visas.” Center for Global Development, Working Paper 212.
Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen (2014). “The Effect of High-Skilled Immigration on Patenting
and Employment: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries.” NBER Working Paper 20668.
Ghosh, Anirban, Anna Maria Mayda, and Francesc Ortega (2014), “The Impact of Skilled Foreign Workers
on Firms: an Investigation of Publicly Traded U.S. Firms.” Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration
(CReAM) Discussion Paper 42/14.”
Kato, Takao and Chad Sparber (2013). “Quotas and Quality: The Effect of H-1B Visa Restrictions on the
Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
95(1): 109-126.
Kerr, William and William F. Lincoln. (2010) “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S.
Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 2010, pp. 473-508.
Hira, Ron (2007) “Outsourcing America’s Technology and Knowledge Jobs: High-Skill Guest Worker Visas
are Currently Hurting Rather than Helping Keep Jobs at Home.” Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper
no. 187.
Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle (2010). “How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, pp. 31-56.
Matloff, Norman (2008) “H-1Bs: Still Not the Best and the Brightest,” Center for Immigration Studies
Backgrounder.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, (2014). “German-Jewish Emigres and U.S. Invention,” NBER Working Papers 19962, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
29

Moretti Enrico (2010). “Local Multipliers” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, Vol 100, pp
1—7. http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.100.2.1
Peri G. (2007) “Higher Education, Innovation and Growth.” In Giorgio Brunello, Pietro Garibaldi, and
Etienne Wasmer eds. Education and Training in Europe, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Peri Giovanni, Kevin Shih and Chad Sparber, (2015). “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and Productivity in
U.S. Cities,” Journal of Labor Economics, Forthcoming.
Peri Giovanni, Kevin Shih, Chad Sparber, and Angie Marek Zeitlin (2014). “Closing Economic Windows:
How H-1B Visa Denials Cost U.S.-Born Tech Workers Jobs and Wages During the Great Recession,” The
Partnership for a New American Economy.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (2007). “USCIS Updates Count of FY 2008 H-1B Cap Filings,”
April 10, 2007.
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (2008). “USCIS Runs Random Selection Process for H-1B Petitions,” March 31, 2008.

30

A

Appendix

The main text of this paper relies upon regressions of pre-lottery foreign employment growth trends to
examine the exogeneity of the H-1B variables. In each case, we find no statistical evidence for a significant
correlation, thereby lending support toward exogeneity.
Other pre-lottery variables, however, might also be worth exploring. One alternative is to consider prelottery native-born employment growth. Table A1 displays the results from these regressions, which are
analogous to figures presented for foreign employment in the main text. The top panel presents the nativeborn equivalent to the foreign-born pre-lottery results of Table 2. Unlike with foreign employment, we do find
some evidence for a significant negative correlation between native pre-lottery employment growth and the
H-1B shock in two of the three weighting schemes. While this is problematic for a fully causal interpretation
of regression results in the paper, the problem is alleviated by the inclusion of pre-lottery growth variables
in all regressions examining the main outcomes of interest.
Importantly, this relationship is driven by the dependency channel, and our unexpected shock variable
(described in Section 6.2) appears to be random. On the one hand, the second panel of Table A2 seemingly
questions the validity of this claim, as it uncovers evidence that pre-lottery trends are correlated with
unexpected shocks. On the other hand, this correlation is entirely driven by four outliers: Three cities
(Davenport, IA; Manchester, NH; and Springfield, IL) lie more than three standard deviations below the
mean, and one city (Worcester, MA) lies more than three standard deviations above it. Their removal (in
the third panel) attests for the plausible exogeneity and randomness of the shock variable.16
Also important, the fourth panel indicates that no significant correlation exists among highly rationed
cities (the analogue to Table 6). The text notes that our H-1B variables are nonetheless able to identify a
first-order effect in which negative supply shocks reduce subsequent foreign employment growth. The final
panel indicates that average rationing is, once again, associated with pre-lottery native employment growth,
whereas the random shock is not.
The bottom line is that the normalized excess demand variable (dc ) is uncorrelated with pre-lottery
1 6 Table 5 in the main text includes these four outlying cities. Their removal would cause some coefficients and standard
errors to rise, but the results are qualitatively similar. Furthermore, the outlying cities are neither highly rationed nor Large
H-1B cities.

31

foreign-born employment growth but could be correlated with pre-lottery native-born employment growth.
We recognize that this creates a challenge for purely causal interpretation of the results in the paper, though
the inclusion of pre-lottery trends in the models should help in this regard. This correlation is driven by
H-1B dependency; unexpected lottery shocks appear to be random. Such shocks, when negative, reduce
subsequent foreign-born employment growth, but have no effect on native employment growth. This finding
— like others in the paper — suggests that foreign-born, college-educated, computer-related workers do not
crowd out similar native-born workers.

32

Table 1:
Last Date of Receipt for H-1B Applications in Each Fiscal Year

Fiscal Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008*
2009*
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014*
2015*

Final Receipt Date
February 17, 2004
October 1, 2004
August 10, 2005
May 26, 2006
April 3, 2007
April 7, 2008
December 21, 2009
January 26, 2011
November 22, 2011
June 11, 2012
April 7, 2013
April 7, 2014

Days in Filing Period
323
184
132
56
3
7
265
301
236
72
7
7

*= A lottery was held to assign all H-1B permits.
Note: This Table describes the last day in the year in which H-1B permit applications were accepted and the
implied number of days available for individuals to file requests. After the last date of receipt, no additional H-1B
permits are available to perspective employees of private for-profit firms who do not already have H-1B status.

33

Table 2
The H-1B supply shock effect on pre and post lottery foreign-born employment
238 MSA level data for computer-related occupations only

Explanatory Variable: Negative H-1B-Supply Shock Relative to Total 2005-06 Employment
(Variable dc in the Text)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Weighted by
Weighted by
Unweighted
H-1B
ln(H-1B
Dependence
Dependence)
Panel A
Dependent Variable:
Pre-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign-Born College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2000 and 2005-06
-1.624
-0.225
-0.913
(1.031)

(0.376)

Panel B
Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign-Born College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2008-09
-2.235**
-0.331
(1.129)
-1.897*
(0.974)
-1.730*
(0.936)

Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2009-10
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2010-11

(0.344)
-0.521***
(0.178)
-0.488*
(0.253)

(0.683)

-1.051*
(0.622)
-0.996*
(0.574)
-1.166*
(0.624)

Note: Each entry in the table is the coefficient of the explanatory variable dc =“standardized negative-supply shock
of H-1B”, described in the text. The dependent variable in the regression is described in the first row. The
observations are 238 metropolitan areas in the US. The method of estimation is Least squares, using different
weights (as described in each column). Panel A tests the pre-lottery outcomes and Panel B the post-Lottery ones.

34

Table 3
The H-1B supply shock effect on post-lottery native employment and wages
238 MSA level data for computer-related occupations only

Explanatory Variable: Negative H-1B-Supply Shock Relative to Total 2005-06 Employment
(Variable dc in the Text)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Weighted by
Weighted by
Unweighted
ln(H-1B
Dependence
Dependence)
Panel A
Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Native College-Graduate Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2008-09
-0.510*
-0.394***
-0.446*
(0.301)
-0.528*
(0.279)
-0.337
(0.384)

Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2009-10
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2010-11

(0.092)
-0.624***
(0.170)
-0.768***
(0.276)

(0.228)
-0.507**
(0.197)
-0.434
(0.294)

Panel B
Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Wages Paid to Native College-Graduates
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2008-09
-0.067
0.022
-0.014
(0.090)
-0.195**
(0.089)
-0.191*
(0.101)

Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2009-10
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and 2010-11

(0.080)
-0.075
(0.080)
0.002
(0.035)

(0.085)
-0.109
(0.078)
-0.095
(0.068)

Note: Each entry in the table is the coefficient of the explanatory variable dc =“standardized negative-supply shock of H-1B”,
described in the text. The dependent variable in the regression is described in the first row. The observations are 238
metropolitan areas in the US. The method of estimation is Least squares, using different weights (as described in each column).
Panel A analyzes the impact of the negative H-1B shock on native college graduate employment in computer-related
occupations. Panel B analyzes the impact of the negative H-1B shock on native college graduate wages in computer-related
occupations.

35

Table 4
Summary statistics, average and unexpected rationing
238 US Metropolitan areas, combining 2007 and 2008 lotteries

Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. deviation

90-10
percentile
0.09

Normalized Excess demand
(total rationing)
dc
Average Rationing
(dependence-driven)
dAVGc
Unexpected Rationing
(lottery-driven shock)
duc

238

0.041

0.096

238

0.042

0.096

0.09

238

0

0.008

0.009

Note: The Normalized Excess demand or “total rationing” captures the supply shocks of H-1B permits across
cities. It is a measure of demand (applications for foreign workers) minus supply (the awarded H-1B) combining
the April 2007 and 2007 lotteries, and it is divided by the 2005/06 level of employment in computer-related
occupations. The unit of observation is the metropolitan area.

36

Table 5
Decomposing total rationing into average and unexpected H-1B supply shocks
MSA level data for computer-related occupations only
Explanatory Variables: Average and Unexpected Negative H-1B-Supply Shocks
(1)

(2)

(3)

Unweighted

Weighted by
H-1B
Dependence

Weighted by
ln(H-1B
Dependence)

Panel A
Dependent Variable: Pre-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2000 and
Average
2005-06
Rationing
-1.579
-0.289
(1.003)
(0.365)
Unexpected
Shock
11.259
4.805
(9.303)
(3.853)

-0.924
(0.675)
7.186
(6.432)

Panel B
Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06
Average
and 2008-09
Rationing
-2.201**
-0.417*
-1.078*
(1.092)
(0.242)
(0.583)
Unexpected
Shock
13.272
5.870
8.996
(8.156)
(4.879)
(5.842)
Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Native College-Graduate Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06
Average
and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.505*
-0.384***
-0.446*
(0.292)
(0.103)
(0.237)
Unexpected
Shock
1.301
-1.239
-0.801
(6.375)
(4.597)
(6.041)
Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Wages Paid to Native College-Graduates
Growth Rate between 2005-06
Average
and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.069
0.024
-0.013
(0.096)
(0.080)
(0.092)
Unexpected
Shock
-0.663
-0.199
-0.790
(1.566)
(1.733)
(1.529)
Note: The entries in in the table are the coefficient on the average rationing and unexpected rationing of H-1B permits as
described in the text. The dependent variable in each regression is described in the first row. The observations are 238
metropolitan areas in the US. The method of estimation is Least squares, using different weights (as described in each column).

37

Table 6
Average and unexpected H-1B supply shocks in the top 30 dependent cities
30 MSA level data for computer-related occupations only
Explanatory Variables: Average and Unexpected Negative H-1B-Supply Shocks

(1)

(2)

Unweighted

Weighted by
Dependence

(3)
Weighted by
ln(H-1B
Dependence)

Dependent Variable: Pre-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2000
and 2005-06

Average
Rationing
Unexpected
Shock

-0.457
(0.970)

-0.220
(0.539)

-0.391
(0.867)

31.256
(29.638)

0.848
(15.237)

25.143
(26.551)

Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06 Average
and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.505**
-0.448**
-0.516**
Unexpected
Shock

(0.242)

(0.192)

(0.232)

-10.127*
(5.374)

-5.288
(5.121)

-9.245*
(5.232)

Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Native College-Graduate Employees
Growth Rate between 2005-06 Average
and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.407
-0.200
-0.363
Unexpected
Shock

(0.278)

(0.135)

(0.242)

-6.438
(8.300)

-3.139
(4.743)

-5.706
(7.558)

Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Wages Paid to Native College-Graduates
Growth Rate between 2005-06
and 2008-09

Average
Rationing
Unexpected
Shock

-0.043
(0.096)

-0.008
(0.063)

-0.035
(0.089)

-1.531
(1.997)

-0.762
(1.865)

-1.502
(1.901)

Note: The entries in in the table are the coefficient on the average rationing and unexpected rationing of H-1B permits as
described in the text. The dependent variable in each regression is described in the first row. The observations are the 30
metropolitan areas in the US with the highest dependence on H-1B permits measured as number of cap-bound LCA applications
in January-April relative to the city’s computer-related employment. The method of estimation is Least squares, using different
weights (as described in each column).

38

Table 7
Average and unexpected H-1B supply shocks in Large H-1B cities
22 MSA level data for computer-related occupations only
Explanatory Variable: Negative H-1B-Supply Shock Relative to Total 2005-06 Employment
(Variable dc in the Text)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Weighted by
Weighted by
Unweighted
ln(H-1B
Dependence
Dependence)
Dependent Variable: Pre-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2000
Average
and 2005-06
Rationing
-0.543
-0.511**
-0.508
Unexpected
Shock

(0.341)

(0.223)

(0.315)

4.479
(9.704)

3.865
(6.311)

4.289
(8.767)

Dependent Variable: Post-Lottery Growth Rate of Foreign College Educated Employees
Growth Rate between 2005Average
06 and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.791**
-0.502***
-0.720**
Unexpected
Shock

(0.328)

(0.164)

(0.303)

1.255
(4.736)

0.864
(3.257)

0.966
(4.511)

Dependent Variable: Growth Rate of Native College-Graduate Employees
Growth Rate between 2005Average
06 and 2008-09
Rationing
-0.221
0.024
Unexpected
Shock

(0.231)

(0.114)

-0.162
(0.209)

-5.487
(3.448)

-7.102***
(2.232)

-5.955*
(3.254)

Dependent Variable: Growth Rate of Wages Paid to Native College-Graduates
Growth Rate between 2005-06
and 2008-09

Average
Rationing
Unexpected
Shock

-0.090
(0.071)

-0.034
(0.037)

-0.077
(0.063)

-0.029
(1.063)

0.045
(0.854)

0.030
(0.996)

Note: The entries in in the table are the coefficient on the average rationing and unexpected rationing of H-1B
permits as described in the text. The dependent variable in each regression is described in the first row. The
observations are the 22 metropolitan areas in the US with above average computer-related employment and LCA
filings. The method of estimation is Least squares, using different weights (as described in each column).

39

Table 8
College-educated employment between 2005/06 and 2008/09 and excess demand for H-1B workers

United States (All US Cities)

Atlanta, GA
Austin, TX
Baltimore, MD
Boston, MA-NH
Chicago, IL
Columbus, OH
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX
Detroit, MI
Houston-Brazoria, TX
Kansas City, MO-KS
Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA
New York-Northeastern NJ
Philadelphia, PA-NJ
Phoenix, AZ
Pittsburgh, PA
Raleigh-Durham, NC
San Diego, CA
San Francisco-Oakland-Vallejo, CA
San Jose, CA
Seattle-Everett, WA
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
Washington, DC-MD-VA

Excess
Demand, H-1B

Predicted
Change in
Foreign
Employment

Predicted
Change in
Native
Employment

300,032
9,147
1,341
1,161
15,704
17,576
1,550
31,432
11,104
3,623
1,383
5,192
99,931
5,021
1,197
1,754
2,467
1,157
6,179
14,360
2,986
1,201
31,676

-207,627
-4,232
-492
-363
-10,746
-9,635
-547
-15,202
-6,290
-2,305
-294
-3,808
-87,443
-2,352
-376
-465
-752
-502
-5,739
-20,036
-1,877
-331
-17,938

-63,942
-2,270
-364
-311
-4,083
-4,151
-372
-6,899
-2,230
-706
-395
-885
-18,740
-1,218
-254
-527
-785
-273
-1,144
-1,959
-688
-245
-7,927

40

Foreign jobs per
unit of Excess
demand

-0.69
-0.46
-0.37
-0.31
-0.68
-0.55
-0.35
-0.48
-0.57
-0.64
-0.21
-0.73
-0.88
-0.47
-0.31
-0.27
-0.30
-0.43
-0.93
-1.40
-0.63
-0.28
-0.57

Native jobs per unit
of excess demand

-0.21
-0.25
-0.27
-0.27
-0.26
-0.24
-0.24
-0.22
-0.20
-0.19
-0.29
-0.17
-0.19
-0.24
-0.21
-0.30
-0.32
-0.24
-0.19
-0.14
-0.23
-0.20
-0.25

Figure 1

LCAs Filed in January-April
5-6 Months in Advance of Start Date

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

As a % of LCAs Filed by Firm Type

2002

2004

2006
2008
Calendar Year of Submission
For-Profit Firms

41

2010

Non-Profit Firms

2012

Figure 2

Computer-Related Share of H-1B Supply & Demand

.2

.4

.6

.8

Among For-Profit Firms and Cap-Bound Individuals

2002

2004

2006
2008
Calendar Year

For-Profit, Pre-Dated, LCAs

42

2010
Cap-Bound H-1Bs

2012

Figure 3
Effect of a negative H-1B supply shock when native and foreign-born computer scientists are perfect substitutes
Negative Supply
Shock: Bad Luck in
the H-1b Lottery
WageN

WageF

Native Labor
Supply for
Computer
Scientists

No Negative Supply
Shock: Good Luck in
the H-1B Lottery

F1

F0

D
N1

WN1

Residual Labor
Demand for
Native-Computer
Scientists

N0

WN0

DN0
EN0

EN1

Labor Demand for
Foreign-Computer
Scientists
D: Number of
Denied Permits

DN1
EmplN

F-D

F

43

EmplF

Figure 4
Effect of a negative H-1B supply shock when native and foreign-born computer scientists are complements or
have positive productivity effects

Negative Supply
Shock: Bad Luck in
the H-1b Lottery
WageN

WageF
F1

Native Labor
Supply for
Computer
Scientists

WN0
WN1

N1

F0

Labor Demand for
Native-Computer
Scientists

N0

No Negative Supply
Shock: Good Luck in
the H-1B Lottery

Labor Demand for
Foreign-Computer
Scientists
D: Number of
Denied Permits

DN0
DN1(EF)
EN1

EN0

EmplN

F-D

F

44

EmplF

Figure 5

Computer-Related Share of H-1Bs Filed

.5

Share of Cap-Bound H-1Bs Filed
.6
.7
.8

.9

By H-1B Receipt Date in 2006

0

20
40
Days After Start of Filing Period

45

60

Figure 6

Median Wage of Computer-Related H-1B Workers

50000

Median Wage
55000
60000

65000

By H-1B Receipt Date in 2006

0

20
40
Days After Start of Filing Period

46

60

Figure 7

47

Table A1
The H-1B supply shock and pre-lottery native employment growth

Model:
Normalized Excess Demand (Table 3)
Growth Rate between 2000 and
2005-06
Decomposed Shock (Table 5)
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and
2008-09

Unweighted

Weighted by
Dependence

Weighted by
ln(H-1B
Dependence)

Total Rationing

-1.021**
(0.427)

-0.023
(0.198)

-0.612*
(0.319)

Average Rationing

-1.000**
(0.394)
5.188
(3.414)

-0.094
(0.141)
6.005***
(2.228)

-0.618**
(0.279)
5.158*
(2.752)

-1.214**
(0.471)
-0.455
(7.457)

-0.236*
(0.132)
-4.504
(3.667)

-0.788**
(0.321)
-2.313
(5.665)

-0.018
(0.164)
-9.039
(6.248)

0.068
(0.101)
-5.053
(3.980)

-0.006
(0.148)
-8.255
(5.774)

-0.605**
(0.272)
5.522
(4.806)

-0.210
(0.140)
1.709
(4.113)

-0.511*
(0.248)
4.445
(4.682)

Unexpected Shock
Decomposed Shock, Four Outliers
Omitted
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and
2009-10

Average Rationing
Unexpected Shock

Highly Rationed Cities (Table 6)
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and
2010-11

Average Rationing
Unexpected Shock

Top H-1B Cities (Table 7)
Growth Rate between 2005-06 and
2010-11

Average Rationing
Unexpected Shock

Note: The models above test the relationship between the explanatory variable and pre-lottery native-born,
college-educated, computer-related employment growth. Each entry in the table is the coefficient of the
explanatory variable dc or its components as described in the text. Panels correspond to the models (and tables)
indicated. The observations are 238 metropolitan areas in the US. The method of estimation is Least squares,
using different weights (as described in each column).

48

