NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MISPERCEIVING INEQUALITY
Vladimir Gimpelson
Daniel Treisman
Working Paper 21174
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21174

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015, Revised September 2017

V.Gimpelson acknowledges support from the NRU HSE Basic Research Program. Treisman
acknowledges support from the UCLA College of Letters and Sciences. We thank Vivek Ashok,
Mark Beissinger, Sara Berens, Dan Bernhardt, Graeme Blair, Carles Boix, David Cameron, Dan
Corstange, Rafaela Dancygier, Alex Debs, Christian Dippel, Tim Frye, Laura Garcia, Miriam
Golden, Guy Grossman, Sergei Guriev, Stephan Haggard, Greg Huber, John Huber, Karen Long
Jusko, Slava Kapeliushnikov, Kimuli Kasara, Herbert Kitschelt, Sasha Klyachkina, Hanzhang
Liu, Rick McAlexander, Péter Mihálhyi, Gautam Nair, Grigore Pop-Eleches, Andrew Roberts,
Tom Romer, David Rueda, Bruce Russett, Ken Scheve, Jason Seawright, Milan Svolik, Tinghua
Yu, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, and other participants at seminars at Columbia University,
Northwestern University, Yale University, Princeton University, the Higher School of
Economics, Sciences Po, the University of Warwick, and the 2015 APSA convention, as well as
two anonymous referees, for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Vladimir Gimpelson and Daniel Treisman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Misperceiving Inequality
Vladimir Gimpelson and Daniel Treisman
NBER Working Paper No. 21174
May 2015, Revised September 2017
JEL No. D31,D63,D83,H24,I30,P16
ABSTRACT
A vast literature suggests that economic inequality has important consequences for politics and
public policy. Higher inequality is thought to increase demand for income redistribution in
democracies and to discourage democratization and promote class conflict and revolution in
dictatorships. Most such arguments crucially assume that ordinary people know how high
inequality is, how it has been changing, and where they fit in the income distribution. Using a
variety of large, cross-national surveys, we show that, in recent years, ordinary people have had
little idea about such things. What they think they know is often wrong. Widespread ignorance
and misperceptions emerge robustly, regardless of data source, operationalization, and
measurement method. Moreover, perceived inequality—not the actual level—correlates strongly
with demand for redistribution and reported conflict between rich and poor. We suggest that most
theories about political effects of inequality need to be reframed as theories about effects of
perceived inequality.

Vladimir Gimpelson
Center for Labor Market Studies,
Higher School of Economics,
Moscow, Russia.
and IZA
vladim@hse.ru
Daniel Treisman
Department of Political Science
UCLA
4289 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1472
and NBER
treisman@polisci.ucla.edu

1 Introduction
Economic inequality is believed to have important consequences for politics and public policy. In democracies,
where the poor majority can vote to tax the rich, higher inequality is thought to produce more generous social
spending. Ceteris paribus, unequal democracies should redistribute more than equal ones. In dictatorships, the
greater the income gap, the more the poor can gain by overthrowing and expropriating their rulers. Unequal
autocracies should be more prone to revolution. Similarly, the more skewed are the distributions of property and
income, the more elites should fear to extend the franchise. High inequality should discourage democratization.
These arguments—familiar from works of Aristotle, Marx, and many more recent scholars—seem plausible.
But what if most citizens do not know whether they are relatively rich or poor? Everyone knows his own income,
but not necessarily the distribution into which it fits. What if most citizens have no idea how much wealth elites
have accumulated and whether the gap is growing or shrinking? Even the rich may fail to gauge how strong the
motive is for the poor to revolt. In such cases, the neat link between actual inequality and political outcomes
evaporates.
We provide evidence that such uncertainty and misperception are extremely widespread. Results from nine
large, cross-national surveys suggest that in recent years ordinary people have known little about the extent of
income inequality in their societies, its rate and direction of change, and where they fit into the distribution.
What they think they know is often wrong.1 This finding is robust to data sources, definitions, and measurement
instruments. For instance, perceptions of inequality are no more accurate if reinterpreted as being about wealth
rather than income.
A strange inconsistency underlies much recent scholarship. On one hand, theories assume that individuals
know the income distribution. On the other, scholars complain that data available to test these theories—even
in developed democracies—are “dubious” (Ahlquist and Wibbels 2012) and “massively unreliable” (Cramer
2005). If experts despair at the quality of data, it seems odd to assume the public is perfectly informed. And if
analysts fault the figures available today—despite the most sophisticated statistical agencies in history—quality
must have been worse during the nineteenth century heyday of revolution and democratization.
The implications for theories of redistribution, revolution, and democratization are potentially far-reaching.
To be convincing, these must be reformulated as theories about not actual inequality but perceptions of it, with
no presumption the two coincide. Although actual inequality—as captured by the best current estimates—is
not related to preferences for redistribution, we show that perceived inequality is. Actual poverty correlates
1
And since beliefs will correlate among those who interact or use the same media, the “wisdom of crowds” will not ensure average
estimates are unbiased. Nor is it clear how any available “information shortcuts” could close this gap (see Conclusion).

1

only weakly with reported tension between rich and poor, but the perceived poverty rate strongly predicts such
inter-class conflict.
A number of previous papers have noted inconsistencies in perceptions of inequality, using surveys and
experiments, mostly within a single country (Norton and Ariely 2011; Chambers, Swan and Heesacker 2014;
Cruces, Perez-Truglia and Tetaz 2013; Kuhn 2011, 2016; Niehues 2014). We build on these works. Our
contribution is to provide the most general and comprehensive investigation of the topic to date, using nine crossnational surveys, comparing multiple countries, exploring numerous aspects of income and wealth inequality,
and developing the implications for influential arguments about the politics of redistribution, revolution, and
democratization.
To preview the results, we find that, when asked about the level of and recent trend in inequality in their
country, respondents performed only slightly better than chance. Many could not even approximately identify
the average wage nationwide, average salaries in different jobs, the top one percent’s share of wealth, or the
current poverty rate. Respondents who were almost certainly near the top of the distribution thought they were
near the bottom, and vice versa. Both within and across countries, perceptions of inequality closely tracked
demand for government redistribution and reported class conflict, while the relationship with actual inequality
was tenuous at best.
We believe the accumulation of evidence from the multiple surveys we consider is more compelling than
any individual piece. Although one can—by assuming respondents misunderstood a question or interpreted
it idiosyncratically—construct scenarios in which the respondents were better informed on a particular point
than might appear, it would require a huge number of ad hoc rationalizations to eliminate all the anomalies we
document. And an assumption that rationalizes answers in one setting would often make those in other settings
more puzzling.
The next section reviews major theories relating inequality to politics. Section 3 uses cross-national surveys
to demonstrate widespread misperceptions of the income distribution, the respondent’s place in it, and recent
trends in inequality. Section 4 shows that preferences for redistribution and perceptions of political and social
tension correlate more strongly with beliefs about inequality than with actual levels. Section 5 concludes.

2 Inequality and politics
Various theories associate countries’ levels of economic inequality with important political outcomes. Such
outcomes include the extent of income redistribution (in democracies); the incidence of revolution and other

2

political violence (in non-democracies); and changes in regime type.
One argument contends that democracies with greater market-generated inequality redistribute more. In
a stylized model, Meltzer and Richard (1981) showed that the larger is the gap between median and mean
incomes, the greater the fiscal transfer from rich to poor produced by majority-rule voting. Subsequent papers
built this mechanism into models aiming to explain the pace of economic growth, the fiscal consequences of
decentralization, and the extent of government debt (Persson and Tabellini 1994a,b; Cukierman and Meltzer
1989).
A second literature blames inequality for revolutions, coups, civil wars, and other political violence. The
greater the incomes and land-holdings of the rich, the more the poor can gain by expropriating them (Huntington 1968, p.375). “A large group of impoverished citizens, facing a small and very rich group of well-off
individuals, is likely to become dissatisfied with the existing socioeconomic status quo and demand radical
changes,” write Alesina and Perotti (1994, p.362). “As a result, mass violence and illegal seizures of power are
more likely the more unequal the distribution of income is.” One review called it “almost a universal assumption
that an inequitable distribution of resources and wealth will provoke violent rebellion” (Cramer 2005; see also
Goldstone 2014, p.11, and Gurr 1970).
A third related approach links inequality to the evolution of political regimes. Since elites in unequal autocracies anticipate high redistribution under democracy, they fight to prevent it. Boix (2003), therefore, predicts
a negative relationship between inequality and democratization, unless elites are protected from expropriation,
for instance by mobility of their assets. Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) agree but add that the poor have weak
incentives to seek democracy if inequality is low (taxing the rich yields little). Thus, odds of democratization
should trace an inverted U: it is unlikely at either high or low inequality, but more probable at intermediate
levels. Both theories crucially assume that poor citizens know the extent of inequality.
Despite their appeal, all three sets of theories have proved hard to substantiate empirically. Reviewing recent
literature, Lupu and Pontusson (2011, p.316) report a “current consensus. . . that inequality does not matter for
the politics of redistribution, at least not in any direct and particularly significant way.” Ansell and Samuels
(2011, pp.2-3) concur that: “results have consistently called into question. . . that pressures for redistribution
increase with inequality.”2 Does economic inequality prompt political violence? “For almost half a century,”
writes Ostby (2013, p.206), “scholars have tried to test this assumption, finding little empirical support for
a statistical relationship between the two variables.” What about regime type? The search for a connection
has yielded only “mixed results” say both Houle (2009, p.598) and Haggard and Kaufmann (2012, p.495). A
2
See also Neckerman and Torche (2007) and Lenz (2004), who finds only mixed evidence of a relationship between inequality and
redistribution across American states.

3

sophisticated statistical inquiry found “no evidence that domestic inequality is related to regime outcomes once
spatial correlation is accounted for” (Ahlquist and Wibbels 2012, p.461).
Scholars have suggested several reasons why the simple relationship might not hold—from conditional
effects to non-linear functional forms. Inequality might not prompt redistribution because attitudes towards it
are mediated by: beliefs about the fairness of the distribution (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005a, 2005b; Alesina,
Cozzi, and Mantovan 2012), beliefs about social mobility (Piketty 1995, Benabou and Ok 2001, Alesina and
Ferrara 2005; Ravallion and Lokshin 2000), or other societal norms (Alesina and Giuliano 2009). Religious
organizations might build multi-class coalitions, alleviating conflict (Huber and Stanig 2011). Inequality might
not produce civil unrest if the poor cannot mobilize or if assets are in forms hard to expropriate (Boix 2003).
While these factors may indeed matter, we suggest a simpler explanation. All theories discussed so far
assume key actors accurately perceive the degree of income inequality. Yet, given how hard it is to estimate distributions of income and property—for skilled professionals, let alone statistically unsophisticated citizens—this
assumption is implausible. People may not respond to inequality as posited because, quite simply, they do not
know its level.
A few papers have explored misperception of the income distribution, but usually in a single country. Norton
and Ariely (2011) found respondents underestimated wealth inequality in the US. Americans also assessed
change poorly: respondents “overestimated the rise of income inequality over time” since 1960, and beliefs
about this varied systematically between political liberals and conservatives (Chambers, Swan, and Heesacker
2013; see also Bartels 2008). Using a survey experiment in Argentina, Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013)
found “biases in individuals’ perceptions of aggregate income distributions” as well as in assessments of their
own relative position. Where respondents thought they stood in the national distribution turned out to correlate
strongly with their place in the local income distribution, or in some other reference group. Obviously using
small, non-representative samples produces bias. Among respondents in Spain, only 14 percent could correctly
identify their decile in the national income distribution (Fernandez-Albertos and Kuo 2013, p.16).
In an important paper, Niehues (2014) used the International Social Survey Project (ISSP 2009) to estimate
average perceptions of inequality in 23 European countries plus the USA. She demonstrated systematic errors
and noted a correlation between perceived inequality and the belief that it was too high, as well as with preferences for redistribution.3 Engelhardt and Wagener (2014) also noted a correlation between perceived inequality
3
We accept as a starting point the idea, suggested first by Niehues, of estimating subjective Gini coefficients. However, where she examined a truncated sample from one survey, we document systematic misperceptions using nine cross-national surveys and multiple questions,
together covering a total of 110 countries of all types. We examine: (a) perceptions of the level of inequality, (b) individuals’ beliefs about
their place in the distribution—including their belief about the average income, the key variable for theories such as Meltzer Richard (1981),
and (c) perceptions of recent changes in inequality. Besides the relationship between perceptions and demand for redistribution, we analyze
how inequality perceptions relate to perceived conflict between rich and poor, examining these relationships at the individual as well as

4

and redistribution preferences. They distinguished between a measure of perceived social mobility and actual
mobility and found that perceived mobility reconciled people better to inequality than actual mobility.

3 Misperceiving the income distribution
3.1 Do people understand the level of inequality?
The ISSP survey, conducted in 2009 in 40 countries, focused on social inequality. One question (14a) showed
respondents five diagrams, accompanied by verbal descriptions, of different “types of society.” Respondents
were asked which diagram and description best fit their country. While the question does not explicitly refer
to income or wealth, the previous questions asked about “pay” and “earnings,” so an interpretation in terms of
income is the most natural one.
Responses varied greatly across the 40 countries (see Table A1 in the online appendix).4 While in Latvia 68
percent chose the steep pyramid (Type A), in Denmark fewer than 2 percent picked this option; 56 percent of
Danes saw their country as a diamond, with most people in the middle (Type D).
How often were respondents right? A simple point emerges directly from the distribution of answers.
Barring exact ties—in which case the correct answer would surely be “don’t know”—only one of the five
diagrams can “best describe” each country. It follows that in 29 of the 40 countries a majority of respondents
who ventured a guess guessed wrong. For a majority to guess right, they must all pick the same diagram—but
in 29 countries, the leading choice attracted fewer than 50 percent of those who guessed. (Another 5 percent on
average chose “don’t know” and 1 percent refused to answer.) So, in almost three quarters of countries, most
respondents who thought they could identify the general pattern of inequality got it wrong.5 This conclusion
does not require any assumptions about the actual distributions.
To explore further, we estimate Gini coefficients corresponding to each diagram. We assume each of the
seven bars represents an income class and—initially—that the income gap between each two adjacent categories
is the same (we code average income in the bottom bar as 1 and that in the top bar as 7).6
cross-national level. We derive implications for theories of politics and public policy, which remain unexplored in previous papers.
4
The online appendix, data, and STATA do files for this article are available at
https://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/polisci/faculty/treisman/Pages/publishedpapers.html.
5
Even if we combine diagrams D and E since they are quite similar, this only raises the maximum number of countries where the
majority could have been right from 11 to 12.
6
This might, at first, seem an arbitrary assumption, but in fact the diagrams are meaningless if one does not assume this or something
similar. If, instead, income gaps between the seven bands were allowed to vary, then each diagram could be made to fit almost any
distribution simply by adjusting the cutoffs. We also tried a variety of other assumptions about the values (see below).

5

Figure 1: Characterizing the type of society

Source: International Social Survey Project survey (2009) questionnaire.

Taking the area of each bar (in square cms) to represent the population share in that income class, we
 n

n
X
 i − 12  X
 /
calculate the Gini using the standard formula: Gn = 2 yi 
yi − 1, where n is the number of
n
i=1
i=1
observations (i.e. the total area of the figure), and yi is the income of the i’th observation. Since the number
of groups is small (seven), we correct for the bias associated with calculating the Gini from grouped data, as
recommended by Van Ourti and Clarke (2011).7 The resulting Gini coefficients for the five diagrams are: (A)
.42, (B) .35, (C) .30, (D) .20, (E) .21.
Next, we calculated what proportion of respondents chose the diagram with the Gini coefficient closest to
their country’s actual Gini (we call this the “correct” diagram). For actual Ginis, we refer to those for equivalized
household disposable income from the Standardized World Income Inequality Database (SWIID, version 5.0;
see Solt 2009, 2014). This standardizes observations from a variety of sources, including the United Nations
University’s World Income Inequality Database, the OECD Income Distribution Database, Eurostat, and the
World Bank, and employs multiple imputation to fill in certain missing data points.8 We use data for 2009,
the ISSP survey year, and, since the questionnaire did not specify whether diagrams referred to pre- or posttax-and-transfer incomes, we consider the Gini coefficients for both. Since the Ginis for diagrams D and E are
almost identical, we combine them to avoid penalizing respondents who pick one rather than the other.9
7
8
9

The correction is to multiply the Gini by k2 (n2 − 1)/n2 (k2 − 1), where k is the number of groups, seven in this case.
The database provides 100 imputations for each data point; we use the average.
Even fewer guess corectly if types D and E remain separate.

6

Respondents turn out to pick the wrong diagram most of the time. Worldwide, 29 percent chose “correctly”
if we use their country’s post-tax-and-transfer Gini and 24 percent were right if we use the pre-tax-and-transfer
measure. For reference, a purely random choice among the five answers would be correct 23 percent of the time
for post-tax-and-transfer incomes and 20 percent of the time for pre-tax-and-transfer incomes.10 In other words,
respondents picked correctly only slightly more often than they would have by chance. The percentage correct
varied across countries (Table 1). Assuming post-tax-and-transfer incomes, the proportion correct ranged from
5 percent in Ukraine—where almost all overestimated inequality—to 61 percent in Norway. In only five of
the 40 countries did a majority guess correctly. In five countries—Estonia, Slovakia, Croatia, Hungary, and
Ukraine—90 percent or more picked the wrong distribution.11 (Using pre-redistribution incomes, a majority
guessed right in only three countries.)
In some countries, errors were not just widespread but extreme. Ukraine had one of the most equal income
distributions in 2009: it came first (out of 114 countries with data) for pre-redistribution equality and 14th for
post-redistribution equality. Its Gini, for either, was around .28, less than that for Diagram C. Yet fewer than
5 percent of Ukrainians chose C, while 63 percent picked the steep pyramid of Diagram A. Many respondents
in some countries simply said they did not know—11 percent in Austria, 13 percent in Russia, 16 percent in
Portugal, and 24 percent in the US—while up to 7 percent refused to answer.
Were most people at least close? Often the correct Gini lay between those of two adjacent diagrams. We
calculated how often respondents chose a diagram that was the nearest on one or the other side of the correct
Gini. The probability of doing this purely by chance is 25 percent for pre-tax-and-transfers Ginis and 44
percent for post-tax-and-transfer Ginis.12 In fact, in the average country, 28 percent were “correct” under this
rule for pre-tax-and-transfer income and 48 percent for post-tax-and-transfer income. Were most respondents
at least within one diagram of the correct one (for instance, if B was correct, did most at least pick A, B, or
C)? With only five options, getting within one place of the right one is not very difficult. Choosing randomly,
respondents should achieve this 63 percent of the time for post-tax-and-transfer income and 43 percent of the
time for pre-tax-and- transfer income.13 In fact, for post-tax-and-transfer income, 69 percent were within one
10
The rate is not simply 20 percent in the first case because Ginis for options D and E are combined. Denote the proportions of
respondents for whom (A), (B), (C), and (D or E) are correct as, respectively, a, b, c, and d. The proportion correct under random choice
is: .2a + .2b + .2c + .4d. Using pre-tax-and-transfers Ginis, for this group of countries: a = .863, b = .101 , c = .036, and d = 0; for
post-tax-and-transfers Ginis: a = .213, b = .256 , c = .379, and d = .153. So the expected proportion of answers correct is 20 percent for
pre-tax-and-transfer Ginis and 23 percent for post-tax-and-transfer Ginis.
11
This assumes post-redistribution incomes; using pre-redistribution incomes, 90 percent answered incorrectly in 11 countries.
12
Denoting the correct Gini g, the proportion correct under random choice (combining options D and E) is: .2*Pr(g > .35) + .2*Pr(.30
< g < .42) + .2*Pr(.21 < g < .35) + .4*(g < .3), where Pr(x) denotes the frequency with which expression x was true for ISSP respondents.
This equals .25 for pre-tax-and-transfer Ginis and .44 for post-tax-and-transfers Ginis.
13
Again denoting the frequencies with which (A), (B), (C), and (D or E) are correct as, respectively, a, b, c, and d, the proportion within
one diagram of the correct one under random choice will be: .2(a+b)+.2(a+b+c) + .2*(b+c+d)+.4*(c+d). Again, for pre-tax-and-transfers
income, a = .863, b = .101 , c = .036, and d = 0, while for post-tax-and-transfers Ginis: a = .213, b = .256 , c = .379, and d = .153. So the

7

Table 1: Percentage choosing the diagram with Gini coefficient closest to “correct” one, 2009
if question refers to:
Post-tax-and-transfer income Pre-tax-and-transfer income
Norway
61
2
Denmark
59
2
Cyprus
54
4
Israel
51
17
Iceland
51
18
South Africa
49
49
Argentina
45
45
United Kingdom
40
13
Italy
39
32
Sweden
38
7
Spain
37
15
Venezuela
35
30
Russia
34
34
Belgium
33
7
Turkey
32
36
Finland
32
6
Philippines
32
32
New Zealand
30
6
Portugal
30
34
United States
29
12
Austria
28
15
Australia
28
6
Bulgaria
26
26
South Korea
26
35
Taiwan
25
36
Switzerland
24
6
Japan
24
10
Chile
23
23
China
21
21
Germany
21
17
Latvia
20
68
France
17
17
Czech Republic
16
28
Slovenia
13
23
Poland
13
34
Estonia
10
30
Slovak Republic
8
39
Croatia
6
51
Hungary
6
52
Ukraine
5
5
Total
Expected percent correct if random

29
23

24
20

Source: Authors’ calculations from ISSP (2009, Question 14a) and SWIID database (Solt 2014).
Note: Diagrams D and E combined. If these kept separate, expected percent correct is 20 in both columns, and
total percent correct is 24 for both. The two columns correlate at r = -.34: since the pre-tax-and-transfer Gini
is almost always substantially above the post-tax-and-transfer Gini, the diagram that is “right” for pre-tax-andtransfer income tends to be “wrong” for post-tax-and-transfer income.
8

diagram of the right one. For pre-tax-and-transfer income, 58 percent were within one diagram, 15 percentage
points better than random. Still, 42 percent were very far from the correct choice. And the errors were highest
in countries where one might expect people to be best informed. If focusing on pre-tax-and-transfer income,
more than 70 percent missed by at least two places in Denmark, Norway, Finland, Sweden, and—perhaps less
surprisingly—Ukraine.
Might we be exaggerating respondents’ ignorance because we do not know whether they had pre- or posttax-and-transfer income in mind? To check, we tried coding respondents correct if they picked either the
diagram that was “right” assuming pre-tax-and-transfer income or the diagram that was “right” assuming posttax-and-transfer income. The probability of picking one or other of these purely by chance was .38.14 In fact,
on average 45 percent got the “correct” answer, thus-defined. Even giving respondents generous benefit of the
doubt, they only slightly out-performed chance.
Assigning values 1 to 7 to the bars is probably the most natural interpretation. But results are almost identical
if we make different assumptions. We tried using one tighter distribution, with the bars representing incomes
of 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4, and two more spread-out distributions: (A) bars equalling 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and
13, and (B) bars valued 1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16, and 22. We even tried assuming that respondents in more genuinely
unequal societies supposed the bars to be more widely spaced—specifically, we used the values (1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7) for countries with actual Gini coefficients in the bottom third of the sample; (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13) for
countries in the middle third; and (1, 2, 4, 7, 11, 16, 22) for those in the third with the highest actual inequality.
Re-doing the analysis under these four alternative assumptions, and using Ginis for both post-tax and pre-tax
incomes, results proved remarkably consistent. Across all eight permutations, the share choosing the “right”
diagram ranged between 22 and 26 percent.
Figure A1 (see appendix) plots perceived inequality in the 40 countries against their actual post-tax-andtransfer inequality. The measure of perceived inequality, GPI, is simply an average of the Gini coefficients
for diagrams (A) to (E), weighted by the proportion of respondents who chose that diagram. The GPI ’s
thus calculated range from just under .25 for Denmark and Norway to .39 for Ukraine. Perceived and actual
inequality turn out to be quite weakly correlated (r = .37).15 By construction, the GPI ’s cannot exceed the Gini
expected proportion correct is .43 for pre-tax-and-transfer Ginis and .63 for post-tax-and-transfer Ginis.
14
In 25 countries (containing 58 percent of respondents), the two “right” answers were different options from among A, B, and C; the
probability for a respondent to pick one or other of these at random is .4. For eight countries (containing 27 percent of respondents), the
same option (from among A, B, and C) was right for both pre- and post-tax-and-transfer income; for these, the probability of guessing right
by chance is .2. For the remaining seven countries (15 percent of respondents), the two “right” answers were either A or B and “D or E”;
the probability of being right by chance in these cases is .6. So on average the probability of being right is .58*.4+.27*.2+.15*.6 = .376.
15
Although it is reassuring that the correlation is not zero, this suggests distortions in individuals’ perceptions produce significant
distortion in the crossnational pattern. (Whereas correlations in the .2 to .4 range might seem adequate to establish an association between
two different variables, r = .37 suggests an abnormally weak relationship between two supposed measures of the same thing.) As we will
see, these distortions are enough to eliminate correlation between the crossnational pattern of inequality and demand for redistribution.

9

for the most unequal diagram, .42. In four countries—the Philippines, Chile, China, and South Africa—the
actual Ginis were higher than this. Yet even dropping these countries, the correlation is only r = .41.16 Some
countries where respondents perceived the greatest inequality—such as Ukraine—had among the lowest levels.
In others—such as the US—respondents underestimated inequality.
Another way to explore this is to examine people’s beliefs about salaries in their country. The ISSP
asked respondents how much they thought employees in five occupations—from “unskilled factory worker”
to “chairman of a large national corporation” —typically earned.17 Comparing respondents’ answers to information on actual average earnings, we found guesses were often far off the mark (Table A3). Out of 45 cases
with information on actual salaries, the average respondent guessed within plus or minus 10 percent of the correct answer in only nine. In the Philippines, the typical general practice doctor earned about $5,500 in 2008,
according to a World Bank survey; Filipino respondents guessed $144,000. South Africans surveyed thought
the typical CEO earned $77,000; in fact, the average across 56 major South African companies was $1.7 million (for sources, see Table A2). Not only were average guesses often wrong, the dispersion was sometimes
extreme. Almost all respondents missed by more than plus or minus 33 percent when guessing top CEOs’
salaries. Inequality between doctors (or cabinet ministers) and factory workers (or shop assistants) was overestimated in most countries. But the gap between corporate executives and low-paid occupations was massively
underestimated everywhere we had data.18
A third question is whether people know how rich the rich are. This is important if citizens are to judge
how much could be expropriated by redistributive policies or revolution. In 2015, the polling firm Ipsos MORI
asked about 1,000 residents in each of 29 countries what proportion of total household wealth in their country
they thought the wealthiest 1 percent owned (Ipsos MORI 2015). We compared the answers to estimates of the
correct figures calculated by the investment bank Credit Suisse (CS), using household balance sheet and other
data (Credit Suisse 2010, pp.84-7). In the average country, the average repondent’s guess was 17 percentage
points off—usually an overestimate. In the UK, for instance, respondents thought the wealthiest percentile
owned 59 percent of total household wealth, compared to CS’s estimate of 23 percent. In only eight of the 29
countries was the average guess within plus or minus 10 percentage points of the correct answer (Table A4).
A fourth source of evidence relates to poverty. Ordinary people might know more about the underclass
16

The Spearman correlation coefficient (between countries’ ranks in actual and perceived inequality) —.41— is also low.
Unfortunately, the question’s wording sometimes referenced pre-tax and sometimes post-tax income. We focus on countries for which
it referred to pre-tax income since media accounts, the most likely source, usually report gross pay for different professions.
18
Does such misperception matter for policy preferences? One 2015 US poll suggests it does. When respondents were asked to
guess the average public school teacher’s salary in their state, the average was $38,294. In fact, nationwide the average was $57,379
(https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d15/tables/dt15 _211.50.asp?current=yes). Among those not given more information, 63 percent favored increasing teachers’ salaries. Among those who were told the correct figure for their state, support for raising salaries was only 45
percent (http://educationnext.org/2015-ednext-poll-school-reform-opt-out-common-core-unions/).
17

10

than about the top wealth-holders. In fact, ignorance and misconceptions were common here too. A 2010
Eurobarometer survey asked respondents what proportion of people in their country were poor. Of course, respondents might have their own definitions of poverty, but using either the EU-favored or the national definition
(usually very close), almost one third of respondents in the average country guessed more than 10 percentage
points above or below the true level (Table A5). In Cyprus, Hungary, Poland, Malta, and Spain, a majority of
those who answered were more than 10 percentage points off.19 Since the average poverty rate in these countries
was 16 percent, an error of more than 10 percentage points is substantial.
Even if individuals are often wrong about their society’s level of inequality, average perceptions might still
correlate cross-nationally with the actual levels. In fact, as already noted, the correlation between perceived and
actual inequality is low (r = .37). Still, that might be because of the particular measures we used or because of
the assumptions we had to make to construct Gini coefficients for the perceived distributions. To check, Table 2
shows the correlation coefficients between five alternative measures of actual economic inequality and four measures of perceived inequality. It is possible respondents were thinking about wealth—not income—inequality
(Bagchi and Svejnar 2013). So we include CS’s estimates of the wealth share of the top 10 percent (for 2009)
and the Gini for wealth (for 2010, the first year available).20 We also include another common indicator of income inequality, the 90/10 ratio (i.e. the ratio between incomes at the 90th and 10th percentiles). For perceived
inequality, we add three other measures derived from the ISSP survey. First, to miminize assumptions, we
simply use the percentage of respondents who selected diagram (A), the most unequal. Second, we constructed
a measure of the average choice among the diagrams where (A), the most unequal, was scored 5 and (E), the
least unequal, was scored 1. Finally, we calculated the ratio of perceived earnings of a CEO in a large national
company to those of an unskilled factory worker, averaging in each country across all respondents who gave
estimates for both. As Table 2 shows, no pair of these measures of objective and perceived inequality correlated
at higher than r = .40; many were not correlated at all.
In sum, respondents only slightly outperform chance when asked to identify the shape of the income distribution in their country. They are often quite wrong about what various occupations pay and what share of total
wealth belongs to the top one percent. Many European respondents think poverty is either much higher or lower
than it is. And, measured in various ways, actual and perceived levels of inequality correlate at most weakly.

19
20

Aalberg (2003, p.97) found that, in 1991, German, Dutch, British, and US respondents all overestimated poverty.
Estimated Ginis for wealth ranged from .57 in Spain to .88 in Switzerland (Credit Suisse 2010).

11

Table 2: Correlation coefficients between objective and subjective inequality measures
Objective measures

Subjective measures

Gini for
pre-taxandtransfer
income

Gini for
post-taxand-transfer
income

90/10 ratio
for post-tax
income

Gini for wealth,
2010

Wealth share
of top 10%,
2009

Average perceived Gini,
constructed from survey answers

0.01

0.37

0.36

-0.17

0.09

Percent choosing diagram A

-0.04

0.28

0.37

-0.08

0.23

Average diagram choice

-0.01

0.40

0.39

-0.15

-0.02

Average ratio of perceived earnings of
CEO and unskilled factory worker

0.32

0.25

0.05

0.16

0.02

Source: SWIID database (Solt 2014), OECD, SEDLAC, Eurostat, LIS, Credit Suisse (2010), ISSP (2009), and
authors’ calculations.
Note: estimates for 2009 where possible, 2008 or 2010 when 2009 not available.

3.2 Do people know their place in the distribution?
According to Meltzer and Richard (1981), the median voter will favor redistribution if his income is below the
mean. But does the median voter know whether his income is below the mean?
In its 2015 survey, Ipsos MORI asked respondents: “What do you think the average annual wage for a fulltime worker is in [country]?”21 The results were surprising. Comparing the answers in each country to our best
estimate of the actual average wage, we found that in all countries except New Zealand people underestimated
the average wage, often by a lot.22 For instance, the average US respondent thought the average annual wage
was about $26,000; in fact, the OECD estimated it was $57,417. In only one of 27 cases was the average guess
within 30 percentage points of the correct level (Table 3).
If the median voter in each country had the average belief about the mean wage in his country, his estimate
would almost always be wrong. Would it at least be on the right side of the median wage? That is, would he
still support redistribution when Meltzer-Richard logic suggests he should, and oppose it when that was in his
self-interest? Among the 22 countries for which official estimates of the median wage were available, it turns
out he would have been right in only two.
21
See Ipsos MORI (2015). We are very grateful to Bobby Duffy and James Stannard for sharing data from this poll; any interpretations
offered here are ours and not those of Ipsos MORI.
22
In the interest of consistency, we used the OECD’s estimates from national accounts where available, and figures from national
statistical offices or the ILO where not.

12

Errors were so large in some cases that we wondered if respondents might have misunderstood the question.
So we tried to adjust for possible misinterpretations. For instance, in some countries it is common to discuss
monthly rather than annual salaries. Although the pollsters’ question explicitly asks about the annual wage, we
nevertheless tried multiplying the average guess by 12 whenever that produced something closer to the correct
answer. It is also possible some respondents took the question to refer to post-tax rather than pre-tax wages. We
therefore adjusted again, using OECD estimates of the total tax rate on labor income to convert the guess from
post-tax to pre-tax, whenever this rendered it more accurate (Table A7). Reinterpreting respondents’ answers in
these ways reduces the errors, but not by much. Even adjusting in either or both of these ways when that helped,
the average guess about mean income remained about one third too high or too low in the average country. And
still respondents placed the average income on the right side of the median in only seven out of 17 countries.
With these misperceptions, following Meltzer-Richard logic would lead the median voter astray more often than
not.
A final possibility is that respondents misunderstood the word “worker” in the question to mean either an
industrial worker or, more generally, a manual worker, not just an employee. Using data from Eurostat, the ILO,
and national statistical agencies on the average wages of “machine operators,” the category in common use that
seemed closest to “industrial worker,” we checked whether this could make sense of respondents’ estimates.
Among the 14 countries for which we found data, the average guess was 53 percentage points above or below
the actual average wage of machine operators (Table A8a). And even if we adjust as before—multiplying by
12 and/or adjusting for taxes if that helps—the average guess still misses the actual average wage for machine
operators by 30 percentage points. Results are similar using instead the average wage for “manual workers”
(Table A8b). In sum, people in many countries appear to have extremely unreliable ideas about the average
wage.23 Were they to act politically on the basis of these ideas, they would very often do the opposite of what
influential theories predict.
More generally, do people know where in the national income distribution they fall? To examine this,
we exploit data from the 2010 Life in Transition Survey (LiTS 2010). LiTS includes 30 emerging (mostly
transition) economies and five advanced European economies. The ideal survey to answer this question would
record: (A) respondents’ own income, and (B) their beliefs about their place in the national distribution. Using
the country’s true distribution, one could then judge how often respondents were right. However, neither LiTS
nor any other crossnational survey we know collects data on both (A) and (B). We therefore present indirect
evidence.
23

Although the average wage is not average per capita income, we see no reason perceptions of the latter would be more accurate.

13

Table 3: Did people know the average annual wage in their country (early 2015, local currency units)?

Country
New Zealand
Great Britain
Australia
Sweden
China
Canada
Belgium
Japan
South Africa
Germany
US
Israel
Hungary
Turkey
Poland
Russia
Spain
Italy
France
Brazil
Saudi Arabia
Argentina
South Korea
Colombia
Peru
Mexico
Chile
India

Average guess
of respondents

Actual average wage, 2014

Actual median wage, 2014

50,210
20,802
48,845
232,380
32,821
33,320
21,965
2,045,037
50,040
16,680
26,092
53,243
1,213,809
10,200
13,350
105,082
6,799
6,050
6,260
3,084
9,069
6,942
2,092,564
758,605
1,003
3,822
316,782
108,345

48,737
32,453
78,715
378,907
56,360
62,551
42,687
4,033,913
98, 328a
36,556
57,417
128,400
2,889,151
33,627
45,139
389,940
27,408
28,647
36,018
25,616
73,188
70,365
33,224,208
12,734,700
14,759
137,844
9,610,671
n.a

44,876
26,909
63,651
336,000
n.a.
56,032
36,432
3,505,045
36, 396a
n.a.
41,616
93,962
2,166,863
19,185
36,057
278,766
22,972
n.a.
29,180
n.a
n.a
60,000
25,897,472
7,392,000
11,957
105,497
6,397,636
n.a

Was average guess
about the mean on
right side of median?
YES
NO
NO
NO
n.a.
NO
NO
NO
YES
n.a.
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
n.a
NO
n.a
n.a
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
n.a

Source: Ipsos MORI (2015); see Table A6 for sources and notes on actual figures.
Note: Respondents were asked: “What do you think the average annual wage for a full-time worker is in
[country]?” a 2013.

14

LiTS asked respondents into which decile in the national income distribution they thought they fell. Assuming the survey samples were as representative as intended and as subsequent scrutiny confirmed (Cojocaru
and Diagne 2015), one tenth of respondents should fall within each of the 10 deciles. A histogram of responses
should resemble the uniform distribution: a flat line at 10 percent, with no hills or valleys. That is not what one
sees (Figure A2). In most countries, the two central deciles (5th and 6th) together capture not 20 percent but
more than 40 percent of respondents. Many seem to believe they are relatively richer or poorer than they are.24
Although the LiTS samples have withstood critical examination, it remains possible they do not adequately
represent all income groups. If they oversampled the middle of the distribution, that would explain why respondents disproportionately placed themselves in the middle. To address this, we adopt a different tactic.
From respondents’ answers to other questions, we identify some who are almost certainly among the richest
in their societies and others almost certainly among the poorest, and see where they placed themselves in the
distribution.
LiTS surveys ownership of various consumer durables, including cars. Of course, in developed countries car
ownership is common, but in six of those sampled—Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
and Ukraine—one third of households or fewer owned cars, according to national statistics (Table A10). Given
the expense of automobile ownership, one might expect car-owning households to be among the richest. In
Azerbaijan, the average car cost $13,300 at the time of the survey—almost four times per capita income.25
However, if car-owners in these countries belonged in the top income deciles, they did not realize this. More
than 60 percent of them in all six countries thought they earned less than the median income (Table A10).
Owning two houses usually indicates wealth. In all 35 LiTS countries, at most one in four respondents
said her family owned a second residence, and in all but three it was less than one in six. However, most
secondary residence owners did not think themselves particularly rich (Table A11). On average, 60 percent
placed themselves in the bottom half of the income distribution. In Uzbekistan, only 3 percent of respondents
lived in households with a second residence, yet almost two thirds of these thought their incomes were below
the national median. Developed countries had fewer such anomalies. Still, in France, Italy, and Great Britain,
40 percent or more of second home owners placed themselves in their country’s bottom half.
Neither of these indicators is perfect. Even clearer evidence of high income might be owning both a car and
a second home. In the average LiTS country, about 7 percent of respondents fit this description (Table A12).
But, again, most did not consider themselves rich. On average, 57 percent of such property-owners thought they
24
We also examined a similar question in the fifth wave of the World Values Survey (WVS). The histograms for this survey also tend to
bunch in the center, and for a few countries towards the bottom of the scale. However, Donnelly and Pop-Eleches (2012) raise questions
about the representativeness of the WVS samples.
25
From www.stat.gov.az., converted from Manats at 1.245M/ $.

15

belonged in the bottom half of the distribution, and only 3 percent put themselves in the top two deciles. Similar
patterns emerge for other consumer durables.
In these cases, many respondents who were almost certainly among the wealthiest in their country thought
their incomes below average. Their guesses ranged widely, suggesting considerable doubt. Might they have
been answering insincerely out of embarrassment or even fear? If so, they would surely not have admitted to
owning a second home—an even clearer indication of wealth than their self-placement in a high income decile.
Acknowledging possession of expensive property while claiming to be relatively poor is more consistent with
confusion than with deliberate deception.
Do the poor understand their relative position? By design, it is the poor who receive targeted income
support from the state. In the five developed LiTS countries, national statistics suggest very few received such
aid—about 6 percent of households in France and Sweden and less than 1 percent in Germany. Yet among those
who said that they had been approved to receive “targeted social assistance/guaranteed minimum income” in
the previous year, only a few thought they belonged right at the bottom of the distribution (Table A13). Most
aid recipients in all five countries located themselves above the bottom fifth.
Going hungry is another sign of poverty. Strapped for cash, some LiTS respondents reported having recently
“reduced consumption of staple foods such as milk, fruits, vegetables, or bread.” In the developed European
countries, the share saying this ranged from 3 percent in Sweden to 20 percent in Italy. We might expect such
food-deprived respondents to fall in the bottom two deciles. Again, they thought otherwise. In Italy, more than
half of those cutting food purchases placed themselves in the fifth decile or higher, and in France and Sweden
more than one third did so (Table A14, Panel A). Similarly, in the sixth round of the World Values Survey
(2010-14), very few respondents in the richest countries said that they had “gone without enough food to eat”
during the previous year. Yet in most such countries, many who confessed to having gone hungry nevertheless
placed themselves in the top six of ten income groups (Table A14, Panel B). In short, these surveys suggest the
rich often think they are poorer—and the poor think they are richer—than they actually are. Both think they are
closer to the median than is, in fact, the case.

3.3 Do people know how inequality is changing?
Perhaps ordinary people do not know the level of inequality or their place in the distribution but can still sense
when the gap between rich and poor is growing. If so, the dynamics of inequality might still drive political
behavior. To measure such change, we use the Gini coefficient for pre-tax-and-transfers income from SWIID
5.0. Between 2007 and 2012, change in the Gini ranged from a fall of 7.7 percentage points in Bolivia to a rise

16

of 6.5 points in Spain. Among the 61 countries with SWIID data for both 2007 and 2012, inequality increased
in 32 and decreased in 29.
Could citizens detect the trend? To check, we exploit a survey taken in spring 2013 by the Pew Global
Attitudes project. Respondents in 39 countries were asked: “Do you think the gap between the rich and the
poor in (survey country) has increased, decreased, or stayed the same in the last five years?” For 22 countries,
we had data on actual changes in the Gini coefficient.
We categorize countries where the Gini changed by less than plus or minus 1 percentage point as having
“stayed the same.” With this classification, the Gini fell in eight of these 22 countries, increased in six, and
stayed the same in eight. If respondents chose randomly between these three options, they would be right about
one third of the time. In fact, the average percentage correct was just slightly higher—34.6 percent (Table
A15).26 In more than 90 percent of countries, a plurality of respondents—usually a large majority—believed
the gap between rich and poor had grown in the previous five years. The only exceptions were Malaysia, El
Salvador, and Bolivia, where a plurality said it had “stayed the same.”
Perhaps repondents focused on wealth rather than income inequality. If we use Credit Suisse’s wealth
estimates, a larger share were right. This is simply because wealth inequality rose in more countries than did
income inequality between 2007 and 2012, so the tendency to assume rising inequality was more often correct.27
But whereas the proportion of respondents that thought inequality was rising at least correlated cross-nationally
with actual change in the Gini for income (r = .58), there was no correlation with the actual change in wealth
inequality. In other words, although most respondents worldwide thought inequality had risen, respondents were
not more likely to believe this in countries that actually experienced the biggest increases in wealth inequality.28
People appear equally ignorant of trends in poverty. In 2010, Eurobarometer asked respondents how poverty
had changed in their country in the previous three years. Again coding change of less than plus or minus 1
percent as “stayed the same,” actual poverty had increased in just eight of the 27 countries. Yet in all 27,
more than 65 percent of respondents thought it had risen. Moreover, the percentage who thought poverty had
increased correlated negatively with the actual change (r = -.23; Figure A3). In Romania, where poverty had
fallen almost four percentage points, 89 percent thought it had risen.
26
Using post-tax-and-transfer income Ginis, the percentage correct was lower. For another nine of the 39 countries, change in the Gini
between 2007 and 2011 (but not 2012) was available. Including these countries, the average percentage right increases to 38.7 percent.
Might people be more sensitized to change at the top of the distribution? Using the income share of the top decile instead of the Gini to
measure the “gap between rich and poor,” only 29 percent got the trend right—fewer than would have done so by chance (Table A17).
27
We use the change in the share of wealth of the top 10 percent to assess the trend since CS provides Ginis only from 2010.
28
In a similar Pew survey for 2002, the proportion correctly identifying the direction of change averaged 36.6 percent, again only slightly
better than chance (Table A16).

17

In short, in recent years respondents worldwide have assumed that inequality and poverty were rising. If
focusing on the income distribution, they guessed the trend only slightly better than chance. If focusing on
wealth, they were right more often because inequality did increase in more countries. However, the proportion
convinced that inequality was rising bore no relation to the actual change in the wealth gap. Even where the
wealth share of the top 10 percent and top 1 percent fell slightly in 2007-12—e.g., in Canada and the US—two
thirds or more believed it had risen.

4 Perceived inequality, demand for redistribution, and class conflict
If people do not know how high inequality is, we should not expect actual inequality to predict public preferences and behavior. But perceived inequality could still matter. The evidence we can offer here is only suggestive; we do not take a strong position on causality. Still, results of various surveys suggest it is perceptions—not
the reality—of inequality that shapes political outcomes.29
First, consider preferences over redistribution. In one question, the ISSP asked whether it was “the responsibility of the government to reduce the differences in income between people with high incomes and those
with low incomes.” Respondents could choose among the options: “strongly agree,” “agree,” “neither agree
nor disagree,” “disagree” “strongly disagree,” and “can’t choose.” Since the first five of these represent ordinal
categories, we constructed a dependent variable measuring support for government redistribution that takes the
values one to five.
We then explored how support for redistribution related to both actual and perceived inequality. For actual
inequality, we used the country’s Gini for income; for perceived inequality, we used the perceived Gini (GPI,
based on answers to Question 14a, as described earlier).30 We conducted analysis at both the country and individual level (see Table 4).31 At the country level, we regressed (by OLS) the average level of support for
redistribution on the country’s actual Gini and the perceived Gini (GPI). At the individual level, we regressed
(by ordered probit) the individual’s support for redistribution (on the 5-point scale) on her country’s actual Gini
and on that individual’s perceived Gini. In fact, in the individual case we could distinguish between the effect
of the average perception of inequality in the country (GPI) and the individual’s idiosyncratic perception (the
29
Using a different method to estimate perceived wage inequality, Kuhn (2016) finds this is related to belief in the degree of meritocracy
in labor markets.
30
This question came after the one about attitudes towards redistribution in the questionnaire, so the perceived inequality question can
not have primed respondents’ attitudes towards redistribution.
31
Since some data were missing for some controls, we used multiple imputation in the individual level regressions, using Amelia to
impute 10 datasets which were then combined using STATA’s mi command. Results are very similar deleting listwise instead of imputing
(Table A19). Table A18 adds controls for the country’s growth rate and exposure to trade (exports plus imports as a percent of GDP).
Neither of these is ever significant, and they affect results little.

18

Gini of her chosen diagram, controlling for GPI) (Table 4, columns 9-11). The former may measure common perceptions based on shared cultural or media stimuli, while the latter captures the individual’s particular
impressions.
Neither the pre-tax nor the post-tax actual income Ginis are related to support for redistribution at either the
country or individual level. However, perceived inequality is highly significant in both cases. Where inequality
was believed to be high, more people supported government redistribution. Given beliefs about inequality,
higher actual inequality was in fact associated with lower demand for redistribution (columns 4, 5, 10, and
11). Breaking down perceptions into their general and idiosyncratic components, we found a stronger effect of
the general perception than of the individual’s idiosyncratic perceptions (columns 9-11). Still, both seemed to
matter. And the importance of perceived inequality was robust to including a variety of individual level controls.
(Other things equal, women, the old, those without higher education, and those who identified with a left-wing
political party, as classified by ISSP, tended to support redistribution more.)
What about the idea that greater inequality prompts class conflict and even revolution? One ISSP question
asked respondents how much conflict existed in their country “between poor people and rich people.” The four
possible answers (besides “can’t choose”) ranged from “no conflicts” to “very strong conflicts.” Again, we created an ordinal scale and ran probit regressions to analyze relationships at the individual level; we used OLS
to measure country level relationships. At the country level, post-tax-and-transfer inequality was significantly
associated with greater reported inter-class tension, although pre-tax-and-transfer inequality was not (Table 5,
panel A). However, the effect of perceived inequality was two to three times larger than that of actual inequality.
Moreover, controlling for income and population eliminated the effect of actual inequality (column 5). At the
individual level, results are similar: the post-tax-and-transfer Gini and individual perceptions are both significant; but perceptions have a much larger effect, and that of actual inequality disappears controlling for income
and population.32 (Women, the young, the unmarried, those without higher education, and backers of left-wing
parties tended to perceive more conflict between rich and poor.)

32
This might be, in part, because some effect of actual inequality is mediated through perceptions of it. However, the inaccurate part of
perceptions is also clearly important. If we split the variation in the perceived Gini into two parts—that which is correlated with the actual
post-tax-and-transfer Gini and that which is not—and put both into the Table 5 regressions, both are significant (not shown).

19

20

Source: ISSP 2009, SWIID 5.0. Penn World Tables 8.0 for GDP per capita, World Bank WDI for population.
Note: Robust standard errors, clustered by country in panel B. ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. Multiple imputation used in Panel B to impute values for some
independent variables; 10 datasets imputed with Amelia. See Table A19 for results without imputation.

Table 4: Inequality perceptions and support for government redistribution
Dependent variable: Government should reduce differences in income
(A)
(B)
Country level, OLS: average response where
Individual level, ordered probit:
5 = “strongly agree”, 1 = “strongly disagree”
5 = “strongly agree”, 1 = “strongly disagree”
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Gini (pre-tax-and-transfers)
−0.57
-0.64
(.84)
(.74)
Gini (post-tax-and-transfers)
-0.03
−1.51∗ −1.52∗∗
-0.12
−1.44∗∗ −1.41∗∗
(.58)
(.60)
(.55)
(.41)
(.45)
(.41)
Perceived Gini (respondent)
7.35∗∗ 8.52∗∗
8.17∗∗
3.09∗∗
1.89∗∗
1.91∗∗
1.73∗∗
(.96)
(.98)
(1.07)
(.33)
(.17)
(.17)
(.15)
Perceived Gini (country avge.)
5.58∗∗
7.11∗∗
7.01∗∗
(1.09)
(.91)
(.94)
Ln GDP per capita
-0.04
-.04
(.09)
(.08)
Ln population
-0.01
-.01
(.05)
(.04)
Male
−.07∗∗
(.02)
Age
.002∗
(.001)
Married
-.00
(.03)
Some higher education
−.24∗∗
(.04)
Respondent identified with
.32∗∗
Left-wing party
(.05)
Respondent identified with
.08
Center party
(.06)
Constant
4.12∗∗ 3.87∗∗ 1.46∗∗ 1.57∗∗
2.03
(.39)
(.20)
(.33)
(.29)
(1.20)
N
40
40
40
40
40
55,238 55,238 55,238 55,238 55,238
55,238
R2
0.01
0
0.45
0.52
0.53

21

Source: ISSP 2009, SWIID 5.0. Penn World Tables 8.0 for GDP per capita, World Bank WDI for population.
Note: Robust standard errors, clustered by country in panel B. ∗ p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01. Multiple imputation used in Panel B to impute values for some
independent variables; 10 datasets imputed with Amelia. See Table A19 for results without imputation.

Table 5: Inequality perceptions and perceived conflict between rich and poor
Dependent variable: Perception of conflict between rich and poor
(A)
(B)
Country level, OLS: average response where
Individual level, ordered probit:
4 = “very strong conflicts”, 1 = “no conflicts”
4 = “very strong conflicts”, 1 = “no conflicts”
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Gini (pre-tax-and-transfers)
0.63
0.65
(.77)
(.68)
Gini (post-tax-and-transfers)
1.77∗∗
1.16
0.41
1.65∗∗
1.11
0.46
(.56)
(.62)
(.57)
(.56)
(.60)
(.48)
Perceived Gini (respondent)
4.42∗∗ 3.52∗
4.60∗∗
1.94∗∗
1.08∗∗
1.09∗∗
1.08∗∗
(1.29) (1.53)
(1.53)
(.38)
(.16)
(.16)
(.16)
Perceived Gini (country avge.)
3.97∗∗
2.88∗
4.22∗∗
(1.28)
(1.37)
(1.36)
Ln GDP per capita
0.15∗
.18∗∗
(.06)
(.05)
Ln population
0.11∗∗
.13∗∗
(.03)
(.03)
Male
−.07∗∗
(.02)
Age
.002∗
(.001)
Married
−.07∗∗
(.02)
Some higher education
−.10∗∗
(.04)
Respondent identified with
.07∗
Left-wing party
(.03)
Respondent identified with
-.05
Center party
(.05)
Constant
2.17∗∗ 1.87∗∗ 1.01∗
0.93∗
-1.44
(.37)
(.20)
(.40)
(.39)
(.87)
N
40
40
40
40
40
55,238 55,238 55,238 55,238 55,238 55,238
R2
0.01
0.14
0.19
0.25
0.47

Tables 4 and 5 use measures of perceived inequality and redistributive preferences from the same survey.
As noted, we do not make strong claims about causality. Inequality perceptions might affect demand for redistribution. But it also could be that advocates of redistribution “perceive” more inequality than there is, to
rationalize their preferences; or both might result from some third factor. We defer systematic examination to a
future paper.
Still, we used data from other surveys to assess robustness. In 2009, Eurobarometer asked respondents how
much tension existed in their countries: A) between poor and rich, and B) between managers and workers.
The limited overlap between the Eurobarometer and ISSP surveys reduces our sample to just 17 countries. But
among them, perceived inequality (from ISSP) related strongly and positively to perceived tension between rich
and poor and between managers and workers (from Eurobarometer); actual inequality was either insignificant
or negatively related to reported class conflict (Table A20).
Finally, how do beliefs about poverty relate to preferences over social policy and perceptions of inter-class
tensions? As Tables A21 and A22 demonstrate, using Eurobarometer data from 2010, both the actual poverty
rate and the belief that it was high correlated with the demand for government anti-poverty measures. However,
only perceived—not actual—poverty was positively associated with reported tension between rich and poor.
In sum, we found little evidence of a link between actual inequality and citizens’ demands for government
redistribution or perceptions of class conflict. However, the levels of inequality and poverty that citizens imagined to exist correlated strongly and robustly with such demands and perceptions. Although we cannot make
strong causal claims, the patterns are consistent with the notion that beliefs about inequality—rather than the
actual phenomenon—drive political outcomes.

5 Conclusion
Various theories contend that economic inequality influences the characteristics and policies of governments.
Most assume that citizens accurately observe the level of inequality, at least on average. The evidence presented
here casts doubt on this assumption.
Meltzer and Richard (1981) showed that, under majority rule, redistribution should rise with the gap between
median and average incomes. However, when respondents around the world were asked to guess their country’s
average wage, a large proportion placed it on the wrong side of the median wage. Respondents were confused
about their relative incomes. Many who reported that they could not afford enough to eat nevertheless thought
they belonged in the middle or even upper half of the distribution. Others whose assets suggested relative wealth

22

thought their incomes were below average. Given such confusion, it seems doubtful the median voter generally
knows whether she would gain or lose from redistribution. And, in fact, demand for redistribution appears to
vary with not actual inequality but the perception of it.33
Acemoglu and Robinson (2006, p.36) argued that, ceteris paribus, more “inter-group inequality makes revolution more attractive for the citizens” of a dictatorship. If they revolt, the poor “get a chance to share the entire
income of the economy (minus what is destroyed in revolution).” The rich should respond with repression (if
inequality is high) or by democratizing (if inequality is intermediate). Yet, as we saw, citizens often have little
idea about the income and wealth of the rich. They hardly outperform chance when guessing how income is
distributed. And, on average, they missed by 17 percentage points when guessing the share of wealth owned
by the top 1 percent. Revolution, repression, and democratization might relate to predominant beliefs about
inequality, and perceptions of class conflict appear to vary with those beliefs. But if potential revolutionaries
know so little about actual inequality levels, these are unlikely to predict revolution.
Not all arguments about inequality assume individuals perceive it accurately. The claim that concentration
of wealth enables elites to dominate politics, depressing participation, presupposes no widespread knowledge of
the Gini coefficient (Goodin and Dryzek 1980, Solt 2008). Nor does the point that inequality can lead the poor
to underinvest in human capital if their borrowing is constrained (Galor and Zeira 1993). Ansell and Samuels’
(2010) argument that inequality motivates the rich to seek democracy as a defense against state expropriation
could still work even if rich and poor are uncertain of the distribution.
A growing literature contends that belief in high social mobility or the fairness of the economic system, as
well as various norms, may reconcile people to large income gaps (Alesina and Giuliano 2009, Bénabou and
Tirole 2006). We find these arguments plausible and intuitive—with one modification. What such beliefs and
norms reconcile people to is not actual inequality but the level they believe to exist.
In making this argument, we do not assume offical inequality statistics are necessarily accurate. For many
reasons, inequality is difficult to measure. But that does not invalidate our main point: it makes it in another
way. If experts cannot gauge inequality, how can the man in the street? And the accuracy of official measures
does not affect our second point: that perceptions of inequality—whether accurate or not—do correlate with
political preferences. The strength of this link is significant in its own right, even though establishing causal
33

The Meltzer Richard (1981, p.941) model assumes “fully informed” voters. Even if voters are misinformed about inequality, one might
be able to construct a version of the game in which parties still converge on the policy the median voter should prefer if correctly informed
(we thank John Huber for this point). However, for this to hold one must assume that parties can only propose policies that genuinely
balance the budget (rather than those voters believe are feasible) and that they compete by offering voters a vector of net transfers. If, by
contrast, parties compete by proposing a tax rate (as in Meltzer Richard, pp.920-21) and voters infer—based on perhaps incorrect beliefs
about the income distribution—what the equal lump sum transfers will be, then, at least in a one-shot model, parties should converge on the
tax rate the median voter believes he prefers. The transfers feasible at that rate may not be what voters expect. However, if a party offers
a different tax rate, the other party can win by offering the rate the median voter thinks he prefers. In this case, higher inequality will not
necessarily produce more redistribution.

23

priority is difficult.
A few possible objections are worth considering. First, some might argue that all models—including that
of Meltzer and Richard—are simplifications and not meant to be taken too literally. Friedman (1953) famously
contended that the realism of assumptions is irrelevant if a theory yields accurate predictions. However, the
arguments we critique have not yielded accurate predictions, and the implausibility of their assumptions might
explain why. That models are simplifications does not mean that all simplifications are useful.
Second, it could be that people have accurate intuitions about inequality but that the polls fail to elicit
these. Certainly, the polls we cite are imperfect in various ways, and, therefore, we use different surveys and
instruments to measure perceptions in different country contexts. However, if people know the true level of
inequality—and influential theories get the logic right—these theories should do a better job of explaining
the crossnational and over-time variation in behavior. We should see a strong link between high inequality
and, respectively, revolution, resistance to democratization (in autocracies), and demand for redistribution (in
democracies). By the same logic, we should not expect to see such a strong correlation between inaccurate
“perceptions of inequality” and support for government redistribution. If people respond as if they do not know
something and act as if they do not know it, Occam’s razor would suggest the reason may well be that—they do
not know it.
A third objection might be that detailed factual knowledge is unnecessary if informational shortcuts can
achieve the same result. Lupia (2015) rightly urges scholars to stop equating competence with the recall of
obscure facts. “Low information rationality” is often enough. Yet, in this case, it is hard to see what shortcuts
or heuristics could enable peasants to infer when the benefits of revolution exceed the costs or voters to deduce
their place within the income distribution. Arguments of this type often assume that some informed agent—a
party leader, revolutionary, or activist—exists to guide the uninformed or make decisions on their behalf. Yet
such actors have incentives to mislead or serve their own interests. Professional revolutionaries have a stake in
revolution, just as the authorities have one in the status quo. Parties have established positions on government
redistribution and rarely change these to match undulations in the Gini.
It might be that people only become informed about the income gap when economic disruptions make it
salient or when some decision—such as voting—looms. If so, it is hard to imagine a year when inequality
would have been more salient than 2009, as the global financial crisis tipped the world into deep recession. To
check whether people become better informed around the time of elections, we recalculated Table 1 using just
those 13 countries where the ISSP’s polling occurred within six months of a national vote. The proportions of
respondents “correct” about their country’s distribution—26 percent and 24 percent—were if anything lower

24

than in the full sample (29 and 24 percent).
Protests, revolutions, and even elections turn on the actions of a subset of citizens. Does it, then, matter whether the majority gauges inequality correctly? Again, the theories we critique here—based on the
Meltzer-Richard framework—assume that it does. They suppose that all voters know their interests and act
upon them—whether by voting, rebelling, or resisting democracy. Perhaps if most citizens realized they did not
know the right answer and deferred to those who did, the actions of the informed would carry the day. But the
evidence suggests citizens are not just passively ignorant; they hold non-randomly inaccurate beliefs, which will
not wash out in the mix. It may be reasonable to switch to a theory in which what matters is the mobilization of
groups, with different identities and organizational potential (Achen and Bartels 2016). But that requires abandoning the approaches we critique. It also eliminates the straightforward connection between political outcomes
and inequality. In a group-based theory, such outcomes would have more to do with the structure of identities,
the preferences of group leaders, and the organizational resources at their disposal.
We defer to future research the question what causes perceptions of inequality.34 But several hypotheses
seem plausible. First, individuals may over-generalize from their immediate reference group, thus making biased inferences (Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz 2013, Xu and Garand 2010). Since, in everyday life, most
people tend to see some around them who are richer and some who are poorer, it is natural to think they belong
in the middle of the distribution. This would be consistent with the tendency we noted for respondents to disproportionately place themselves around the center. People may also—wrongly—take the range they observe in
day-to-day interactions as a measure of the range nationwide. Inhabitants of villages where incomes and property are relatively equal may underestimate their country’s gap between rich and poor. Those in professionsS
with large earnings variation may think inequality is higher than those in jobs with uniform wages.
A second likely influence is the media, and television in particular.35 Globalization of media might cause
people in poor countries to compare their consumption to that glimpsed in rich states, generating impressions
of relative deprivation (Pop-Eleches 2009). Sensationalistic and celebrity-focused television may foster perceptions of extreme wealth. At the same time, media that publicize data about actual incomes might reduce misperceptions. In Norway, after newspapers created websites on which citizens could learn each others’ salaries,
perceptions of relative income became more accurate and attitudes towards redistribution changed accordingly
(Perez-Truglia 2016). Besides media effects, greater travel—domestic and international—could broaden the
reference group.
34
35

For an interesting theory of how information about inequality is spread, see Iversen and Soskice (2015).
The strong effect of the average perception of inequality in the country in Tables 4 and 5 is consistent with media influences.

25

A third possible determinant is ideology, which may predispose people to “see” the level of inequality their
beliefs and values convince them must exist (Alesina and Fuchs-Schundeln 2007). Citizens in post-socialist
countries appear particularly sensitive to inequality, perhaps reflecting the ideological legacy of communism
(Corneo and Gruner 2002). Socialists everywhere may exaggerate income gaps, while conservatives may underestimate them. A Marxist may see capital concentrating, while a free marketeer sees wealth trickling down.
Shocks experienced early in life can also leave lasting scars in values and perceptions (Guiliano and Spilimbergo
2014).
Fourth, other psychological effects could matter. A desire to blend in may cause individuals to think their
income close to average; “self-enhancement bias” might lead them to overestimate their standing (Loughnan
et al 2011). Some may conflate reports of high inequality worldwide with assessments of their own country.
They may confuse changes in the trend with information about the level: hearing inequality is rising, they may
assume it is high, and vice versa. They may suppose that recession—which reduces incomes of the poor—must
increase inequality, when in fact recessions often shrink the capital income of the rich more than wage income.
On the other hand, reports of rapid growth that arouse unrealistic expectations could generate suspicions that
income has been diverted to the wealthy (Verme 2014).
Whatever the causes, the gap between perceptions and reality—or, at least, statisticians’ best estimates of reality—is clear. And misperceptions were probably even greater in less data-rich and scientifically sophisticated
eras. Besides inequality, we suspect misperceptions affect how people respond to inflation, unemployment, and
other economic phenomena (Gimpelson and Oshchepkov 2012). More generally, respondents misperceive facts
about various social phenomena (Hochschild 2001) and often resist changing their views and policy preferences
even when confronted with accurate information (Kuklinski et al. 2000, Lawrence and Sides 2014, Kuziemko
et al. 2015).

26

References
Aalberg, Toril. 2003. Achieving Justice: Comparative Public Opinions on Income Distribution.
Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Demcoracy.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Achen, Christopher H. and Larry M. Bartels. 2016. Democracy for Realists: Why Elections Do Not Produce
Responsive Government. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ahlquist, John S., and Erik Wibbels. 2012. “Riding the Wave: World Trade and Factor-Based
Models of Democratization.” American Journal of Political Science 56(2): 447-464.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005a. “Fairness and Redistribution.” American
Economic Review 95(4): 960-980.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005b. “Corruption, Inequality, and Fairness.”
Journal of Monetary Economics 52(7): 1227–1244.
Alesina, Alberto, Guido Cozzi, and Noemi Mantovan. 2012. “The Evolution of Ideology, Fairness
and Redistribution.” The Economic Journal 122: 1244–1261.
Alesina, Alberto, Nichola Fuchs-Schundeln. 2007. “Good-Bye, Lenin, or Not?” American Economic
Review 97: 1507-1528.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2009. “Preferences for redistribution.” National Bureau of
Economic Research, working paper w14825.
Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Preferences for redistribution in the land of
opportunities.” Journal of Public Economics: 897-931.
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti. 1994. “The political economy of growth: a critical survey of
the recent literature.” The World Bank Economic Review 8(3): 351-371.
Ansell, Ben, and David Samuels. 2010. “Inequality and democratization: A contractarian approach.”
Comparative Political Studies 43(12): 1543-1574.
Bagchi Sutirtha, and Jan Svejnar. 2013. “Does Wealth Inequality Matter for Growth? The Effect of
Billionaire Wealth, Income Distribution, and Poverty” IZA DP No. 7733.
Bénabou, Roland, and Efe Ok. 2001. “Social mobility and the demand for redistribution: the POUM
hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 447– 487.
Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics."
Quarterly Journal of Economics121(2): 699-746.
27

Boix, Carles. 2003. Democracy and Redistribution. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chambers, John, Lawton Swan and Martin Heesacker. 2014. “Better Off Than We Know: Distorted
Perceptions of Incomes and Income Inequality in America.” Psychological Science 25(2):
613–618.
CIS Statistical Committee. 2012. Statistika SNG. Statisticheskii’ biulleten’ 9, September.
Cojocaru, Alexandru, and Mame Fatou Diagne. 2015. “How reliable and consistent are subjective
measures of welfare in Europe and Central Asia? Evidence from the second Life in
Transition Survey.” Economics of Transition 23(1):75–103. DOI: 10.1111/ecot.12056.
Corneo Giacomo, and Hans-Peter Gruner. 2002. “Individual Preferences for Political
Redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics 83: 83-107.
Credit Suisse. 2010, 2014, 2015. Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook. Credit Suisse Research Institute.
Cruces, Guillermo, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Martin Tetaz. 2013. “Biased perceptions of income
distribution and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment.” Journal
of Public Economics 98: 100-112.
Cukierman, Alex, and Allan Meltzer. 1989. “A political theory of government debt and deficits in a
neo-Ricardian framework.” American Economic Review: 713-732.
Donnelly, Michael and Grigore Pop-Eleches. 2012. “The Questionable Validity of Income Measures
in the World Values Survey,” Princeton University: unpublished.
Engelhardt, Carina and Andreas Wagener. 2014. “Biased Perceptions of Income Inequality and
Redistribution.” University of Hannover, DP no.526.
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2012. Statistical Yearbook, Rome: FAO.
Fernandez-Albertos, Jose and Alexander Kuo. 2013. “Relative Income, Information, and Progressive
Taxation: Evidence from a Survey Experiment.” Cornell University: unpublished.
Friedman, Milton. 1953. “The Methodology of Positive Economics.” In Milton Friedman, ed. Essays in
Positive Economics. University of Chicago Press, 3–43.
Galor, Oded, and Joseph Zeira. 1993. “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” The Review of
Economic Studies 60: 35-52.
Gimpelson, Vladimir, and Aleksei Oshchepkov. 2012. “Does More Unemployment Cause More Fear
of Unemployment?” IZA Journal of Labor & Development 1(1): 1-26.
Goldstone, Jack. 2014. Revolutions: A Very Short Introduction, New York: Oxford University Press.
Goodin, Robert, and John Dryzek. 1980. “Rational Participation: The Politics of Relative Power.”

28

British Journal of Political Science 10(3): 273-92.
Gurr, Ted Robert. 1970. Why Men Rebel. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Haggard, Stephan, and Robert Kaufman. 2012. “Inequality and Regime Change: Democratic
Transitions and the Stability of Democratic Rule.” American Political Science Review
106(3): 495-516.
Hochschild, Jennifer. 2001. “Where You Stand Depends on What You See: Connections Among
Values, Perceptions of Fact, and Political Prescriptions.” In James Kuklinski, ed., Citizens
and Politics: Perspectives from Political Psychology. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 313-340.
Houle, Christian. 2009. “Inequality and Democracy: Why Inequality Harms Consolidation But Does
Not Affect Democratization.”World Politics 61(4): 589-622.
Huber, John and Piero Stanig. 2011. “Church-State Separation and Redistribution.” Journal of
Public Economics 95: 828-836.
Iversen, Torben, and David Soskice. 2015. “Information, Inequality, and Mass Polarization: Ideology in
Advanced Democracies,” Comparative Political Studies, forthcoming.
Ipsos MORI. 2015. Perils of Perception. https://www.ipsos-mori.com/ $ _ $assets/sri/perils/.
Kiatpongsan, Sorapop, and Michael I. Norton. 2014. “How Much (More) Should CEOs Make? A
Universal Desire For More Equal Pay.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 9(6): 587-593.
Kuhn, Andreas. 2011. “In the Eye of the Beholder: Subjective Inequality Measures and Individuals’ Assessment
of Market Justice.” European Journal of Political Economy 27: 625-41.
Kuhn, Andreas. 2016. “The Subversive Nature of Inequality: Subjective Inequality Perceptions and Attitudes
to Social Inequality.” CesIFO Working Paper No. 6023.
Kuklinski, James , Paul Quirk, Jennifer Jerit, David Schwieder, and Robert Rich. 2000. “Misinformation and the currency of democratic citizenship.” Journal of Politics 62(3): 790-816.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2015. “How Elastic
Are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments.”
American Economic Review, 105(4): 1478-1508.
Lawrence, Eric D., and John Sides. 2014. “The Consequences of Political Innumeracy.” Research &
Politics 1(2): 1-8.
Loughnan, Steve et al. 2011. “Economic Inequality Is Linked to Biased Self-Perception.”

29

Psychological Science 22(10): 1254–1258.
Lenz, Gabriel S. 2004. “The Consequences of Income Inequality for Redistributive Policy in the
United States.” In: Neckerman Kathryn, ed. Social Inequality. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation, 797-820.
Lupia, Arthur. 2015. Uninformed: Why People Know So Little About Politics And What We Can Do About
It. Oxford University Press.
Lupu, Noam, and Jonas Pontusson. 2011. “The Structure of Inequality and the Politics of
Redistribution.” American Political Science Review 105(02): 316-336.
Meltzer, Alan H., and Scott F. Richard. 1981. “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government.” Journal
of Political Economy: 914-927.
Neckerman, Kathryn M., and Florencia Torche. 2007. “Inequality: Causes and consequences.”
Annual Review of Sociology 33: 335-357.
Niehues, Judith. 2014. “Subjective Perceptions of Inequality and Redistributive Preferences: An
International Comparison,” Cologne Institute for Economic Research: unpublished.
Norton, Michael, and Dan Ariely. 2011. “Building a Better America—One Wealth Quintile At a Time”
Perspectives on Psychological Science 6: 9-12.
Oostendorp, Remco. 2012. “The Occupational Wages around the World (OWW) Database: Update
for 1983-2008).” World Bank: World Development Report 2013 Background paper.
Ostby, Gudrun. 2013. “Inequality and Political Violence: A Review of the Literature.” International
Area Studies Review 16(2): 206-231.
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo. 2016. “The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment,” SSRN working paper, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2657808.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1994a. “Does centralization increase the size of
government?” European Economic Review 38(3): 765-773.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 1994b. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American
Economic Review 84: 600-621.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110: 551–584.
Pop-Eleches, Grigore. 2009. “Economic Reference Group Salience in Post-Communist Eastern
Europe: Causes and Consequences.” Princeton University: unpublished. URL: https://www.
princeton. edu/ ∼ gpop/PC % 20ref % 20groups % 20GPE % 20Dec09. pdf.

30

Ravallion, Martin, and Michael Lokshin. 2000. “Who Wants to Redistribute? The Tunnel Effect in
1990s Russia.” Journal of Public Economics 76(1): 87-104.
Solt, Frederick. 2008. “Economic Inequality and Democratic Political Engagement.” American
Journal of Political Science 52(1): 48-60.
Solt, Frederick. 2009. “Standardizing the World Income Inequality Database.” Social Science
Quarterly 90(2): 231-242.
Solt, Frederick. 2014. “The Standardized World Income Inequality Database.” Working paper.
SWIID Version 5.0, October 2014.
Van Ourti, Tom, and Philip Clarke. 2011. “A Simple Correction to Remove the Bias of the Gini
Coefficient Due to Grouping.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 982-994.
Verme, Paolo. 2014. “Explaining the Gap Between Facts and Perceptions of Inequality.” Inequality
in Focus 2(4): 5-8.
Xu, Ping, and James C. Garand. 2010. “Economic Context and Americans’ Perceptions of Income
Inequality.” Social Science Quarterly 91(5): 1220-1241.

31

Perceived Gini, reconstructed from survey answers

Figure A1: Inequality--Perceptions and Reality, 2009
0.40

UKR
HUN HRV
SLK

POR
EST
POL ITL

0.35
CZR
SLN

LAT
BUG

FRA
TAI
GER KORSPA
JAP
AUT
CYP

0.30

BEL
SWE FIN
ICL

0.25

SWZ

TUR
VEN
ISR

ZAF

ARG
RUS
PHL

CHL

CHN

GBN USA

NZL
AUS

DEN
NOR

0.20
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Actual Gini
Sources: SWIID (Solt 2014) and ISSP (2009).
Note: Actual Gini is for post-tax-and-transfer income. Perceived Gini is reconstructed from responses to ISSP
question 14a. Correlation: r = .37.

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Belarus

BiH

Bulgaria

Croatia

Czech

Estonia

FYROM

France

Georgia

Germany

Hungary

Italy

Kazakhstan

Kosovo

Kyrgyzstan

Latvia

Lithuania

Moldova

Mongolia

Montenegro

Poland

Romania

Russia

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Sweden

Tajikistan

Turkey

UK

Ukraine

Uzbekistan

10 20 30 40
0
10 20 30 40
0
10 20 30 40
0
10 20 30 40

0

0

Percent

0

10 20 30 40

0

10 20 30 40

Albania

0

5

10

0

5

10

0

5

10

0

ineq1
Graphs by countryname

5

10

0

5

10

5

10

Percent that thought that poverty had
increased in previous three years, Aug-Sep
2010

Figure A3: Trend in Poverty--Perceptions and Reality, Europe 2007-2010

100
95
90

BUL

ROM
EST

85

IRE
ITA

80

HUN
LAT
GRE
FRA
POR GER
BEL
NTH
CZE

LIT SPA
SLI
SLK

CYP
FIN

75

LUX

DEN

UK

70

SWEAUT

MLT
POL

65

r = -.23

60
-5.0

-4.0

-3.0

-2.0

-1.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

Change in percentage of population in poverty, 2007-10
(income below 60% of median equivalised income after social transfers)
Sources: Eurobarometer (74.1) and Eurostat.

5.0

i

i

