NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEIGHBORHOOD SANITATION AND INFANT MORTALITY
Michael Geruso
Dean Spears
Working Paper 21184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21184

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015, Revised May 2017

The authors are grateful to seminar participants at the Population Association of America 2014,
the Indian Statistical Institute, the Princeton University Center for Health and Wellbeing, and the
University of Texas at Austin for comments and suggestions. We thank Sandy Black, Marika
Cabral, Anne Case, Angus Deaton, Michel Guillot, Robert Jensen, Leigh Linden, Steve Trejo,
and Eric Verhoogen for useful conversations. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, from grants 5 R24 HD042849 and 5 T32 HD007081
awarded to the Population Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin by the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and from the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation grant OPP1125318. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21184.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2015 by Michael Geruso and Dean Spears. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Neighborhood Sanitation and Infant Mortality
Michael Geruso and Dean Spears
NBER Working Paper No. 21184
May 2015, Revised May 2017
JEL No. H23,H41,I1,I12,I15,O1,O15
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we shed new light on a long-standing puzzle: In India, Muslim children are
substantially more likely than Hindu children to survive to their first birthday, even though Indian
Muslims have lower wealth, consumption, educational attainment, and access to state services.
Contrary to the prior literature, we show that the observed mortality advantage accrues not to
Muslim households themselves but rather to their neighbors, who are also likely to be Muslim.
Investigating mechanisms, we provide a collage of evidence suggesting externalities due to poor
sanitation are a channel linking the religious composition of neighborhoods to infant mortality.

Michael Geruso
University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
mike.geruso@austin.utexas.edu
Dean Spears
r.i.c.e.
472 Old Colchester Road
Amston, CT 06231
dean@riceinstitute.org

In this paper, we address a long-standing puzzle in the development and health literature: In India,
Muslim children are substantially more likely than Hindu children to survive to their first birthday,
even though Muslims have lower wealth, consumption, and educational attainment, and face worse
access to state services such as piped water and health infrastructure, compared to the majority Hindus.1 By age one, mortality among Muslims is 17% lower than among Hindus, with an additional 1.1
infants per 100 surviving. Bhalotra, Valente and van Soest (2010) named this robust and persistent
pattern a “puzzle,” showing that individual and household characteristics could not explain it.2
After replicating the fact that Muslim children have a large survival advantage in India, we show
that the mortality difference can be accounted for by two facts. First, compared to the typical Hindu
infant, the typical Muslim infant lives in a neighborhood where a larger share of her neighbors are
Muslim. Second, both Hindu and Muslim infants are more likely to survive in neighborhoods with
high shares of Muslim neighbors. The natural question, then, is: what makes neighborhoods disproportionately inhabited by Muslims better places for the health of (Muslim and Hindu) children?
We show, consistent with the well-known relative disadvantage of Muslims in India (Sachar et al.,
2006 and Deolalikar, 2008), that neighborhoods with high shares of Muslim households are associated with worse characteristics that predict infant health along many observable dimensions—with
the important exception of sanitation.
Despite relative economic advantage, India’s majority Hindu population is 25 percentage points
more likely to defecate in the open—that is, in open places such as in fields, behind bushes, or near
roads—than the minority Muslim population. This Hindu-Muslim behavioral difference implies that
the fraction of a household’s neighbors who are Muslim is strongly correlated with the local sanitation environment to which the household is exposed. For example, in nationally representative data,
Hindus residing in neighborhoods that are 10% Muslim are exposed to a local open defecation prevalence of 63%, while Hindus residing in neighborhoods that are 90% Muslim are exposed to a local
open defecation prevalence of 46%. To better understand this variation, we draw on a survey by
Coffey et al. (2014) in rural northern India that was designed to elicit richer detail on stated and
1 This

phenomenon, which has existed since at least the 1960s and which has been documented by Shariff (1995), Bhat
and Zavier (2005), Bhalotra and van Soest (2008), and Bhalotra, Valente and van Soest (2010), is hard to reconcile with the
well-developed literature on the importance of parental income in predicting child health and mortality. For overviews of
the literature and applications in the US, see Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) and Geruso (2012).
2 Bhalotra, Valente and van Soest (2010) carefully demonstrated that individual and household characteristics, development expenditure, and village-level health services and health infrastructure could not account for the Muslim mortality
advantage.

1

revealed preferences toward latrine ownership and use. While both Hindus and Muslims in India
are significantly more likely to defecate in the open than similarly poor people in other developing
countries, there is a significant gap in attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors between these two groups in
India. Hindus are more likely to report that using a toilet or latrine near their home is “impure” and
that defecating away from the home in the open is part of a healthy lifestyle. Even conditional on
ownership of a working latrine, Hindus are less likely to use it. The idea that latrine demand could
be significantly influenced by social factors beyond price and wealth accords with recent qualitative work in India (Coffey et al., 2017) and experimental interventions in Bangladesh (Guiteras et al.,
2014).3
After establishing that the mortality advantage accrues, in fact, to both Hindu and Muslim neighbors of Muslims and after observing that local sanitation is strongly associated with the share of Muslim neighbors, we provide a collage of evidence consistent with poor sanitation as the channel linking
religious composition of neighborhoods to infant mortality. We show (i) that the partial correlation
between Muslim neighbors and mortality diminishes once one controls for the sanitation practices of
neighbors; (ii) that in the minority of neighborhoods where there is no open defecation, there is no
mortality advantage associated with a higher proportion of Muslim neighbors; (iii) that where there
is non-negligible open defecation, regional variation in the strength of the Hindu-Muslim difference
in defecation behaviors predicts the regional strength of the Muslim mortality advantage; (iv) that
other child outcomes with a specific biological link to the bacteria and worms spread by fecal matter
(in particular, anemia and low current weight) are correlated with Muslim neighbors in the same
pattern as infant mortality; and (v) that child health inputs (diet, hand washing, access to piped water) and child health outcomes (vaccinations, institutional births) that should not be affected by open
defecation do not positively covary with the Muslim share in the neighborhood.
As a final exercise, we attempt to understand the potential size of the apparent mortality externalities of open defecation by instrumenting for neighborhood sanitation with the religious composition
of neighbors, holding constant own religious identity and own latrine/toilet use. These regressions
have the advantage that the coefficient of interest is identified off of a component of the variation
in neighbors’ behavior that is carefully documented in the paper. However, even though we show
that the observed correlates of Muslim neighborhoods would tend to bias against the finding of a
3 Coffey et al. (2017) document significant resistance to the adoption of effective, low-cost improvements to sanitation in
India.

2

negative externality under this strategy, the neighborhoods where Muslims are concentrated may be
different in unobservable ways, so these results are presented with caution. With that caveat, we find
that a 10 percentage point reduction in the fraction of neighbors defecating in the open is associated
with a decline in infant mortality of 6 infants per 1,000, or about 8% of the population mean infant
mortality rate (IMR).4 By replicating the IV results within various subsets of the data—for example,
boys and girls separately, first-borns and later-borns separately, and rural and urban neighborhoods
separately—we show that these results are not confounded by phenomena like differential son preference by Hindus and Muslims, birth order explanations, or differential sorting of Muslims to urban
areas.
The implied importance of open defecation for infant mortality in the modern Indian context
fits with evidence by Bleakley (2007), Cutler and Miller (2005), and Watson (2006) regarding the role
of sanitation and water in determining health and human capital outcomes in the historical US.5 In
particular, Cutler and Miller (2005) show that clean water and sanitation interventions in US citites
explain large shares of the decline in infant mortality in the US at the turn of the twentieth century.6
Our estimates are also consistent with the most credible data on cause of death during early-life in
India, which show that a large share (22%) of non-neonatal child deaths in India are due to diarrhea,
which is just one symptom of the diseases transmitted via open defecation.7
It is difficult to overstate the potential importance of this issue. Today, more than a billion people continue to defecate in the open. Ending this practice has become a target of governments,
NGOs, and private foundations. For example: ending open defecation was adopted in September
2015 among the UN’s new Sustainable Development Goals; in India in 2014, the central government
launched a 100-day construction plan during which one toilet or latrine was to be constructed every
second; from 2007 to 2014, the World Bank Group committed an average of over $3 billion per year
4 To give a sense of how large a 10 percentage point decline in open defecation would be, we note that despite India’s
rapid economic growth over the last two decades and a large government investment specific to open defecation (Spears,
2013), open defecation rates have fallen in India by no more than 1 percentage point per year between 2001 and 2011 on
average (Government of India, 2011).
5 Watson (2006) studied federal interventions to improve water and sanitation on US Indian reservations, finding effects
on local infant mortality and spillovers to neighboring localities. Bleakley (2007) studied the eradication of hookworm in
school-aged children in the US South at the turn of the twentieth century, documenting impacts on school enrollment and
attendance and on later-life income.
6 Cutler and Miller (2005) show that the introduction of clean water technologies in US cities beginning around 1900
reduced the infant mortality rate by 87 deaths per thousand, or 46 percent of the base of 189 per thousand. Naively
applying our IV estimates would predict that cutting open defecation in half from 66 percent to 33 percent would reduce
infant mortality by 20 deaths per thousand (= 0.33 · 61.4). This would be a 28 percent reduction in the baseline Indian
infant mortality rate of 72 deaths per thousand during our sample period.
7 See Million Death Study Collaborators (2010).

3

to water and sanitation; and since 2005, the Gates Foundation has invested hundreds of millions of
dollars to improve sanitation in developing countries, including efforts to “reinvent the toilet.” In
parallel, researchers have investigated the economic (Guiteras, Levinsohn and Mobarak, 2015) and
social (Guiteras et al., 2014) determinants of persistent open defecation. The rationale underlying
much of this recent attention is that private demand for toilets and latrines may be below the social
optimum, possibly because of inaccurate beliefs about the health benefits of improved sanitation, or
because latrine use has an important public goods component. The public goods aspect of sanitation
is indeed plausible. Epidemiological evidence and recent work by Duflo et al. (2015) suggest clear
pathways by which exposure to fecal pathogens introduced by neighbors could lead to acute net
malnutrition and ultimately death.8 Nonetheless, the research significantly lags the policy action and
investment.9
Our paper develops important new facts on sanitation in the modern developing world—in part
by simply documenting striking patterns in stated and revealed preferences over latrines in India.
But our study also contributes new evidence to a long-running debate: The past two centuries have
produced the fastest declines in human mortality ever experienced. Much of this gain has come
from declines in infant deaths. Economic historians examining the epidemiological transition to low
infant mortality in developed countries have debated whether it reflects changes in nutrition, medical care, or the disease environment. The disease environment, including water and sanitation, has
been found to be an important determinant of health and human capital outcomes around the world
(Spears and Lamba, 2014; Gertler et al., 2015; Headey et al., 2015). Our study is unique in the economics literature in providing even suggestive evidence of the external impacts of open defecation on
mortality. Establishing whether the harm from open defecation is primarily external is an important
8 We

discuss the epidemiological evidence in detail in Section 5. Duflo et al. (2015) show that an integrated water and
sanitation improvement program in rural India reduced diarrhea episodes by 30-50%.
9 There are several reasons why, despite significant interest in and spending on this issue, the externalities of open
defecation are not yet well understood. For one, OLS estimates are likely to be biased because neighborhoods with worse
sanitation practices are likely to be worse in other unobservable dimensions as well. Further, efforts to estimate the impacts
of sanitation via field experiments have been complicated by difficulties in generating a first-stage effect on latrine use.
In many places there exist deeply rooted preferences against using latrines and toilets, even those freely provided. The
difficulty in generating a large first stage effect has been demonstrated by three recent field experiments in rural India, each
intending to estimate the effect of open defecation on child height (Hammer and Spears, 2016; Clasen et al., 2015; Gertler
et al., 2015). Indeed, the difficulty of changing latrine use behavior, combined with the large number of neighborhood
clusters required to measure mortality externalities, may explain the lack of any experimental evidence on sanitation and
mortality to date.The number of neighborhood clusters required to detect even economically large mortality effects via a
field experiment is large both because of the plausible effect size relative to the variance in mortality and because measuring
local externalities necessarily implies randomization at the level of the locality, not the individual. We discuss the issue in
Appendix A.1.

4

starting point for understanding behavior that is socially suboptimal and for justifying any policy
intervention on the grounds of efficiency.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: We begin in Section 2 by replicating the Muslim mortality puzzle and showing that the mortality advantage in fact accrues to both Hindu and
Muslim households in Muslim-concentrated neighborhoods. Section 3 then documents how neighborhood characteristics vary with religious composition, suggesting the possibility of a sanitation
channel. Section 4 draws on several household survey datasets to understand these neighborhood
differences in light of striking differences between Hindu and Muslim respondents in stated beliefs
and revealed preferences regarding the use of latrines. Section 5 provides a variety of corroborating evidence supporting a sanitation channel, and Section 6 puts the magnitudes of the apparent
sanitation externalities in context.

2

The Puzzle of Muslim Mortality Advantage

2.1

Data

For our main analysis, we use data from three rounds of the National Family Health Survey (NFHS)
of India: 1992/1993, 1998/1999, and 2005/2006. The NFHS (India’s version of the Demographic
and Health Survey) is a large, nationally representative survey that collects data from women aged
15 to 49. Respondents report birth histories, including deaths and stillbirths, from which we calculate infant and neonatal mortality rates. The NFHS also includes information on household assets,
household physical infrastructure, and health behaviors. With respect to the disposal of excreta, the
respondents are asked about the type of toilet facility, if any, the household usually uses. We code
a household as practicing open defecation (OD) if they report using no facility, or using a bush or a
field.
Table 1 tabulates the summary statistics for our main analysis sample, which consists of Hindus
and Muslims in all waves of the NFHS. Corresponding to the analysis below, children (live births) are
the unit of observation.10 Our primary outcomes of interest are the infant mortality rate (IMR) and
the neonatal mortality rate (NMR), defined respectively as the number of deaths among children less
than one year old and less than 1 month old, scaled per 1,000 live births.11 Throughout the paper,
10 Therefore,
11 We

these averages are representative of young children and their households, not of all of India.
focus on these mortality outcomes as they are measured closest in time to the open defecation measurement that

5

we organize our analysis at the level of the child, constructing mortality rates from birth history
information on around 280,000 Hindu and Muslim children in India over the three survey rounds.
Infant mortality is high across India, and consistent with previous studies, there is a large and
significant Muslim survival advantage. Table 1 shows that across both groups during our sample
period, more than 6 children in 100 died before their first birthday. Comparison of the Hindu and
Muslim means shows that for every hundred live births, 1.1 fewer Hindu children will survive to
age one, implying infant mortality is 17% higher among Hindus. Neonatal mortality shows a similar
pattern, with a 19% survival deficit. This is despite Muslims having lower educational attainment
and wealth, measured in this survey by assets. Though the NFHS does not measure consumption, the
India Human Development Survey, which is used to supplement the main analysis and is described
below, shows that mean and median consumption are higher among Hindus than Muslims as well.12
Below, we show that neighborhood characteristics are important in understanding the lower
mortality rates of Muslim infants. We exploit the two-stage sampling structure of the survey design
to identify neighborhoods as primary sampling units (PSUs).13 The median survey PSU contains
observations on 27 households, which are sampled from PSU-level frames of about 100-200 households. In rural areas, these PSU frames may be the entire village. In urban areas, they are census
enumeration blocks.14 Therefore, PSU identifiers allow us to construct neighborhood-level variables
that reflect the characteristics of small localities. For each PSU j in the NFHS, we calculate the fraction
of sample respondents that are Muslim, M j , referred to below as Muslim concentration or Muslim
share.

2.2

The Puzzle

Figure 1 illustrates the mortality puzzle that was most clearly documented by Bhalotra, Valente and
van Soest (2010). At all levels of socioeconomic status, mortality is lower among Muslim children
than among Hindu children. The figure plots infant mortality, separately by religious group, against
two alternative summary measures of household economic well-being. The NFHS, like all DHS surcomprises our variable of interest.
12 The unconditional mean and median consumption among Hindus in the IHDS is 985 and 710 rupees per month per
capita, respectively. The unconditional mean and median consumption among Muslims is 831 and 623 rupees per month
per capita, respectively.
13 The NFHS is a two-stage random sample, first sampling PSUs and then households within sampled PSUs.
14 Our data do not contain the sampling frame itself. According to the NFHS-3 report, rural PSUs are villages of “usually
about 100 to 200 households.” Large villages above 500 households were split into three possible PSUs. Urban PSUs are
census enumeration blocks (approximately 150-200 households).

6

veys, does not measure income or consumption. Therefore, in Panel A we follow the literature (see,
for example, Filmer and Pritchett, 2001) in using asset ownership as a proxy for wealth, and collapsing seven categories of asset ownership into a single-dimensional wealth rank within the sample.15
This gives the horizontal axis a clear rank interpretation. As an alternative measure of parental endowment, we use mother’s height along the horizontal axis in Panel B. Maternal adult height predicts
maternal adult health and reflects maternal economic well-being earlier in the mother’s life (Case and
Paxson, 2008; Steckel, 2009).
Consistent with asset ownership and mother’s height capturing meaningful variation in endowments that is correlated with child survival, Figure 1 shows that infant mortality is steeply decreasing in both measures. The Muslim advantage documented by Shariff (1995), Bhat and Zavier (2005),
Bhalotra and van Soest (2008), and Bhalotra, Valente and van Soest (2010) is apparent in the large and
statistically significant mortality differences at any fixed level of either measure of well-being. To put
the size of the mortality difference in context, holding either wealth rank or maternal height constant
at their medians, Figure 1 shows that about an additional 10 out of 1000 infants in Hindu households
will die before age one compared to Muslim infants. The figure is consistent with the unconditional
difference in means of 11.1 (per thousand) in Table 1. The confidence intervals in the figure are not
adjusted for clustering, though as we show in regressions clustered at the neighborhood level in Table 2, the mortality gap is strongly statistically significant and persists after conditioning on a wider
set of person, household, and neighborhood characteristics.

2.3

The Solution: Neighborhoods

In Table 2, we analyze the extent to which neighborhood composition can statistically account for the
Hindu-Muslim mortality gap, net of the religious identity of the respondent household. In the table,
observations are children (live births). We estimate regressions of the form
Yijt = a1 Mijt + a2 M jt + fjt + f ( Xijt ) + eijt ,

(1)

15 We cannot use the pre-constructed asset index included in the NFHS dataset because it is constructed including measures of sanitation. Therefore, following Filmer and Pritchett (2001), we construct a household’s asset rank by (1) partitioning the sample into 128 = 27 bins of indicators for ownership of seven assets listed in Table 1; (2) ranking the bins by the
average infant mortality rate in each bin; and (3) assigning each household the median rank within the sample of its bin.
Thus, the household of child 200,000 has more and better assets than 200,000 of the approximately 300,000 children in our
sample. Unlike a principal component index, this measure has units with a clear interpretation.

7

where i indexes live births, j indexes survey PSUs, and t indexes the three NFHS survey rounds.16
The dependent variable, Yijt , is an individual-level mortality indicator for infant or neonatal death,
as indicated in the column headers of Table 2. It is scaled so that coefficients reflect impacts on deaths
per thousand: Yijt is either 0 if a child survived to the specified age or 1,000 if she did not.17 The
regressor of interest is an indicator for whether the household in which the child lived is Muslim,
Mijt . In some specifications, we include controls for the fraction of the PSU that is Muslim M j , or PSU
fixed effects, fjt . Standard errors are clustered by PSU.
The top panel includes no covariates Xijt beyond indicators for the survey round. The bottom
panel adds controls for a set of demographic and socio-economic characteristics that the literature on
the determinants of early-life health in India has highlighted.18 The first column in the table offers
another illustration of the widely-documented mortality puzzle. In Panel A, the Muslim coefficient
replicates the unconditional mean infant mortality difference discussed above. In the corresponding
column of Panel B, the addition of individual, household, and PSU-level variables has essentially no
net effect on the Muslim coefficient.
To capture the possibility of neighborhood effects, we include PSU fixed effects in columns 2
and 6 of Table 2. These controls attenuate the own Muslim coefficient and render it statistically insignificant. Contrary to the focus in the prior literature on the characteristics of Muslim respondents
themselves, these columns show that it is the places where Muslims are more likely to reside that is
most strongly associated with low infant mortality, and that this neighborhood effect is similar for
Hindu and Muslim households. The respondent household’s religious identity no longer predicts
its child’s survival. In the next two columns within each set of specifications (columns 3 and 7 in
Panels A and B), we control for just one PSU-level variable: the fraction of the PSU that is Muslim
(M j ). Doing so has nearly the same effect on the own-Muslim coefficient as including a neighborhood
fixed effect. Additionally controlling for indicators for all-Muslim and all-Hindu neighborhoods in
columns 4 and 8 replicates the same statistically insignificant point estimate for the coefficient on
own household Muslim as the specifications that are linear in M j . In all cases—infant and neona16 All

specifications include survey round fixed effects.
construction merely scales mortality rates and coefficients to match the standard of expressing rates per 1,000.
18 These controls, labeled “extended controls” in Table 2, include a full set of birth order indicators interacted with sex
(Pande and Jayachandran, 2013); indicators for household ownership of each of the seven assets asked about throughout
survey rounds, the standard strategy for controlling for SES using these data (Filmer and Pritchett, 2001); an indicator for
whether the mother lives with her husband’s parents (Coffey, Khera and Spears, 2013); indicators for child’s birth month
(Doblhammer and Vaupel, 2001) and birth year; an urban indicator; household size; and several other individual and
PSU-level variables. See the Table 2 notes for the full control list.
17 This

8

tal mortality with and without extended controls—controlling for the religious composition of the
neighborhood removes the association between a household’s own religion and the child’s mortality. These results imply that what has been widely documented as a Muslim survival advantage is
actually an advantage accruing to the neighbors of Muslims.
Figure 2 displays corresponding semi-parametric plots of infant mortality versus Muslim concentration. Consistent with a negative coefficient on Muslim concentration in Table 2, the negative slope
in M j in the figure indicates that infant mortality is lower for both Hindus and Muslims in neighborhoods with a greater proportion of Muslim neighbors. Also consistent with Table 2, the Muslim
mortality advantage, reflected in the vertical distance between the regression lines, is smaller (about
4 deaths per thousand) and statistically insignificant once one holds constant the religious composition of a household’s neighbors (Panel A). After additionally conditioning on own household latrine
use—a behavior that figures prominently in the analysis below—the point estimates converge even
more closely (Panel B).

3

Characteristics of Muslim Neighborhoods

The results in Table 2 raise an obvious question: What is different about neighborhoods where Muslims are likely to reside that confers a mortality advantage to the (Hindu and Muslim) residents of
those places? In this section, we investigate how neighborhoods in this context vary with religious
composition. We show a striking pattern in which Muslim-dominated neighborhoods appear to be
worse in terms of characteristics that predict infant health along many observable dimensions—with
the singular exception of sanitation.

3.1

Better or Worse Places?

Hindus and Muslims are largely segregated by neighborhood in India, but a substantial minority of
neighborhoods are mixed. Figure 3 plots the histogram of Muslim share, M j , across PSUs, with the
point mass at zero (= 65%) excluded to maintain a readable scale. The histogram shows that between
the extremes of perfect segregation of the majority Hindu and minority Muslim populations, there is
substantial variation in M j . In particular, 31% of survey primary sampling units (PSUs) contain some
fraction of Muslim residents strictly between zero and one. These mixed neighborhoods are what

9

identify neighborhood religious composition effects separately from own religion in the regressions
of Table 2.
To investigate how neighborhood-level characteristics covary with Muslim concentration, Figure 4 plots local polynomial regressions in which a set of ten variables capturing characteristics of
children, parents, and their neighborhoods that are likely to be relevant health inputs, outputs, and
correlates are regressed on M j . For ease of interpretation, we define each of the variables such that
its range is [0, 1] and higher values predict better child health outcomes.19 The dependent variables
include asset wealth (as the fraction of the seven assets reported in all survey rounds) and indicators
for household electrification, household piped water, institutional delivery of the child, any child
vaccinations, family possession of a national health card, mother having a say in child’s healthcare,
mothers’ literacy, and latrine use. In Panel A, we include all PSUs in the data. In Panel B, we restrict
the sample to the set of mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M j < 1).
Other than latrine use, the characteristics in Figure 4 are generally flat or declining in M j , indicating a mortality disadvantage of Muslim neighborhoods. The pattern is particularly clear and
approximately linear in Panel B of Figure 4, which excludes religiously homogenous PSUs. The bottom panels of Figure 4 summarize this intuition by predicting infant mortality on the basis of the
neighborhood-level means of the variables examined in Panels A and B, other than latrine use. We
regress IMR on these variables, then apply the coefficient estimates to each PSU’s characteristics to
generate predictions.20 The predicted IMR (dashed line) is monotonically increasing in Muslim concentration, for both the full sample (Panel C) and for the subset of mixed-religion PSUs (Panel D). The
actual IMR (solid line) exhibits exactly the opposite pattern, decreasing in the proportion of Muslim
neighbors.
For completeness, Appendix Table A1 reports the coefficients from the linear regressions corresponding to the local polynomials plotted in Panel B of Figure 4. In Appendix Table A2, we confirm
the sign of the relationships between each of these characteristics and infant mortality by regressing IMR on each of the dependent variables in Table A1. Together, Figure 4 and Tables A1 and A2
show that among variables likely to cause or to be correlated with child health outcomes, almost all
are either uncorrelated with M j or are changing in a way that would predict worse child health as
19 We
20 We

IMR.

confirm the sign of the relationships between these variables and mortality in Appendix Table A2.
also normalize the constant in the regression so that the mean predicted IMR exactly replicates the mean observed

10

Muslim concentration increases. In Section 5.3, we turn to an additional dataset, the India Human
Development Survey, to show that Muslim concentration is likewise uncorrelated with diet and hygiene behaviors that are not observable in our main dataset. The finding that Muslim-concentrated
neighborhoods are no better and possibly worse for infant survival along observables also accords
with observations about the relative disadvantage of India’s Muslim minority (Sachar et al., 2006;
Deolalikar, 2008).
A clear exception to this pattern in which higher Muslim concentration predicts neutral or worse
PSU characteristics is latrine use, defined as one minus the indicator for open defecation.21 In neighborhoods with close to zero Muslim residents, open defecation averages nearly 70%. This decreases
monotonically in Muslim concentration, with residents in all-Muslim neighborhoods facing local
open defecation rates below 40%. In aggregate, given the patterns of residential sorting, exposure to
local open defecation is higher for the typical Hindu child by a margin of 21 percentage points (Table
1, row 4). The relationship between M j and local open defecation (hereafter abbreviated OD) is primarily driven by variation in religious composition interacting with stable differences across Hindu
and Muslim households in their probability of practicing open defecation. In Appendix Figure A1,
we show that, within the Hindu and Muslim subsamples, there is also a small gradient in which both
groups are more likely to safely dispose of feces as M j increases.22

3.2

Neighborhood Sanitation and IMR

In light of Figure 4, we examine the correlation between the sanitation differences across Hindu and
Muslim neighborhoods and the observed Hindu-Muslim mortality differences. To precisely control
for neighbors’ behavior separately from that of the respondent household, we calculate a neighbor
OD rate, ODij i , where the superscript

i indicates a leave-out mean, taken over all households in

PSU j other than the respondent household.
In Figure 5, we plot local polynomial regressions of IMR on ODij i , separately for Hindus and
Muslims. These plots parallel those from Figure 2 in which Muslim share was the regressor of interest, and ask whether the mortality association with sanitation follows the same pattern as the
mortality association with religious composition. Panel A displays the raw correlation and Panel B
21 Urban/rural status and household size show some association, but not after controlling for own household characteristics (own latrine use and own religion).
22 This fact highlights the importance of controlling for the own household’s use of latrines or toilets in any analysis
examining the external effects of neighborhood-level sanitation.

11

controls for the household’s own latrine use.23 In both panels, the slope is similar across the two religious groups. At higher levels of ODij i in Panel A, point estimates suggest a possible Hindu-Muslim
difference conditional on ODij i , though that pattern is not robust and reverses in Panel B with the
addition of a control for own household OD.24
In a series of supplemental tests in Table A3, we regress mortality outcomes on a Muslim indicator, local Muslim share, and own and neighbors’ OD. The exercise is not intended to recover well
identified causal effects of open defecation.25 These “horserace” regressions address a more basic
question: Does the partial correlation between Muslim neighbors and own child mortality diminish
once one controls for the sanitation practices of neighbors? We find that it does. Consistent with
Figure 5, adding controls for own household and neighbors’ OD attenuates the coefficient on M j to a
magnitude that is economically small and statistically insignificant.
The result that neighborhood open defecation is strongly correlated with IMR is a very robust
pattern.26 A natural question in this context is whether differences in son preference and intrahousehold resource allocation between Hindus and Muslims could confound the results. To address
this possibility, in Panel A of Appendix Table A4 we examine the correlation between local OD and
IMR, splitting the sample by child’s sex. The table shows that the Hindu-Muslim gaps in infant
mortality are similar across boys and girls. More importantly, in both the boy and girl subsamples,
these gaps attenuate to insignificance once the measures of open defecation are included. We also
investigate whether the apparent relationship is confounded by the pattern documented in Pande
and Jayachandran (2013) in which sex ⇥ birth order interactions predict child health in India. The
behavior has the potential for importance here, because Hindu and Muslim household sizes in India differ, and therefore so do the mean birth orders across groups. Nonetheless, this phenomenon
does not explain the patterns here: All regressions in Panel B of Table 2 include the full set of sex
indicators interacted with birth order indicators as controls, and Panel B of Table A4 shows that the
23 Throughout,

latrine use is used as a shorthand for latrine and toilet use, either of which can safely dispose of excreta.
in all of the local polynomial regression plots, the 95% confidence intervals drawn in the figure are not corrected
for clustering and will overstate the statistical significance of Hindu-Muslim differences. We rely on Table A3 to assess the
statistical significance of the OD-IMR cross-sectional relationship and Hindu-Muslim differences in it.
24 As

below, we estimate IV specifications to get a sense of magnitudes of the effect of ODij i on IMR under strong
identification assumptions that we make explicit.
26 In Appendix Section A.2, we describe an alternative approach to statistically accounting for the mortality gaps. There,
we estimate counterfactual Hindu mortality rates after nonparametrically reweighting the sample of Hindu children to
match the joint distribution of characteristics in the Muslim child sample. Compared to the linear regressions above, this
exercise more flexibly controls for the entire distribution of open defecation exposure, matching the probability mass in 20
bins defining the sanitation environment: 10 bands of local (PSU) open defecation interacted with household’s own latrine
use indicator. Appendix Table A5 reports the results of the exercise, which are closely consistent with Tables 2 and A3.
25 Further

12

pattern of our results holds whether restricting the sample to only first births or to only second or
later births. Because residence in an urban area was shown in Table 1 to differ significantly across
religious groups, in Panel C of Table A4 we replicate the regression separately for urban and rural
areas, allowing more flexibility in how urban status is held constant. The results within the urban
and rural subsamples are closely consistent with the overall patterns.

3.3

Heterogeneity in the Muslim Advantage

The facts above suggest that a channel operating behind the mortality advantage of Muslims may
consist of two pieces. First, compared to the typical Hindu infant, the typical Muslim infant lives
in a neighborhood where a larger share of her neighbors are Muslim. Second, Muslim neighbors are
much less likely to defecate in the open. Below in Section 5.1 we discuss the plausibility of a biological
mechanism linking neighbors’ OD to infant mortality via fecal pathogens. Here, we first examine
some basic statistical predictions of this interpretation that do not require a deep understanding of
the biological mechanism.
First, we note that if the channel linking mortality and religious composition of neighborhoods
is indeed better sanitation, then in the subset of neighborhoods in which OD is rare, and the channel
is therefore closed off, Muslim neighbors should not predict lower mortality. Table 3 tests this idea,
dividing the sample of survey PSUs according to whether there is non-zero open defecation, and
re-running the mortality regressions from Table 2 within these partitions.27
There is a clear pattern in the point estimates across this division: In places with zero reported
open defecation, Muslim identity has an insignificant and often positive association with morality. In
places where open defecation is present, Muslim identity has a significantly negative association with
morality. This general pattern holds whether one examines the correlation between own religion
and IMR (Panel A), neighbors’ religion and IMR (Panel B), or the partial correlations of own and
neighbors’ religion in the same regression (Panel C). It is striking that in places where the OD channel
cannot operate by construction of the subsample, Muslim own identity and Muslim neighbor identity
27 This partitioning—and more generally relying on measures of open defecation based on household-level responses—
overstates the precision with which we can observe open defecation at the person level. This is because the type of
household-level reports recorded in the NFHS do not account for the possibility of discordant latrine use behaviors among
members of the same household. As we discuss in detail below in Section 4, there can be substantial within-household
differences in latrine use. Thus, even setting aside measurement error due to the PSU mean OD being calculated from a
small sample, there is error in this measurement. Person-level open defecation is rare in the PSUs in column 1 of Table 3,
but likely not a precise zero.

13

are actually correlated with higher IMR, in clear contrast to the national, aggregate relationship that
motivates this paper. The sign reversal is consistent with Figure 4, which shows that other than
latrine use, neighborhoods with many Muslims tend to be worse in terms of features that would
predict child health and human capital.
An alternative test in a similar spirit asks whether the Muslim neighborhood mortality effects
are weaker in places where the “first stage” relationship between religious identity and sanitation
practice is weaker. India is a large, geographically diverse country of 1.2 billion people. We exploit spatial heterogeneity across the states of India in the degree to which religious identity predicts
revealed preference for open defecation. To do so, we divide the main survey data into 79 state-bysurvey round cells.28 For each cell, we calculate the means of IMR and OD separately for Hindus
and Muslims. This allows us to calculate a first stage relationship (E[OD |Hindu]
and a reduced form relationship (E[ I MR|Hindu]

E[OD |Muslim])

E[ I MR|Muslim]) separately within each cell. In

Panel A of Figure 6, we plot these statistics against each other. Each scatter point is a state-by-survey
round, and marker sizes are proportional to sample size. Most of the points lie in the right-hand
portion of the graph because in most places, the prevalence of OD among Hindus exceeds that of
Muslims, consistent with the national averages. But behind those national averages lies some heterogeneity, and Panel A shows that only in the places where there is a strong behavioral difference in
latrine use between Hindus and Muslims is there a strong association between religious identity and
infant mortality. A regression line fit to the data points (in red) passes through the origin, indicating
that in expectation, there is no relationship between religious identity and infant mortality in places
where Hindus and Muslims have similar sanitation practices.
In Panel B of Figure 6, we retain the same horizontal axis, but on the vertical axis plot the strength
of the religion-IMR relationship, as revealed in a regression of infant mortality on a Muslim indicator. This is the same regression that is reported in the first column of Table 3, but is here estimated
separately for each state-by-round cell. The vertical axis measures the t-statistics for the coefficients,
rather than the coefficients themselves, in order to reduce the visual noise associated with any large
but statistically insignificant estimates generated within the 79 cells of the partitioned sample. (Appendix Figure A2 plots the analogous graph using coefficients themselves.) Here again, the strength
and direction of the statistical relationship between religious identity and mortality is clearly related
28 The

number of states increased from 25 to 29 across the years represented in the survey rounds.

14

to the strength and direction of the first stage relationship: In the many places where Hindus are more
likely to OD (right of the origin), Muslims, who tend to collocate near other Muslims, have an aggregate mortality advantage. In the few places where Hindus are less likely to OD (left of the origin),
Muslims, who tend to collocate near other Muslims, have an aggregate mortality disadvantage.
Taken together, Table 3 and Figures 6 and A2 support the idea that sanitation may be the channel
linking religious composition of neighborhoods to infant mortality. Where there is no OD, there
is no Muslim mortality advantage. And where there is non-zero OD, the strength of the HinduMuslim difference in OD predicts the strength of the mortality advantage. This clearly suggests a
mechanism in which neighborhood religious composition is predictive of IMR via its association
with open defecation.

4

Hindu-Muslim Differences in Demand for Latrine Use

Given the observed association between the religious composition of neighborhoods and local sanitation, in this section we draw on several data sources to better understand Hindu-Muslim differences
in attitudes and behaviors related to latrine/toilet use. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that open defecation in this context is not merely a matter of latrine affordability or access, but rather involves clear
consumer preference heterogeneity.
More than half of the Indian population, over 600 million people, defecates in the open. Muslim Indians, though they are more likely to defecate in the open than the poor rural populations of
much of the world, are much less likely to do so than Hindu Indians. In our main dataset, only 32%
of Hindu children live in households that use latrines or toilets, compared to 57% of Muslim children. This gross difference cannot be explained by affordability because Hindus are the richer group:
Appendix Figure A3 shows that conditional on any level of asset wealth, Hindus are more likely
to be exposed to open defecation and to defecate in the open themselves, compared to Muslims.29
Importantly, although exposure to open defecation declines in wealth, even Hindus and Muslims
in relatively wealthy households still practice OD at non-negligible rates and are still exposed to
29 The figure also shows that this disparity holds conditioning instead on mother’s height—thus paralleling Figure 1,
which showed that Hindu IMR was higher at any level of asset wealth or mother’s height. The associations of sanitation with asset wealth and mother’s height strikingly resemble the associations of infant mortality with asset wealth and
mother’s height. Linear regressions confirm that the gaps are statistically significant (p < .01) in both panels. In panels C
and D of Appendix Figure A3, we plot own, rather than PSU, OD on the vertical axes. The pattern is nearly identical, highlighting that even relatively wealthy Hindus (and to a lesser extent relatively wealthy Muslims) are still likely to practice
OD in this context. The richest Hindus by the asset wealth measure have OD rates in excess of 30%.

15

significantly high levels of open defecation by their neighbors.
To investigate these patterns in more detail, we turn briefly in Table 4 to data from the Sanitation
Quality, Use, Access, & Trends (SQUAT) survey, which was collected in rural northern India in 2013
and 2014. Unlike our main analysis dataset (the NFHS) this survey was specifically designed to elicit
preferences over latrine use, as distinct from latrine ownership. The survey is also unique in having
a structure that permits reporting of different latrine use patterns by different members of the same
household. The survey is described in more detail in Coffey et al. (2014).30
Table 4 summarizes responses at the individual and household levels, with Hindu means in column 1 and Muslim means in column 2. Consistent with other data sources, the first row of the table
shows that Hindus are significantly more likely than Muslims to practice OD—that is, they are less
likely to use a latrine or toilet. This difference in revealed preferences is deeply embedded: The second row shows that a substantial minority of Hindus who reside in a household with a working
latrine nonetheless choose to defecate in the open. 26% of Hindus whose households own functional latrines choose not to use them, compared to 10% of Muslims. These statistics mask some
within-household heterogeneity: Over 40% of households that had a working latrine had at least one
member who nevertheless defecated in the open.
These statistics are especially useful in disentangling access to latrines from preferences over
latrine use. People from households that owned a latrine used by another household member unambiguously had the option not to defecate in the open. These findings are consistent with accounts
from Indian commentators (e.g. Ramaswami, 2005) and evaluations by researchers (e.g. Barnard
et al., 2013) that toilets constructed or paid for by the government often remain unused or repurposed. We investigate further in Appendix Figure A4, where we compare latrine use behaviors at
the individual (rather than household) level and separately by ownership of a working latrine. The
figure shows that whether one examines all respondents, or just those residing in latrine-owning
households, Hindus are more likely to defecate in the open.
To provide additional context to the fact that high socioeconomic status does not predict zero
open defecation in this setting, we draw on another nationally representative survey, the India Hu30 See the Sanitation Quality, Use, Access, & Trends (SQUAT) Survey. The SQUAT survey was designed to be representative of rural open defecation practices in five states of north India: Bihar, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and
Uttar Pradesh. These states are home to 40% of the population of India, and to 45% of households in India without a toilet
or latrine. Surveyors interviewed 3,235 adults about their defecation practices and views on latrines and latrine use, and
collected individual level latrine use data for 22,787 household members.

16

man Development Survey, which has the advantage of being more recent than our main dataset
and of allowing additional measures of household socioeconomic status. (See Section 5.3 for a fuller
description of these data.) Among rural households in the 2012 IHDS in which the most highlyeducated adult member holds a bachelor’s degree or higher, 32% of households report practicing
open defecation. For rural households in which the most highly-educated adult completed secondary school, the statistic is 51%. This contrasts with neighboring Bangladesh (in its 2011 DHS
survey), where only 1% of rural households in which the most highly-educated adult completed any
schooling beyond secondary defecated in the open, and where only 4% of households with a member
who completed secondary school defecated in the open.
The roots of these behavioral differences are difficult to trace and are beyond the scope of this
paper. Sanitation practices may have evolved differently across Muslim and Hindu communities
for purely secular reasons, and could have been privately or socially optimal given the context under which they arose (Mobarak, Levinsohn and Guiteras, 2014). Even specific religious instruction
with respect to sanitation and hygiene that we observe today may have been established long ago—
codifying then-existing norms, rather than establishing those norms.31 Regardless of the historical
path, today religion is a highly predictive marker for group differences.
While we take no position on whether religion causes OD per se, it is common for Indians to
discuss waste disposal choices with reference to religious purity. Row 4 of Table 4 shows that a
substantial fraction of both Hindu and Muslim respondents self-report that a religious leader has
told them explicitly where to defecate. The table shows that Hindus are more likely than Muslims to
respond that OD away from the home is pure, while using a latrine near the home is not pure. All
Hindu-Muslim differences in the table are statistically significant at the 5% level.
The SQUAT data also allow us to observe plainly-stated beliefs about whether sanitation (latrine
use) confers a health benefit to children. Respondents were asked “Imagine two villages, one in
which everyone defecates in the open and one in which everyone uses a latrine. In which village do
you think children would be healthier?” The final row of Table 4 shows that 40% of Hindus reported
that open defecation was healthier, compared to 27% of Muslims. Hindus and Muslims gave statistically identical answers to the other questions in this module, which asked whether children would
31 The

Laws of Manu, a Hindu sacred text, advises defecating away from the home (Chapter 4 verse 151): “Far from his
dwelling let him remove urine and excreta.” In contrast, the Mishkat-al-Masabiha, a Muslim sacred text, offers opposing
advice: “Muadh reported God’s messenger as saying, ‘Guard against the three things which produce cursing: relieving
one self in watering-places, in the middle of the road and in the shade.’ ”

17

be healthier in villages where people ate rice or wheat and whether children would be healthier in
villages where households used kerosene or dung as fuel.32
The possibility that open defecation would ever be chosen if a working toilet or latrine were available may be surprising to many readers, but these patterns, and indeed the Hindu-Muslim behavior
difference itself, are well known to many residents of rural India. Coffey et al. (2017) documents this
fact in a qualitative study in rural northern India, recording, for example, how a Muslim woman
from Uttar Pradesh described the differences: “Even if Hindus have made a latrine, still they go out
to defecate in the open. Now for our people [Muslims], it’s not a problem. If we have a latrine in the
house, we will use it.”33,34
In short, the pattern of especially poor sanitation in Hindu-concentrated neighborhoods is not
merely a matter of affordability of or access to latrines and toilets. Instead, many Indians (Muslim
and Hindu) report and reveal clear preferences against using latrines, and this clear preference for
open defecation is particularly strong among the Hindu majority.

5

Corroborating Evidence for the Open Defecation Channel

We next present a collage of evidence evaluating sanitation externalities as the possible channel linking the religious composition of neighborhoods to infant mortality. We begin by briefly outlining the
biological mechanism, drawing on the prior literature. That discussion then guides several empirical
tests with respect to intermediate health outcomes where effects of poor sanitation should be detectable, and which would not easily be explained by other phenomenon. We conclude with a series
of falsification tests.
32 In this module of three questions, the order was: rice/wheat, followed by dung/kerosene, followed by OD/latrine.
Respondents could answer that one of the two options within each set was healthier for children in the village, or that
the two options had the same impact. Only the sanitation question showed a differential response pattern by religious
identity. The F-stats, are, in the same order, 0.5, 2.7, and 9.7. We also note that this question about the health perceptions
surrounding sanitation was asked before it was revealed that the survey was specifically focused on sanitation.
33 Coffey et al. (2017) also reports how a Hindu man in Haryana described his beliefs about the health benefits of open
defecation: “[By defecating in the open] one can stretch the body, one can go out for a walk. You can also prevent yourself
from getting diseases. If a latrine is in the house, bad smells will come, germs will grow. Latrines in the house are like...hell.
The environment becomes completely polluted.”
34 Moreover, this behavior has long been recognized and documented publicly: Cultural scholars attribute the modern
persistence of OD among Hindus in India to the persistence of the Hindu caste system, with its ritual avoidance of excreta
(Ramaswami, 2005; Bathran, 2011). Recently, Hindu politicians from both major political parties in India have echoed
this sentiment with the slogan: “Toilets are more important than [Hindu] Temples.” Union Rural Development Minister
Jairam Ramesh of the Congress party made the statement in October 2012. From the BJP, Gujarat Chief Minister and thencandidate for Prime Minister Narendra Modi made an identical statement in October 2013. And nearly a century ago,
Gandhi campaigned to change Indian behavior with respect to excreta disposal, famously declaring, “Sanitation is more
important than independence.”

18

5.1

Biological Mechanism

Bacteria and parasites, such as intestinal worms, live in feces. Fecal matter in the local environment
gets onto feet and hands and into mouths directly. It can also contaminate food and water. These
pathogenic processes have been documented since at least the 19th century.35 By definition, open
defecation is not limited to a confined or designated area. Feces are disposed of in crop fields, near
homes, and in and along roads, implying widespread scope for disease transmission and potential
harm, regardless of whether an individual chooses to use a latrine himself.
For children, infections caused by fecal pathogens can reduce net nutrition through caloric loss
to diarrhea and parasites, as well as by expending calories to combat infections. Acute malnutrition
due to infectious disease is well established in the epidemiological literature (Kielmann and McCord,
1978; Mosley and Chen, 1984) and recognized among economists (e.g. Cutler, Deaton and LlerasMuney, 2006). Epidemiological evidence also suggests that exposure to fecal pathogens could lead
to enteropathy—a chronic intestinal problem that prevents the proper absorption of calories and
micronutrients (Humphrey, 2009; Petri et al., 2008; Mondal et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2013). The resulting
acute malnutrition manifests as wasting (low weight) and can lead to death (Black, Morris and Bryce,
2003). It may also manifest as anemia as the body fails to absorb the nutrients necessary for red
blood cell production (Rosenberg and Bowman, 1982). We check this mechanism directly below by
examining the intermediate outcomes of blood hemoglobin, weight-for-height, and weight-for-age.
For neonates (0-1 month old), the process is somewhat different but with the potential for similar
mortality effects. Maternal exposure to fecal pathogens could cause neonatal mortality by reducing
the quality of maternal net nutrition during gestation, in turn reducing uterine growth and birth
weight. This possibility is highlighted by the recent finding in Prendergast et al. (2014) of a correlation
between in-utero growth, growth hormones at birth, and mothers’ exposure to open defecation in
Zimbabwe.
The public goods features of sanitation have been highlighted in the economics literature. Mobarak, Levinsohn and Guiteras (2014) investigated the determinants of latrine use in Bangladesh via
a field experiment, finding an important role for local complementarities. Other studies have examined health outcomes impacted by the public goods problems of sanitation, though these have
focused almost exclusively on worms, which comprise just one channel by which OD could affect
35 See

Freedman, 1991 for examples.

19

health. In the Kenyan context, Miguel and Kremer (2004) studied the public goods problems associated with intestinal worms transmitted by contact with fecal matter. In the historical US context,
Bleakley (2007) examined the impact of efforts by the Rockefeller Foundation at the turn of the century to eradicate widespread hookworm infections in the US South. Taken together, the economic
literature supports the potential of important externalities of OD, while the epidemiological evidence
suggests that health impacts could be significant and include mortality effects.

5.2

Tests of the Fecal Pathogens Channel

Anemia/Hemoglobin. In Table 5 we examine a health outcome with a direct connection to the type
of intestinal disease spread by open defecation. Anemia, defined as low levels of blood hemoglobin,
can be caused by diets lacking iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid, all of which are necessary for the production of red blood cells. Intestinal parasites also importantly contribute to low blood hemoglobin
in developing country settings, by causing blood loss in the stool, lack of appetite, increased motility
(including via diarrhea), and competition for nutrients. Intestinal parasites also cause damage to the
intestinal wall lining, which can inhibit the absorption of nutrients critical in red blood cell production (Rosenberg and Bowman, 1982). The impacts of intestinal parasites on hemoglobin can be large
even relative to the impacts of diet or micronutrient supplementation. For example, in a randomized control trial among Kenyan children, Friis et al. (2003) found that a single dose of deworming
medicine was as effective in raising hemoglobin levels as the daily administration of micronutrient
supplements, including iron, for a period of eight months. In the economics literature, Bleakley (2007)
shows that a hookworm eradication campaign in the US South at the turn of the twentieth century
raised school attendance and later-life incomes, with reduced anemia as the assumed channel.36
The dependent variable in the first four columns of Table 5 is the child’s blood hemoglobin, in
g/dL, measured from a surveyor-collected blood sample analyzed by a portable device in the field.
Mean hemoglobin in the sample is 10.3 g/dL, very near to the WHO threshold for moderate anemia (< 10 g/dL). The analysis sample is significantly smaller than in the main analysis because
hemoglobin was measured only in the most recent NFHS survey round and because these measurements were taken only for children alive at the time of the interview and between one and five years
36 In Bleakley (2007), anemia was the assumed channel, though it was not possible in that study to directly observe blood
hemoglobin in the historical data. In a cross-country comparison of recent micro data in which hemoglobin was measured
in blood samples, Coffey, Geruso and Spears (2017) show that, at the country level, children’s hemoglobin and sanitation
are correlated, even after controlling for household-level diet data and national malaria incidence.

20

old. Table 5 shows that Muslim children are observed to have higher hemoglobin on average (column 1), but this relationship disappears after controlling for neighborhood fixed effects (column 2)
or the fraction of Muslims in the neighborhood (column 3). In column 4 the association between
neighborhood religious composition and blood hemoglobin becomes smaller and insignificant after
partialing-out the contribution of poor sanitation. This pattern precisely tracks the pattern of Tables
2 and A3.
It is important to understand that the list of other potential causes of low hemoglobin here is very
limited. As discussed in Coffey, Geruso and Spears (2017), the literature points to just diet, malaria,
and the type of intestinal infections spread by poor sanitation as being plausible causes of anemia in
this context. And we are able to investigate diet directly, which we do below in Section 5.3, where
we show that conditional on own religion, own diet is uncorrelated with the religious composition
of neighborhoods.
Acute Malnutrition. A related pathway from exposure to fecal pathogens to death is poor net
nutrition—that is, calories consumed net of calories lost to diarrheal disease and parasites and expended in combating infections. Acute malnutrition is a well-known mechanism linking infectious
disease to infant death (Kielmann and McCord, 1978; Mosley and Chen, 1984), our outcome of interest. If open defecation is causing deaths via infection, acute malnutrition should also be observable in
weight. This intermediate outcome may also be of independent interest, because acute malnutrition
could impact the human capital accumulation of surviving children.
We follow the standard practice (e.g. Schmidt et al., 2010) of using surveyor-measured weight
to capture acute malnutrition and recent diarrhea. Weight, rather than self-reported diarrheal disease, is recommended due to widely recognized problems in survey-reported diarrhea. We discuss
the problems with survey-reported diarrhea in this context in more detail in Appendix A.3, and provide statistics in our own dataset highlighting these issues. Weight-for-age is the particular measure
of recent diarrhea recommended by Schmidt et al. (2010). To evaluate robustness, we also examine
weight-for-height.37 We operationalize both measures as z-scores scaled to the World Health Organization’s child growth standards.
Columns 5 through 12 in Table 5 repeat the exercise performed for hemoglobin, but now with
measures of child weight as the dependent variables. The sample includes all children up to 24
37 Height is an appropriate denominator for normalizing weight when analyzing acute malnutrition because height reflects long-term, but not recent, net nutritional and disease experience.

21

months for whom a weight measurement was taken. Due to the DHS/NFHS surveying scheme,
these detailed anthropometry measures exist for only a small subset of our main analysis sample. In
the first three columns, the dependent variable is weight-for-age. We report OLS regressions.38 The
extended controls are identical to those in the bottom panel of Table 2 with an additional control for
height.39
The results for weight follow the now-familiar pattern: In columns 5 and 9, an indicator for Muslim households predicts significantly higher z-scores (i.e., heavier children). Then, additionally controlling for Muslim concentration in the locality (M j ) or controlling for a PSU fixed effect attenuates
the coefficient on the Muslim indicator to insignificance. And finally, incrementally controlling for
the local sanitation environment attenuates the coefficient on M j as well. This pattern of results supports the mechanism outlined above, as it shows that the fraction of Muslim neighbors is correlated
with child malnutrition, but not after partialing out the association between religious composition of
the neighborhood or neighborhood open defecation.
Breastfeeding Interactions. Water and prepared food are two key pathways through which poor
sanitation causes infections in children. Breastfeeding, which interrupts this pathway, is known to be
protective against the transmission of such infections, and previous studies have shown important
interactions in this context between the efficacy of breastfeeding and the quality of a household’s
water supply (see Jayachandran and Kuziemko, 2010). Here, we examine whether the efficacy of
breastfeeding is increasing in the fraction of neighbors who defecate in the open. Operationally, this
means examing interactions between breastfeeding and M j or OD j .
Table 6 examines various combinations of interactions between religion, breastfeeding, and sanitation in OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is IMR. The regressor of interest is an
indicator for exclusive breastfeeding during the infant’s first six months of life if she survived, or until death if she died. Controls are as in Table 2. Column 1 reports results for a specification interacting
breastfeeding with the Muslim indicator. Unsurprisingly, the main effect of exclusive breastfeeding
is large and negative—i.e., breastfeeding is associated with reduced mortality. But the significant
positive coefficient estimate for the interaction term breastfed ⇥ Muslim indicates that breastfeeding is
38 The sample here is smaller because weight in the NFHS is only consistently measured for children below age 3 at the
time of the survey, whereas in our main analysis, we calculate IMR over a larger sample by using the mother’s responses
to retrospective questions about the timing of births and deaths over a longer look back period.
39 We control for height-for-age to ensure that results are not spuriously driven by chronic malnutrition, which would be
reflected in height. In practice, removing the height control does not affect the pattern of results in the table.

22

less beneficial to Muslim children than Hindu children, on average.
This non-intuitive pattern again appears to be due to the correlation between own religious identity and that of neighbors and due to the association of both with sanitation. After additionally
controlling for M j or ODij i and the interaction of each with breastfeeding, the positive coefficient
on breastfed ⇥ Muslim becomes insignificant (column 3) or flips sign (column 6). Overall, comparing
columns 1 through 3, in which there are no controls for sanitation, with columns 5 through 7, in which
these controls are included, suggests that the associations of the breastfed ⇥ Muslim and breastfed ⇥
fraction Muslim with mortality are operating via open defecation: Living near more Hindus predicts
a greater protective effect of breastfeeding only until the correlation between religious composition
and sanitation is controlled for. These regressions indicate that Muslim children, on average, benefit
less from breastfeeding only because they tend to live in better local sanitation environments, while
Hindu children, on average, face environments where the protection conferred by breastfeeding matters more.40
Appendix Table A6 shows that although the main effect of breastfeeding varies significantly as a
function of baseline IMR, the coefficient on the interaction of breastfeeding with PSU fraction Muslim
is remarkably similar across PSUs split by high versus low infant morality rates. Thus, these results
are not merely driven by a stronger effect of breastfeeding in locales where IMR is higher.

5.3

Falsification Tests

Panels A and B of Figure 4 showed that two child health outcomes that should not be driven by local
sanitation are indeed flat (institutional deliveries) or declining (vaccinations) in fraction Muslim, a
clear contrast with the overall IMR patterns revealed in Panels C and D of that figure, in which survival increases in fraction Muslim. In this section, we investigate whether the religious composition
of neighbors is correlated with other important observable health behaviors, inputs, and outcomes
that would not be expected to be importantly affected by open defecation. Although there is no
reason in principle that sanitation-related and and non-sanitation-related child inputs and outcomes
should not be positively correlated, the special institutional feature of our setting is that higher concentration of Muslims in a locality predicts better sanitation but otherwise predicts worse or neutral
40 Like the main results in Table 2, estimates in Table 6 are identified off of the religion of neighbors, not the religion of the
child’s own household. Therefore, any unobserved differences in inputs like weaning foods between Hindu and Muslim
households would be captured by controls for Muslim and Muslim ⇥ breastfed.

23

neighborhood characteristics, allowing us to potentially separate which channel is operating.
Diet. In Table 7 we ask whether Hindus living around many Muslims are likely to have different
diets than Hindus living around few Muslims. Because our main dataset, the NFHS, was not designed to measure consumption and contains relatively little information on hygiene behaviors, we
turn again to the India Human Development Survey (IHDS) of 2012.41 Summary statistics for this
supplemental dataset are included in Appendix Table A7. For the set of variables common to both
the IHDS and NFHS, such as urban residence, open defecation, and access to piped water, Table A7
shows that the IHDS replicates the same Hindu-Muslim differences found in the NFHS, which are
displayed in Table 1.
The dependent variables in Table 7 are listed in the column headers and include measures of
meat, eggs, and dairy consumption, measured per household per month. For each of these diet
variables, we first regress diet on own religion to demonstrate that the consumption data are rich
enough to capture differences across Muslim and Hindu households. For example, column 1 shows
that Muslims are a precisely estimated 15 percentage points more likely (on a base of 25 percentage
points) to consume meat compared to Hindus. Such differences are expected, and not problematic.
We add (M j ) as a regressor in the second and third columns for each dependent variable. Panel
A shows that there is no correlation between M j and the extensive margin of eating any meat, or
between M j and the intensive margin of quantity of meat consumed. In Panel B, we examine two
other calorie- and protein-rich foods: eggs and milk. For all diet variables, the coefficients are small,
not significantly different from zero, and robust to the inclusion of controls.42 This is true even though
large, precisely estimated diet differences are apparent between Hindu and Muslim households for
each consumption outcome in the table.
Table 7 is direct evidence against the notion that Hindus living around Muslims have systematically different diets than Hindus living around other Hindus, and similarly against the notion that
Muslims living around Hindus have systematically different diets than Muslims living around other
Muslims. Thus, there is no empirical evidence that our results are likely to be confounded by issues
related to diet, including our results regarding hemoglobin in Table 5.
41 The IHDS contains richer hygiene information and a complete consumption module, but it cannot be used to construct
mortality rates that are similarly reliable to those from the NFHS. Specifically, we are limited by the fact that complete birth
histories were not recorded for all women of childbearing age.
42 We control for log per capita per consumption and the urban classification of the household, which could be important
in principle because richer and urban households in India are more likely to eat meat.

24

Other Hygiene and Water. Diet is likely to have primarily private benefits, but hygiene practices
like hand washing could generate externalities in principle. If these practices covary with Muslim
concentration across localities, then our estimates could be reflecting a different hygiene-related externality associated with the religious composition of a neighborhood. In fact, Hindu and Muslim
households do not appear to differ with respect to these health behaviors. For example, the summary statistics from the IHDS data in Table A7 reveal that unlike OD (practiced by 51% of Hindus
and 31% of Muslims in the IHDS data), Hindu and Muslim households do not differ in hand washing
(72% vs. 70%) or purifying water (11% vs. 12%).
In Table 8, we report on regressions in which the dependent variables are various measures of
hygiene and water quality from the IHDS. The regressor of interest is Muslim share, M j . In the first
eight columns the dependent variables are always washing hands, sometimes washing hands, always purifying water, and sometimes purifying water. In columns 9 and 10, the dependent variable
is piped public water to the home, for which a similar measure is available in the NFHS. For completeness, in columns 11 and 12, we replicate the Figure 4 regression of OD on M j using the IHDS
data. The last four columns are shaded, since these can be compared directly to results in the NFHS
dataset—although in a different time period.
Columns 1 through 8 show that there is no correlation between measures of washing or water
purifying and M j . The only significant difference we find in the table—besides OD—is that Muslim
concentration is associated with less access to public piped water. This is consistent with our analysis
in the NFHS data presented above (see Figure 4 and Table A1). Both the literature (Jayachandran
and Kuziemko, 2010) and our own analysis (Table A2) indicate that lower access to piped water
in this region implies a Muslim disadvantage with respect to health. The difference in piped water
likely reflects the inferior access to state services faced by Muslims. It appears that the Hindu-Muslim
difference in latrine use, therefore, is not merely a marker for a wider array of other important hygiene
behaviors with public goods qualities.
Cough and Fever. Although all types of infectious disease may respond to poor sanitation exposure due to a weakened immune system,43 respiratory infections and fevers may be be less responsive
43 As Cutler and Miller (2005) explain: “It is difficult to determine which infectious diseases should have responded to
clean water technologies, however. Hiram Mills, a member of the Massachusetts State Board of Health, and J. J. Reincke,
a health officer in Hamburg, Germany, independently observed a marked reduction in overall mortality, not just mortality
from waterborne diseases, on the introduction of water filtration more than a century ago. ... The biological mechanism underpinning the so-called Mills-Reincke phenomenon would presumably be that contaminated water weakens the immune
system, making one more susceptible to other contagions.”

25

than symptoms specifically related to the gut. As a falsification test, we examine here whether fever
and cough respond to neighborhood religious composition differently than diarrhea, a symptom with
a more direct (and presumably quantitatively stronger) link to sanitation.
As discussed above, our primary measure of recent diarrhea in children is based not on the
survey reports of mothers, but on current weight. This follows the recommendation from the medical
literature (Schmidt et al., 2010) of preferring surveyor-measured weight to capture recent diarrhea
even when self-reports of the symptom are available. Our own analysis in Table A8 suggests that a
mother’s education may significantly affect what she decides “counts” as diarrhea in her child. To
overcome differences in the perceptions of illness across mothers of different socioeconomic status,
we compare the relative reporting of three different types of symptoms by the same mother.
The NFHS contains mothers’ subjective reports of three infectious disease symptoms: fever,
cough, and diarrhea. We estimate differences in the relative reporting of these symptoms within
a mother across localities that vary in Muslim concentration. In a stacked regression in which an
observation is a child ⇥ symptom, we regress an indicator for a positive report of the symptom on
mother ⇥ child fixed effects. Appendix Figure A5 plots residuals from that regression—separately
by symptom—against the religious composition of the PSU in which the child resides. The figure
shows that for the fever and cough symptoms, residuals are clearly increasing in fraction Muslim.
Diarrhea residuals, in contrast, are clearly decreasing in fraction Muslim. This means that mothers in
neighborhoods with higher Muslim shares are differentially less likely to report their child as having
recent diarrhea, relative to their reporting of recent fever and cough and relative to mothers in neighborhoods with fewer Muslims. Appendix Section A.4 describes the exercise in more detail and also
reports on a parametric regression approach that yields the same pattern of results.44

6

Sizing the Externalities

In this section we attempt to understand the potential size of the sanitation externalities suggested by
the evidence above. To do so, we instrument for the local sanitation environment with the religious
composition variable, M j . This strategy would yield unbiased estimates of the externalities of interest
if PSU religious composition predicted own-household infant mortality only through its association
44 The parametric version of this mother fixed effect regression in Table A12 yields a coefficient on diarrhea ⇥ fraction
Muslim that is significant at p < .09.

26

with nearby neighbors’ open defecation. In contrast, it is clear from Figure 4 that the neighborhoods
where Muslims are concentrated are somewhat different along several other observable dimensions.
Even though the evidence above points toward Muslim neighborhoods being, if anything, worse in
terms of observable correlates of child health (other than sanitation), we cannot rule out the possibility of important unobservables. We therefore view the IV analysis as informative primarily because
these regressions are identified off of a subset of the variation in open defecation that is carefully
documented above.
We regress mortality outcomes on variables capturing a household’s own open defecation (ODijt )
and neighbors’ open defecation within the PSU (ODijti ):

\
Yijt = b 1 ODijti + b 2 ODijt + b 3 Mijt + f ( Xijt ) + eijt .

(2)

We instrument for the mean open defecation rate among neighbors with the fraction of PSU households that are Muslim:
ODijti = g1 M jt + g2 ODijt + g3 Mijt + f ( Xijt ) + µijt .

(3)

As above, i indexes live births, j indexes survey PSUs, and t indexes the three NFHS survey rounds.
The dependent variables are infant and neonatal mortality. Note that the indicator for the child
residing in a Muslim household, Mijt , absorbs any unobserved health behaviors or child investments
that could be correlated with a household’s own religion, such as differing Hindu and Muslim diets.
We restrict attention to the mixed-religion PSU sample, over which the relationship between between
M j and other PSU characteristics, including OD j , is monotonic and approximately linear, as shown
in Panel B of Figure 4. That plot visually depicts a non-parametric version of the first stage regression
for the case of no controls.45 Parametric first stage estimates are presented in Appendix Table A9,
with first stage F-statistics always exceeding weak instrument thresholds. We also estimate the first
stage separately within subsamples defined by child’s birth order, child’s sex, child’s own religion,
45 Besides tracking the linearity of the first stage, restricting to mixed-religion PSUs confers the identification advantage
that only respondents who have settled or remained in mixed neighborhoods contribute to estimating our coefficients. This
could be important if the types of Hindus and Muslims who are willing to collocate with the other group are systematically
different from those who are not. Panel A of Figure 4 suggests that all-Muslim and all-Hindu neighborhoods may indeed
differ from mixed-religion neighborhoods, because the nonparametric plots jump at the endpoints (M = 0 and M = 1) for
many variables.

27

and the location of the household in a rural or urban setting in order to demonstrate that the first
stage relationship is not driven by an association with any of these variables. Table A9 shows that
the first stage effect is strong, precisely estimated, and consistent across subsamples.
Table 9 presents the results of the IV analysis. Results for IMR are displayed in Panel A. Results for NMR are in Panel B. Columns 1 and 2 in each panel report OLS estimates for comparison.
Columns 3 through 7 report IV estimates with various control sets.46,47 Table 9 shows that instrumenting for ODij i with M j yields point estimates of about 50-60 infant deaths per thousand. To put the
size in context, the IV coefficient in column 7 implies that a 10 percentage point reduction in the fraction of neighbors defecating in the open is associated with a decline in infant mortality of 6.1 children
out of 1000. For neonatal mortality (Panel B), the figure is 4.4 deaths per thousand. The magnitude of
the estimated externality is similar across specifications that vary the control set, suggesting that the
variation in open defecation that arises from the composition of neighbors is not strongly correlated
with any individual-level behaviors or characteristics that affect mortality.48
These effects are economically large. In the context of our data, the difference between a locality
in which all of a household’s neighbors defecate in the open and a locality where none of them do is
associated with a larger reduction in child mortality than the difference between households at the
bottom and top quintiles of asset wealth (see Figure 1). To understand the economic importance of
our results, it is useful to consider external harm created by a single household defecating in the open.
Because about one in every ten Indian households has an infant born each year, the coefficient on
ODij i is approximately equal to the sum of harm (across all neighbors) imposed by a single household
that chooses open defecation, aggregated over 10 years.49
The implied importance of open defecation for infant mortality in the modern Indian context is
46 All

regressions include indicators for survey rounds. The extended controls are identical to those in Table 2.

47 The coefficient on own household OD becomes insignificant and unstable in the IV. This accords with the fact that own

latrine use and neighbors’ latrine use are highly correlated, as Appendix Figure A1 shows.

IV estimates may be larger than the OLS due to measurement error in the PSU-level variable ODij i , which is
calculated over only the survey-sampled households, and because, as reported in Table 4 from the supplementary SQUAT
data, even within a household there is variation in use of latrines that our main data cannot capture. Computations in the
spirit of regression calibration indicate that measurement error in local area open defecation could plausibly account for the
IV coefficients being approximately twice as large as our OLS coefficients, in large part because own household Muslim,
own open defecation, and survey round are correlated with the “signal” in true PSU open defecation.
49 Consider the simple case in which all households contain one infant. Because the contribution of any household to the
regressor OD i is weighted by its share in the PSU, the harm caused by one household defecating in the open on any other
single household is N1 1 · b, where N is the number of households in the PSU and b is the coefficient on OD i . The total
external harm summed across the other N 1 households is then N 1 · N1 1 · b = b. In practice, about one in every 10
Indian households has an infant born each year, so that the total harm equals b over a 10-year window.
48 The

28

consistent with evidence by Cutler and Miller (2005) and Watson (2006) on the role of clean water
and sanitation in explaining large shares of declining infant mortality in the history of the US.50
Cutler and Miller (2005) show that the introduction of clean water technologies in US cities beginning
around 1900 reduced the infant mortality rate by 87 deaths per thousand, or 46 percent of the base
of 189 per thousand. To put our findings in perspective, naively applying our IV estimates (Table
9, column 7), would predict that cutting open defecation in half from 66% to 33% would reduce
infant mortality by 20 deaths per thousand in India (=

0.33 ⇥ 61.4). This would be a 28 percent

reduction in the baseline Indian infant mortality rate of 72 deaths per thousand during our sample
period.51 Our estimates are also consistent with the most credible data on cause of death during
early-life in India: Using a census of all Indian deaths occurring from 2001 to 2003, Million Death
Study Collaborators (2010) show that 22% of non-neonatal child deaths (deaths from 1-59 months) in
India are due to diarrhea, which is just one of the potential pathways by which intestinal worms and
bacterial infections that are transmitted via open defecation could affect infant mortality.52
Although ours is the first paper to provide even suggestive evidence of mortality externalities
associated with open defecation, recent work exploring other human capital impacts of open defecation has found effects with similarly large magnitudes. Gertler et al. (2015) perform a meta-analysis
of open defecation-height experiments, and estimate a reduction of 0.046 height-for-age standard deviations from a 10 percentage point reduction in open defecation. To compare the size of these height
effects to our mortality estimates, one can scale the estimates using the correlation between IMR and
height across Indian villages. In the NFHS, Indian villages with one more IMR point (.0010) have
children that are 0.0034 normalized height-for-age standard deviations shorter. Using this conver50 Watson (2006), studying sanitation programs in the United States in the 1960s, where infant mortality was lower and the
therefore marginal effects would be expected to be smaller compared to India, finds that “sanitation interventions explain
almost forty percent of the convergence in Native American and White infant mortality rates in reservation counties since
1970.” Galiani, Gertler and Schargrodsky (2005) studying water privatization in Argentina, found a decline in all-cause
child mortality by 8%, with effects reaching as high as 26% in the poorest places, which are likely to be better comparisons
to India with respect to poverty. Given that interventions like water privatization could have such large effects on mortality,
it is unsurprising to find similarly large effects of open defecation. Among other plausible channels, open defecation is
likely to contaminate drinking water.
51 This calculation sets aside all complications of predictions out-of-sample, such as the potential for reinforcing or countervailing behavioral responses to such a dramatic shift in the local environment. The denominator 72 is the weighted
average IMR of Hindus and Muslims from row 1 of Table 1.)
52 As we discuss in Footnote 43, there is a plausible pathway from poor sanitation to all infectious disease, not merely
diarrhea. In addition, Million Death Study Collaborators (2010) show that an even larger fraction (33%) of neonatal deaths
(deaths from 0-1 months) are attributable to low birthweight. As we discuss in Section 5.1, there is clear epidemiological
evidence that exposure to fecal pathogens reduces the body’s net absorption of nutrients. In mothers, poorer net nutrition would have direct impacts on child’s birthweight. Prendergast et al. (2014) find suggestive evidence on birthweight
specifically, showing a correlation between in-utero growth and mothers’ exposure to open defecation in Zimbabwe.

29

sion factor to roughly translate between outcomes, our estimate of a .0061 mortality improvement
for a 10 percentage point decline open defecation (Table 9, col 4) would be consistent with a 0.021
height-for-age effect. This effect size translated from our mortality estimates is roughly half of the
Gertler et al. (2015) experimental effect sizes, implying our estimates, though economically large, are
smaller by this metric.
To examine the robustness of our IV results to more flexibly controlling for potential confounders,
we re-estimate the IV regressions over different partitions of our analysis sample. Dividing the sample into various partitions pushes the limit of what the data is powered to detect, but in Appendix
Table A10, we estimate the IV regression separately for Muslim and Hindu children (in each case
continuing to instrument with the religious composition of all neighbors). The additional flexibility
and smaller sample reduces statistical precision. The point estimate in the Muslim subsample is less
than half the size of corresponding point estimate in the Hindu subsample, though not statistically
different from the Hindu effect or from zero. Similarly, Table A10 shows that within subsamples of
only girls or boys, only first-borns or later-borns, and only urban or rural PSUs, the IV results are
never statistically different and are often quantitatively similar.53
Finally, we note that individuals who are willing to live in more diverse neighborhoods could be
systematically different from those who are not. However, any “cosmopolitan” advantage in health
could not even in principle spuriously generate our results. This is because the instrument here does
not measure the religious diversity of a PSU, it measures the share that is Muslim, which has an
asymmetric relationship to religious diversity for Hindus and Muslims. For example, because most
Hindus collocate with other Hindus and most Muslims collocate with other Muslims, for the typical
Muslim, an increase in M j implies a less religiously diverse neighborhood. In contrast, for the typical
Hindu, an increase in M j implies a more religiously diverse neighborhood. This predicted asymmetry
stands in contrast to the symmetry of the effects we estimate in Appendix Table A10, where we split
the sample by own religion and find positive effects for both groups.54
53 It would be interesting to evaluate whether there was any interaction between own household latrine use and that of
neighbors. A priori, it is unclear whether an interaction should exist: The disposal of feces in this context is distributed
along roads, in fields, and near homes—that is, it is not relegated to areas trafficked only by those who do not use latrines.
This implies that the effect of neighbors’ open defecation may be invariant to own household latrine use. Our estimation
strategy, which focuses on neighbor effects, does not allow us identify the interaction term, as doing so would require a
second instrument (for own open defecation, ODi ).
54 This is contrary to the diversity hypothesis, which would predict effects working in opposite directions for the two
subsamples. Such a hypothesis would imply that, counter to our findings, Muslims living in a neighborhood with a 50
percent Muslim share would experience lower infant mortality than Muslims living in a neighborhood with a 100 percent
Muslim share.

30

To show that unobservables associated with willingness to live in a diverse or cosmopolitan
neighborhood are not driving our results, in Appendix Table A11 we replicate our main IV analysis
from Table 9, but include an additional control for diversity, defined as the fraction of neighbors who
are religiously dissimilar from the respondent household. This religious dissimilarity variable moves
in opposite directions for Hindu and Muslim households as M j increases. The regressions show that
coefficients on religious dissimilarity in IMR and NNM regressions are small and indistinguishable
from zero, and that the effects of interest are almost numerically identical to the specifications in Table
9.

7

Conclusion

As of 2014, more than a billion people worldwide continue to defecate in the open, without the use
of even basic latrines. While governments and others have invested heavily in reducing the practice
in recent years, there has been disproportionately little evidence of the impact of open defecation on
mortality. We view our study as informing ongoing policy efforts to reduce open defecation around
the world, as well as contributing to the economic literature concerned with the impacts of infectious
disease on health and human capital.
The pattern we document solves an existing puzzle in the literature—that in India, Muslim children suffer lower rates of mortality than Hindu children, despite being poorer on average. We show
that this operates via the tendency of Muslims to reside near other Muslims, but that both Hindus
and Muslims appear to gain advantage from Muslim neighbors. Investigating channels, we observe
that Indian Muslims, despite being more likely to defecate in the open than Muslims in neighboring
Pakistan or Bangladesh, practice open defecation at significantly lower rates than Indian Hindus, implying that the neighbors of Muslims are on average exposed to better sanitation environments in this
context. Tests of the mechanisms linking open defecation to infant death, including contamination of
food and water and acute malnutrition due to intestinal disease, lend support to this interpretation.
More broadly, our study provides insights into the public goods aspect of sanitation. Understanding this public goods component is important for policy interventions motivated by the efficiency concern that private demand is below the social optimum. The clear stated and revealed
preferences towards open defecation reported in Section 4 suggest that the gap between individual
perceptions regarding latrine use and the objective external harms of open defecation are signifi31

cant. Practically, our results suggest that many infants die each year due to poor sanitation in their
localities. In the context of India, a back-of-the-envelope calculation within the range of variation
supported by the data suggests that reducing mean open defecation by 10 percentage points (one
quarter of a standard deviation across localities) would reduce IMR by 6 deaths per thousand, or
about 8% of the mean mortality rate. With an estimated 26 million children born in India each year,
this equates to 156,000 deaths annually. The sheer size of these potential effects highlights the need
for further investigation into the externalities of sanitation in the modern developing world.

32

References
Barnard, Sharmani, Parimita Routray, Fiona Majorin, Rachel Peletz, Sophie Boisson, Antara
Sinha, and Thomas Clasen. 2013. “Impact of Indian Total Sanitation Campaign on Latrine Coverage and Use: A Cross-Sectional Study in Orissa Three Years following Programme Implementation.” PloS one, 8(8): e71438.
Bathran, Ravichandaran. 2011. “Indian Sanitation.” Economic and Political Weekly, XLVI(51): 34–37.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Arthur van Soest. 2008. “Birth-spacing, fertility and neonatal mortality in India:
Dynamics, frailty, and fecundity.” Journal of Econometrics, 143(2): 274–290.
Bhalotra, Sonia, Christine Valente, and Arthur van Soest. 2010. “The puzzle of Muslim advantage
in child survival in India.” Journal of Health Economics, 29: 191–204.
Bhat, PN Mari, and AJ Francis Zavier. 2005. “Role of religion in fertility decline: The case of Indian
Muslims.” Economic and Political Weekly, 385–402.
Black, Robert E, Saul S Morris, and Jennifer Bryce. 2003. “Where and why are 10 million children
dying every year?” The Lancet, 361(9376): 2226–2234.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and development: evidence from hookworm eradication in the American South.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73–117.
Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. 2008. “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3).
Clasen, Thomas, Sophie Boisson, Parimita Routray, Belen Torondel, Melissa Bell, Oliver Cumming, Jeroen Ensink, Matthew Freeman, Marion Jenkins, Mitsunori Odagiri, Subhajyoti Ray,
Antara Sinha, Mrutyunjay Suar, and Wolf-Peter Schmidt. 2015. “Effectiveness of a rural sanitation programme on diarrhoea, soil-transmitted helminth infection, and child malnutrition in
Odisha, India: a cluster-randomised trial.” The Lancet Global Health, 2(11): e645–e653.
Coffey, Diane, Aashish Gupta, Payal Hathi, Nidhi Khurana, Dean Spears, Nikhil Srivastav, and
Sangita Vyas. 2014. “Revealed preference for open defecation.” Economic and Political Weekly,
49(38): 43.
Coffey, Diane, Michael Geruso, and Dean Spears. 2017. “Sanitation, Disease Externalities, and Anemia: Evidence From Nepal.” The Economic Journal, n/a–n/a.
Coffey, Diane, Payal Hathi, Aashish Gupta, Dean Spears, Nikhil Srivastav, and Sangita Vyas.
2017. “Understanding open defecation in rural India: Untouchability, pollution, and latrine pits.”
Economic and Political Weekly.
Coffey, Diane, Reetika Khera, and Dean Spears. 2013. “Women’s Status and Children’s Height in
India: Evidence from Rural Joint Households.” Princeton University working paper.
Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. 2005. “The role of public health improvements in health advances:
The twentieth-century United States.” Demography, 42(1): 1–22.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The Determinants of Mortality.”
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 97–120.
Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding differences in health behaviors
by education.” Journal of Health Economics, 29(1): 1 – 28.
33

Deolalikar, A. 2008. “How do Indian Muslims fare on social indicators.” Handbook of Muslims in India:
Empirical and Policy Perspectives.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica, 64(5): 1001–1044.
Doblhammer, Gabriele, and James W. Vaupel. 2001. “Lifespan depends on month of birth.” PNAS,
98(5): 2934–2939.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Raymond Guiteras, and Thomas Clasen. 2015. “Toilets Can
Work: Short and Medium Run Health Impacts of Addressing Complementarities and Externalities
in Water and Sanitation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21521.
Filmer, Deon, and Lant H Pritchett. 2001. “Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data–Or
Tears: An Application To Educational Enrollments In States Of India.” Demography, 38(1): 115–132.
Freedman, David A. 1991. “Statistcal Models and Shoe Leather.” Sociological Methodology, 21: 291–313.
Friis, H, D Mwaniki, B Omondi, E Muniu, F Thiong’o, J Ouma, P Magnussen, PW Geissler, and
K Fleischer Michaelsen. 2003. “Effects on haemoglobin of multi-micronutrient supplementation
and multi-helminth chemotherapy: A randomized, controlled trial in Kenyan school children.”
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 57(4): 573–579.
Galiani, Sebastian, Paul Gertler, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2005. “Water for life: The impact of the
privatization of water services on child mortality.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 83–120.
Gertler, Paul, Manisha Shah, Maria Laura Alzua, Lisa Cameron, Sebastian Martinez, and Sumeet
Patil. 2015. “How Does Health Promotion Work? Evidence From The Dirty Business of Eliminating
Open Defecation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20997.
Geruso, Michael. 2012. “Black-White Disparities in Life Expectancy: How Much Can the Standard
SES Variables Explain?” Demography, 49(2): 553–574.
Government of India. 2011. “Census of India, 2011.”
Guiteras, Raymond, James Levinsohn, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. 2015. “Encouraging sanitation investment in the developing world: A cluster-randomized trial.” Science.
Guiteras, Raymond P, David I Levine, Stephen P Luby, Thomas H Polley, Kaniz Khatun-e Jannat,
and Leanne Unicomb. 2014. “Disgust and Shame: Motivating Contributions to Public Goods.”
mimeo.
Hammer, Jeffrey, and Dean Spears. 2016. “Village sanitation and child health: Effects and external
validity in a randomized field experiment in rural India.” Journal of Health Economics, 48: 135–148.
Headey, Derek, John Hoddinott, Disha Ali, Roman Tesfaye, and Mekdim Dereje. 2015. “The Other
Asian Enigma: Explaining the Rapid Reduction of Undernutrition in Bangladesh.” World Development, 66: 749 – 761.
Humphrey, Jean H. 2009. “Child undernutrition, tropical enteropathy, toilets, and handwashing.”
The Lancet, 374: 1032 – 35.
Jayachandran, S, and I Kuziemko. 2010. “Why do mothers breastfeed girls less than boys? Evidence
and implications for child health in India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3): 1485–1538.
34

Kielmann, ArnfriedA, and Colin McCord. 1978. “Weight-for-age as an index of risk of death in
children.” The Lancet, 311(8076): 1247–1250.
Lin, Audrie, Benjamin F. Arnold, Sadia Afreen, Rie Goto, Tarique Mohammad Nurul Huda,
Rashidul Haque, Rubhana Raqib, Leanne Unicomb, Tahmeed Ahmed, John M. Colford Jr., and
Stephen P Luby. 2013. “Household Environmental Conditions Are Associated with Enteropathy
and Impaired Growth in Rural Bangladesh.” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health
in the Presence of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159–217.
Million Death Study Collaborators. 2010. “Causes of neonatal and child mortality in India: nationally representative mortality survey.” Lancet, 376(9755): 1853.
Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq, James Levinsohn, and Raymond Guiteras. 2014. “No Shit: Demand
Estimation with Strategic Complementarities – The Case of Sanitation in Bangladesh.” mimeo.
Mondal, Dinesh, Juliana Minak, Masud Alam, Yue Liu, Jing Dai, Poonum Korpe, Lei Liu,
Rashidul Haque, and William A. Petri, Jr. 2011. “Contribution of Enteric Infection, Altered Intestinal Barrier Function, and Maternal Malnutrition to Infant Malnutrition in Bangladesh.” Clinical
Infectious Diseases.
Mosley, W Henry, and Lincoln C Chen. 1984. “An analytical framework for the study of child survival in developing countries.” Population and Development Review, 25–45.
Pande, Rohini, and Seema Jayachandran. 2013. “Why Are Indian Children Shorter than African
Children?” Harvard working paper.
Petri, Jr, William A., Mark Miller, Henry J. Binder, Myron M. Levine, Rebecca Dillingham, and
Richard L. Guerrant. 2008. “Enteric infections, diarrhea, and their impact on function and development.” Journal of Clinical Investigation, 118(4): 1266–1290.
Prendergast, Andrew J, Sandra Rukobo, Bernard Chasekwa, Kuda Mutasa, Robert Ntozini,
Mduduzi NN Mbuya, Andrew Jones, Lawrence H Moulton, Rebecca J Stoltzfus, and Jean H
Humphrey. 2014. “Stunting Is Characterized by Chronic Inflammation in Zimbabwean Infants.”
PloS one, 9(2): e86928.
Ramaswami, Gita. 2005. India stinking: manual scavengers in Andhra Pradesh and their work. Navayana
Distributed by IPD Alternatives.
Rosenberg, Irwin, and Barbara Bowman. 1982. “Intestinal Physiology and Parasitic Diseases.” Reviews of Infectious Diseases, 4(4): 763–767.
Sachar, Rajindar, Saiyid Hamid, TK Oommen, MA Basith, Rakesh Basant, Akhtar Majeed, and
Abusaleh Shariff. 2006. “Social, Economic and Educational Status of the Muslim Community of
India.” East Asian Bureau of Economic Research.
Schmidt, Wolf-Peter, Benjamin F Arnold, Sophie Boisson, Bernd Genser, Stephen P Luby, Mauricio L Barreto, Thomas Clasen, and Sandy Cairncross. 2011. “Epidemiological methods in diarrhoea studies – an update.” International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(6): 1678–1692.
Schmidt, Wolf-Peter, Sophie Boisson, Bernd Genser, Mauricio L Barreto, Kathy Baisley, Suzanne
Filteau, and Sandy Cairncross. 2010. “Weight-for-age z-score as a proxy marker for diarrhoea in
epidemiological studies.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 64(12): 1074–1079.
35

Shariff, Abusaleh. 1995. “Socio-economic and demographic differentials between Hindus and Muslims in India.” Economic and Political Weekly, 2947–2953.
Spears, Dean. 2013. “Policy Lessons from the Implementation of India’s Total Sanitation Campaign.”
India Policy Forum, 9.
Spears, Dean, and Sneha Lamba. 2014. “Effects of Early-Life Exposure to Rural Sanitation on Childhood Cognitive Skills: Evidence from India’s Total Sanitation Campaign.” forthcoming Journal of
Human Resources.
Steckel, Richard. 2009. “Heights and human welfare: Recent developments and new directions.”
Explorations in Economic History, 46: 1–23.
Watson, Tara. 2006. “Public health investments and the infant mortality gap: Evidence from federal
sanitation interventions on U.S. Indian reservations.” Journal of Public Economics, 90(8-9): 1537 –
1560.

36

Figure 1: Puzzle: At All Levels of Parental Wealth and Health, Hindu IMR is Higher
(B) IMR vs. Mother’s Height

40

70
40

50

60

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)

80
60

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)

80

90

100

(A) IMR vs. Asset Wealth

0

100000

200000

300000

Asset Wealth Rank
Hindu

140

145

150

155

160

165

Mother's Height (cm)

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

Note: Figure plots local regressions of infant mortality on measures of economic well-being. The dependent variable
is an indicator for death in the first year of life ⇥ 1000. The left panel plots mortality against asset wealth rank,
constructed as described in the text. The right panel plots mortality against mother’s height. Observations are live
births. Thinner lines in the figure correspond to 95% confidence intervals that are not adjusted for clustering. Table
2 reports standard errors that account for clustering.

37

Figure 2: Infant Mortality Decreases with Muslim Neighbors for Both Hindus and Muslims
(B) Controlling for Own OD

-10

0

10

40

-30

-20

60
50

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)

70

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), Residual

80

(A) Raw

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

-.5

Fraction PSU Muslim
Hindu

0

.5

1

Fraction PSU Muslim, Residual

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

Note: Figure plots local regressions of infant mortality on the fraction of the neighborhood that is Muslim. The dependent variable is an indicator for death in the first year of life ⇥ 1000. Neighborhoods are defined as survey PSUs.
Panel A plots the raw relationship, separately for Hindus and Muslims. Panel B plots residuals after conditioning
on own open defecation. Observations are live births in mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). Thinner lines in the
figure correspond to 95% confidence intervals that are not adjusted for clustering. Table 2 reports standard errors
that account for clustering.

38

Figure 3: Muslim Share (M) in Survey Primary Sampling Units

!

Density

Histogram bar not to scale:
←65% point mass at zero

0

.2

.4
.6
Fraction Muslim in the PSU

.8

1

Note: Figure shows the histogram of Muslim concentration across primary sampling units (PSUs) in the NFHS
survey. Observations are PSUs. Most PSUs are perfectly segregated along religious lines, with either 0% or 100%
Muslim shares. The point mass representing 100% Hindu, which comprises about two thirds of all PSUs, is not
drawn to scale.

39

Figure 4: Greater Muslim Share (M) Predicts Neutral or Worse PSU Characteristics, Except
Latrine Use
(B) Characteristics: Mixed Religion PSUs (0 < M < 1)

.2

.2

Predicts Better Health →
.4
.6

Predicts Better Health →
.4
.6

.8

.8

(A) Characteristics: All PSUs

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
Fraction PSU Muslim

assets (fraction of 7)
piped water
institutional delivery
has healthcare card
mother literate

1

.01

electrification
urban
child ever vaccinated
mother healthcare say
latrine use

.4
.6
Fraction PSU Muslim

assets (fraction of 7)
piped water
institutional delivery
has healthcare card
mother literate

.8

.99

electrification
urban
child ever vaccinated
mother healthcare say
latrine use

(D) IMR: Mixed Religion PSUs (0 < M < 1)

70
65
60

60

65

70

Infant Morality

75

75

(C) IMR: All PSUs

Infant Morality

.2

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
Fraction PSU Muslim

Actual IMR

1

.01

Predicted IMR, Except OD

.2

.4
.6
.8
Fraction PSU Muslim

Actual IMR

.99

Predicted IMR, Except OD

Note: Figure plots local regressions. The dependent variables in Panels A and B are household-level characteristics,
and the regressor is Muslim concentration in the PSU (M j ). Each dependent variable is defined such that higher values predict better infant health outcomes. The signs of the relationships between these variables and infant mortality
are confirmed in Appendix Table A2. The dependent variables include asset wealth (as the fraction of the seven assets reported in all survey rounds) and indicators for household electrification, household piped water, institutional
delivery of the child, any child vaccinations, family possession of a national health card, mother having a say in
child’s healthcare, mothers’ literacy, and latrine use. Panel A includes all PSUs in the sample. Panel B includes only
mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). Observations are live births. In Panels C and D, we plot actual and predicted
IMR versus fraction Muslim in the full and mixed-PSU samples. Predicted values in C and D are generated via a
regression of IMR on the neighborhood-level means of the variables examined in Panels A and B, other than latrine
use.

40

Figure 5: Neighborhood Sanitation and Infant Mortality
(B) Controlling for Own OD

20

20
0
-40

-20

60
40

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)

80

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), Residual

40

100

(A) Raw

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

-1

Mean OD in PSU
Hindu

-.5

0

.5

1

Mean OD in PSU, Residual

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

Note: Figure plots local regressions of infant mortality on the fraction of the neighborhood that defecates in the
open. The dependent variable is an indicator for death in the first year of life ⇥ 1000. Neighborhoods are defined as
survey PSUs. Panel A plots the raw relationship, separately for Hindus and Muslims. Panel B plots residuals after
conditioning on own open defecation. Observations are live births in mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). Thinner
lines in the figure correspond to 95% confidence intervals that are not adjusted for clustering. Table A3 reports
standard errors that account for clustering.

41

Figure 6: Hindu-Muslim IMR Gap Tracks Heterogeneity in First Stage Relationship Across States
(B) Muslim Coefficient vs. D OD

-5

-50

t of Muslim Coeff in IMR Regression
0

Mean Hindu IMR - Mean Muslim IMR
0

5

50

(A) D IMR vs. D OD

-.4

-.2
0
.2
.4
Mean Hindu OD - Mean Muslim OD

.6

-.4

-.2
0
.2
.4
Mean Hindu OD - Mean Muslim OD

.6

Note: Figure shows how heterogeneity in the “first stage” relationship between religious identity and open defecation is reflected in the reduced-form relationship between religious identity and IMR. Scatter points are Indian
states ⇥ survey rounds, with marker sizes proportional to sample sizes. Panel A plots the Hindu-Muslim mean IMR
difference versus the Hindu-Muslim mean difference in OD for each state ⇥ round. Panel B plots the t-statistic on
an indicator for Muslim in an individual-level regression in which the dependent variable is IMR. That regression
follows the specification in Panel A, column 1 of Table 2 but is estimated separately for each state ⇥ round cell. OLS
regressions fit to the scatterpoints are displayed in red in each panel, along with 95% confidence intervals.

42

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Hindus and Muslims in the NFHS
Hindu0Subsample

Muslim0Subsample

Mean
(1)

SD
(2)

Mean
(3)

SD
(4)

infant0mortality0rate0(IMR),0year01
neonatal0mortality0rate0(NMR),0month01

74.1
47.5

261.9
212.6

63.0
39.8

243.0
195.6

household0open0defecation
local0(PSU)0open0defecation
local0(PSU)0fraction0Muslim

0.68
0.66
0.06

0.47
0.38
0.14

0.43
0.45
0.69

0.49
0.38
0.31

household0has0electricity
household0has0piped0water
household0is0urban

0.59
0.35
0.28

0.49
0.48
0.45

0.59
0.37
0.40

0.49
0.48
0.49

household0has0radio
household0has0TV
household0has0refrigerator
household0has0bicycle
household0has0motorcycle
household0has0car

0.36
0.33
0.10
0.46
0.12
0.02

0.48
0.47
0.30
0.50
0.33
0.14

0.36
0.31
0.10
0.41
0.10
0.02

0.48
0.46
0.30
0.49
0.29
0.12

mother's0height0(cm)
mother0no0education
mother0completed0primary

151.5
0.58
0.27

5.8
0.49
0.45

152.0
0.64
0.21

5.8
0.48
0.40

child0breastfed0for0at0least0six0months
child's0birth0order
child0is0female

0.91
2.46
0.48

0.28
1.17
0.50

0.91
2.74
0.49

0.28
1.20
0.50

observations0(live0births)

232,123

46,300

Note: Table displays summary statistics for our main analysis sample, rounds 1, 2, and 3 of the NFHS. Neonatal and
infant mortality are defined, respectively, as the number of deaths among children less than one month old and less
than one year old, scaled per 1,000 live births. Observations are children (live births).

43

Table 2: Main Result: Neighborhood Composition Predicts Mortality
dependent variable:
(1)
Muslim

-9.8**
(1.5)

Panel A: Survey Round FEs only
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-4.1
(2.4)

PSU fraction Muslim

PSU FEs
indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

72.2
278,423

-9.5**
(1.5)

72.2
278,423

-11.8**
(4.2)

-2.8
(2.0)

-2.5
(2.0)

-2.5
(2.0)

-7.4**
(2.5)

-9.4**
(3.3)

X

X

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

X
46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

-3.4
(2.4)

-4.2
(2.3)

-4.2
(2.3)

-8.6**
(2.9)

-13.3**
(3.9)

X

X

X
X

-5.8**
(1.2)

X

-1.7
(2.0)

X
X

-2.1
(1.9)

-2.1
(1.9)

-6.1*
(2.5)

-9.9**
(3.2)

X

X

X
72.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

Panel B: Extended Controls
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

PSU fraction Muslim

mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

-9.6**
(3.0)

-7.1**
(1.2)

X

(1)

extended controls
PSU FEs
indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim

-3.8
(2.3)

X

dependent variable:

Muslim

-3.8
(2.3)

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

X
46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 4 is infant mortality
(year 1). The dependent variable in columns 5 through 8 is neonatal mortality (month 1). Mortality variables are scaled
as described in the text to generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). All
regressions include survey round fixed effects. Columns 4 and 8 control both for the Muslim share of the PSU and for
indicators for all-Muslim and all-Hindu neighborhoods. Extended controls in the bottom panel include a full set of
birth order indicators interacted with sex, indicators for household ownership of each of the seven assets asked about
throughout NFHS survey rounds, an indicator for piped water, an indicator for whether the mother lives with her
husband’s parents, indicators for child’s birth month and birth year, an indicator for the child being a multiple birth, an
urban indicator, household size, mother’s education in years, and an indicator for mother’s literacy, as well as PSU-level
means of household assets, household electricity, household piped water, whether births occurred in an institution,
whether mothers had birth assistance, whether children were ever vaccinated, household possession of a health card, and
father’s education in years. See the text for additional details. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are
clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

44

Table 3: Heterogeneity in the Muslim Advantage, by Local OD Prevalence

dependent variable:
sample restriction:

own household Muslim

Panel A: Own Religion
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.6
(3.9)

χ2 test for equality of coeffs.

dependent variable:
sample restriction:

PSU fraction Muslim

1.5
(3.3)

p=0.02

-6.5**
(1.8)
p=0.03

Panel B: Neighbors' Religion
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.6
(6.6)

χ2 test for equality of coeffs.

dependent variable:
sample restriction:

-8.7**
(2.2)

-16.0**
(4.0)

-1.1
(5.2)

p=0.02

-12.0**
(3.0)
p=0.07

Panel C: Own and Neighbors' Religion
Infant Mortality (IMR)
Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
PSU OD = 0
PSU OD > 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

own household Muslim

1.6
(4.8)

-4.6
(2.6)

3.2
(4.2)

-3.3
(2.2)

PSU fraction Muslim

0.0
(8.3)

-11.4*
(4.7)

-4.3
(6.7)

-8.7*
(3.7)

χ2 test: own household Muslim

p=0.26

p=0.16

χ2 test: PSU fraction Muslim

p=0.23

p=0.57

OD mean
PSUs
observations (live births)

0.00
631
13,546

0.60
2,445
90,544

0.00
631
13,546

0.60
2,445
90,544

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions run over subsamples of the NFHS data. Columns divide the sample
into partitions according to the mean of household-level open defecation in the PSU, either zero or greater than zero.
The sample consists of mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). Household-level observations of open defecation reported
in the NFHS do not account for the discordant latrine use behaviors among household members. The dependent
variable in columns 1 and 2 is infant mortality (year 1), and in columns 3 and 4 is neonatal mortality (month 1).
Survey round FEs are included in all specifications. See Table 2 for additional notes. Observations are children (live
births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

45

Table 4: Stated and Revealed Preferences over Latrine Ownership and Use
Unit of
Observation

Hindu
Mean
(1)

Muslim
Mean
(2)

Open defecation, unconditionally

all persons
in household

0.73
(0.00)

0.45
(0.01)

Open defecation, conditional on owning latrine

all persons
in household

0.26
(0.01)

0.10
(0.01)

household

0.34
(0.01)

0.52
(0.04)

Says religious leader ever told them where to defecate

respondent

0.16
(0.00)

0.33
(0.01)

Says open defecation far from home is pure

respondent

0.53
(0.01)

0.40
(0.04)

Says latrine use near home is pure

respondent

0.45
(0.01)

0.54
(0.04)

Says open defecation is healthier for village children

respondent

0.40
(0.01)

0.27
(0.03)

Owns latrine

Note: Table reports means and standard errors of survey responses from the Sanitation Quality, Use, Access, &
Trends (SQUAT) Survey, 2013-2014. Responses are stratified by religious group. The table contains information on
22,787 individuals in 3,235 sampled rural households in Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh. The
unit of observation differs across rows and includes either all persons in the household, whether interviewed or told
about; the household itself; or the survey respondent (one per household). Standard errors of the means, clustered
by village, are shown in parentheses. All across-group comparisons are statistically significant at the 5% level.

46

Table 5: Tests of Mechanism: Anemia and Current Weight
dependent variable:
(1)
Muslim

0.151**
(0.034)

Blood Hemoglobin (g/dL)
(2)
(3)
-0.015
(0.049)

PSU fraction Muslim

(4)

(5)

0.020
(0.047)

0.005
(0.046)

0.128**
(0.028)

0.199**
(0.062)

0.090
(0.063)

Weight-for-Age Z-score
(6)
(7)
0.009
(0.059)

Weight-for-Height Z-score
(10)
(11)
(12)

(8)

(9)

0.056
(0.042)

0.046
(0.042)

0.135**
(0.032)

0.093
(0.074)

-0.009
(0.075)

0.016
(0.062)

0.032
(0.046)

0.021
(0.045)

0.123
(0.084)

0.001
(0.085)

own household OD

-0.256**
(0.059)

-0.139**
(0.033)

-0.159**
(0.036)

PSU mean OD (except own)

-0.155**
(0.034)

-0.274**
(0.055)

-0.326**
(0.063)

47

extended controls
PSU FEs
indicators for All Muslim
& No Muslim

X

mean of dep. var.
observations (children)

10.3
26,330

X
X

10.3
26,330

X

X

X

X

10.3
26,330

10.3
26,330

X

-1.89
21,636

X
X

-1.89
21,636

X

X

X

X

-1.89
21,636

-1.89
21,636

X

-0.94
21,164

X
X

-0.94
21,164

X

X

X

X

-0.94
21,164

-0.94
21,164

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. The dependent variables are indicated at the column header and are either blood hemoglobin
in g/dL, or weight-for-age or weight-for-height scaled as WHO z-scores. Hemoglobin levels are affected by intestinal parasites. Current weight
is an outcome reflecting acute malnutrition, and is recommended in the medical literature as the preferred measure for recent bouts of diarrhea.
PSU mean OD is calculated over all households in the PSU other than the respondent household. Controls are as described in the Table 2 notes.
Observations are children (live births). Due to the DHS/NFHS surveying scheme, the hemoglobin and anthropometry measurements exist for only
a small subset of our main analysis sample. The sample in columns 1 through 4 includes all observations for which hemoglobin was collected in
the NFHS data. The sample in columns 5 through 12 includes all children up to 24 months for whom a weight measurement was taken. Standard
errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

Table 6: Test of Mechanism: Interaction Between Breastfeeding Efficacy and OD
dependent variable:
(1)
Muslim

breastfed X Muslim

(2)

(3)

Infant Mortality (IMR)
(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

-38.4**
(14.0)

-23.6
(22.6)

9.9
(13.7)

-28.3
(22.0)

31.5*
(14.1)

24.3
(22.7)

-20.8
(13.8)

29.0
(22.1)

PSU fraction Muslim

PSU fraction Muslim X breastfed

-48.0**
(18.3)

-24.4
(29.1)

32.2
(18.1)

60.6*
(28.6)

35.5
(18.1)

11.2
(29.1)

-51.2**
(17.8)

-80.3**
(28.5)

PSU OD (except own)

233.8**
(13.7)

233.6**
(14.0)

236.6**
(14.1)

236.8**
(14.1)

PSU OD (except own) X breastfed

-246.6**
(13.5)

-250.5**
(13.7)

-256.3**
(13.7)

-256.5**
(13.7)

breastfed

extended controls
indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
observations (live births)

-245.5**
(6.4)

-246.2**
(6.7)

-246.2**
(6.7)

-110.7**
(7.7)

-105.1**
(8.5)

-96.8**
(8.8)

-96.7**
(8.8)

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X

83,702

83,702

83,702

83,702

83,702

83,702

83,702

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is IMR, scaled as described in the text
to generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). The breastfed indicator is
equal to one if the infant was exclusively breastfed during the first six months of life if she survived, or until death if
she died. PSU mean OD is calculated over all households in the PSU other than the respondent household. Controls
are as described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions include survey round fixed effects. Observations are children
(live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

48

Table 7: Falsification Tests: M j Does Not Predict Diet Differences Across PSUs

Panel&A:&Meat&Eating
dependent&variable:

Muslim

(1)

NonEVegetarian
(2)

(3)

0.15**
(0.02)

0.15**
(0.02)

0.14**
(0.02)

0.01
(0.04)

0.01
(0.04)

PSU&fraction&Muslim

IHDS&Controls
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(households)

Meat&(kg),&conditional&on&>&0
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.89**
(0.15)

0.90**
(0.21)

0.84**
(0.20)

E0.02
(0.29)

E0.01
(0.30)

X
0.25
37,195

0.25
37,195

0.25
37,195

X
3.35
9,235

3.35
9,235

3.35
9,235

Panel&B:&Other&Diet&Variables
dependent&variable:

Muslim

(7)

Eggs&(doz)
(8)

(9)

(10)

Milk&(liters)
(11)

(12)

5.16**
(0.56)

4.27**
(0.47)

4.32**
(0.47)

E2.89**
(0.90)

E2.27**
(0.61)

E1.95**
(0.58)

1.53
(0.96)

1.51
(0.98)

E1.08
(1.66)

0.53
(1.56)

PSU&fraction&Muslim

IHDS&Controls
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(households)

X
4.86
37,195

4.86
37,195

4.86
37,195

X
18.24
37,195

18.24
37,195

18.24
37,195

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions, using data from the India Human Development Survey of 2012.
Dependent variables are listed in the column headers, and include an indicator for consuming meat and continuous
measures of meat consumed (kg), eggs consumed (dozens), and milk consumed (liters), per household per month.
All columns control for own religion. IHDS controls include an urban indicator and log of consumption, measured
as rupees per month per capita. Observations are households. Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. *
p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

49

Table 8: Falsification Tests: M j Does Not Predict Other Hygiene Behaviors Across PSUs

dependent&variable:

PSU&fraction&Muslim

Always&Wash&Hands&
after&Defecating
(1)
(2)
0.05
(0.04)

IHDS&Controls
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(households)

0.03
(0.04)

Usually/Always&Wash&
Hands&after&Defecating
(3)
(4)
E0.01
(0.01)

X
0.72
36,608

0.72
36,608

E0.01
(0.01)

Always&Purify&Water
(5)
(6)
0.02
(0.02)

X
0.96
36,608

0.96
36,608

0.01
(0.02)

Usually/Always&Purify&
Water
(7)
(8)
0.01
(0.03)

X
0.11
36,608

0.11
36,608

E0.01
(0.03)

Piped&Public&Water&to&
Home
(9)
(10)
E0.07*
(0.03)

X
0.20
36,608

0.20
36,608

E0.11**
(0.02)

Open&Defecation
(11)
(12)
E0.19**
(0.04)

X
0.29
36,608

0.29
36,608

E0.14**
(0.03)
X

0.49
36,608

0.49
36,608

50

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions, using data from the India Human Development Survey of 2012. Dependent variables are listed in the column
headers, and include indicators for washing hands after defecating, for purifying water, for own household open defecation, and for having public piped
drinking water into the home. All columns control for own religion. IHDS controls include an urban indicator and log of consumption, measured as rupees
per month per capita. Observations are households. Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

Table 9: IV Estimates Exploiting PSU-level Variation in the Composition of Neighbors
dependent variable:
sample restriction:
specification:

PSU mean OD (except own)

OLS
(1)

OLS
(2)

44.0**
(2.6)

23.9**
(3.6)

own household Muslim

Panel A: Infant Mortality (IMR)
Mixed Religion PSUs
IV
IV
IV
(3)
(4)
(5)
68.6**
(15.1)

-3.5
(2.0)

own household OD

45.8
(31.6)

51.0**
(16.1)

61.4**
(21.5)

-3.9
(2.3)

-3.3
(2.0)

-3.6
(2.4)

-4.8*
(2.1)

20.2**
(2.6)

dependent variable:
sample restriction:
specification:

PSU mean OD (except own)

72.0

72.0

104,090

104,090

OLS
(8)

OLS
(9)

29.4**
(2.0)

16.1**
(2.9)

own household Muslim

7.9
(17.9)

72.0
74.4
104,090

72.0
74.8
104,090

72.0
97.0
104,090

Panel B: Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
Mixed Religion PSUs
IV
IV
IV
(10)
(11)
(12)
52.1**
(11.7)

-2.9
(1.6)

own household OD

46.6

104,090

104,090

X

X

72.0
200.3
104,090

72.0
230.7
104,090

IV
(13)

IV
(14)

42.5
(25.5)

38.4**
(13.0)

44.1*
(17.4)

-2.5
(1.9)

-2.6
(1.6)

-1.4
(2.0)

-2.1
(1.8)

13.5**
(2.2)

46.6

-14.1
(7.9)

41.3**
(14.1)

-1.4
(14.4)

extended controls
mean of dep. var.
first stage F-stat
observations (live births)

IV
(7)

52.1**
(17.6)

extended controls
mean of dep. var.
first stage F-stat
observations (live births)

IV
(6)

46.6
74.4
104,090

46.6
74.8
104,090

46.6
97.0
104,090

-7.8
(6.4)
X

X

46.6
200.3
104,090

46.6
230.7
104,090

Note: Table reports results from OLS and IV regressions of mortality on neighbors’ open defecation in the PSU
(ODij i ). IV estimates instrument ODij i with M j . Mortality variables are scaled as described in the text to generate
coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). The sample consists of mixed-religion
PSUs (0 < M < 1). Extended controls are as described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions include survey round
fixed effects. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, **
p < 0.01.

51

Appendix - For Online Publication

APPENDIX
A.1

Sample Sizes Needed to Experimentally Identify Infant Mortality Externalities

In footnote 1 in the introduction, we noted that the number of neighborhood clusters required to
detect even economically large infant mortality effects of open defecation (OD) via a field experiment
is large, both because of the plausible effect size relative to the variance in mortality and because
measuring local externalities necessarily implies randomization at the level of the locality, not the
individual. We also noted that it can be difficult to generate a first stage effect on latrine use via
experimental interventions. In this section, we illustrate these issues.
We begin with a standard power calculation to determine the number of localities (clusters) required to detect an external effect of OD on IMR. Assume we wish to detect a minimum effect size of
3.5 infant deaths per thousand, which is 5% of mean IMR and a little larger than our OLS estimate of
2.7 to 2.9 deaths averted per 10 percentage point reduction in local open defecation. The calculation
results in 8,622 clusters, based on a simple two-sided test.
With the NFHS data, we can alternatively perform a more detailed calculation for the required
sample size and cluster count via Monte Carlo simulation. Unlike the standard power calculation,
this method naturally incorporates any heterogeneity in infant mortality that is present across clusters. For the simulation, we again assume that the true effect of a 10 percentage point reduction in
local OD is equal to 5 percent of mean infant mortality, or 3.5 deaths per thousand. To implement
the Monte Carlo simulation, we iterate over the following procedure, varying the number of sample
clusters (Nc ) included. We use PSUs from the NFHS data described in Section 2 as our clusters.
1. Randomly select, with replacement, Nc clusters to include in the simulation.
2. Randomly assign half the included clusters to treatment and half to control.
3. Randomly identify 5 percent of infants in treated clusters and replace their infant mortality
with zero, thus leaving observations for live children unchanged. This changes the mean IMR
in each treatment cluster by 5 percent of the mean on average.
4. Regress infant mortality on a treatment indicator, clustering standard errors.
In practice, we vary Nc from 2,000 to 10,500 clusters in increments of 100, with 50 iterations at each
value of Nc . Appendix Figure A6 plots the relationship between sample size and power delivered
by the simulation. The horizontal axis shows the cluster count, and the vertical axis measures the
fraction of simulations resulting in a significant treatment effect at the 5% level. The graph reveals
that between 9,000 and 10,000 clusters are needed to achieve power = .80. This closely aligns with
the analytical derivation of the required sample size of 8,622 clusters.
Note that these power calculations will somewhat understate the required sample size because
they do not account for the fact that within a cluster, externalities can only be measured on the subset
of households that were not assigned the latrine treatment. Here, we have used the size of the whole
cluster to simulate the externality, whereas the correct experiment would measure the externality
within only the “leave-out” households in treatment clusters.
Calculating costs requires making additional assumptions about the efficacy of a hypothetical
latrine intervention, on which very little data exists. For illustration, we note that Barnard et al. (2013)
provides evidence on this question by examining a small number of Indian villages where latrines
were built under the central government’s Total Sanitation Campaign in the late 2000s. Barnard et al.
(2013) shows that among individuals owning a latrine following the implementation of the program
in their village, less than half were using the latrines.
52

Appendix - For Online Publication
To calculate a lower-bound estimate of the cost of an experiment that detected the mortality externalities of a latrine intervention, consider an intervention that converts non-latrine users to latrine
users at a success rate of 50% by constructing a latrine and providing some information about its benefits and use at a cost of $500 USD per household.55 With approximately 9,000 clusters and average
cluster sizes of 200 households, this implies 40 interventions in each of the 4,500 treatment localities
in order to generate the 10 percentage point first stage effect on latrine use. The cost of implementing
the treatment alone (leaving out surveying and other costs) would equal $90 million.

A.2

Details of Non-Parametric Decomposition

As an alternative approach to statistically explaining the mortality gaps, we estimate counterfactual
Hindu mortality rates after non-parametrically reweighting the sample of Hindu children to match
the characteristics of Muslim children. Compared to the linear regressions in Section 2, this nonparametric approach has the advantage of more flexibly allowing correlation between open defecation and other controls.
Following DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996), we first reweight the Hindu sample according
to a partition based on variables other than open defecation and report counterfactual outcomes.
We then reweight according to a finer partition that interacts groupings of these variables with our
sanitation variable. Here, sanitation (exposure to open defecation) is defined flexibly as an interaction
between own and neighbors’ latrine use. In particular, we divide both samples into 20 bins b of
exposure to open defecation: 10 bands of local (PSU) open defecation interacted with household
open defecation. Other variables are binned as follows: 3 survey rounds, 2 urban statuses, 8 bins of
asset ownership, 3 terciles of household size, and 4 quartiles of birth order.56 For each reweight on
some combination these of characteristics, we follow three steps:
1. Within each sample s 2 {Hindu, Muslim} and each bin b, compute wbs , the fraction of sample s
in bin b, using survey design weights.
2. For each observation in the Hindu sample, create new counterfactual weights by multiplying
the observation’s survey sampling weight by the ratio
ber.

wbMuslim
wbHindu

for the bin b of which it is a mem-

3. Compute a counterfactual mean Hindu mortality rate under the Muslim distribution of characteristics using these new weights.
Table A5 reports counterfactual Hindu infant mortality rates with the new weights. The first
row displays the unweighted difference in means and the reweight on the marginal distribution of
open defecation alone. The rest of the table explores the explanatory power of local open defecation
when added sequentially after reweighting with respect to other factors. Row 1 shows that matching on open defecation alone completely accounts for, and even reverses, the direction of the gap.
Sanitation non-parametrically accounting for 108 percent of the IMR gap is consistent with the fact
that Hindu children come from richer families, on average, and would therefore be expected to have
lower mortality. In the remaining rows, reweighting on various sets of covariates that do not include
OD continues to generate a large mortality gap. Then, adding sanitation to the set of reweighting
variables has a large incremental effect and explains the entire gap in most cases. The single case in
55 The $500 figure follows Duflo et al. (2015) who report an approximate construction cost of $440 per latrine plus annual
maintenance.
56 The requirement in any reweighting exercise to create joint distributions that include full support in both subsamples
limits the number of dimensions over which we can jointly reweight in a fixed sample size. See Geruso (2012) for a fuller
discussion of this limitation.

53

Appendix - For Online Publication
which it fails to do so is the specification that includes a count of joint household assets, but does not
control for the fact that Muslims live in larger households.

A.3

Problems with Survey-Reported Diarrhea

The NFHS contains information on mothers’ reports of diarrhea in their children. This type of survey
measure is likely to contain significant biases that may be correlated with our regressors of interest.
For example, because the reporting of diarrhea depends on whether the reporting mother recognizes
a loose stool as diarrhea, differences in reporting across children is correlated with the education level
of their mothers. Appendix Table A8 illustrates this fact, regressing reported diarrhea on mother’s
education, where the omitted category is no education. The table also includes regressions where
weight-for-age is the dependent variable. The table shows that reported diarrhea is only weakly
correlated with education, even though children of higher educated mothers tend to show fewer
measurable symptoms of the problem: Point estimates indicate that mothers with some education
are weakly more likely to report diarrhea than those with no education (columns 1 and 2). This is
despite the fact that weight moves in the predicted pattern, increasing with education. Columns 3
and 4 show that the weight of children is strongly correlated with mother’s education.
We also note that in the NFHS data, the reported incidence of diarrhea fluctuates significantly
across survey rounds: In our sample it is 11% in the 1992/1993 round, up to 19% in the 1998/1999
round, and then back down to 11% in the 2005/2006 round. This non-monotonicity over time stands
in stark contrast to the wide evidence from elsewhere, including the Census of India, that infant
mortality—which is largely accounted for by diarrheal disease (Million Death Study Collaborators,
2010)—was steadily declining in India over this time period. For these reasons, we focus our analysis
on surveyor-measured weight-for-age, following the standard practice (Schmidt et al., 2011). For
more detail on the problems with survey-reported diarrhea, see Schmidt et al. (2011).

A.4

Cough, Fever, and Diarrhea

In Section 5.3 we describe an exercise that examines whether fever and cough respond to neighborhood religious composition differently than diarrhea. We attempt to address differences across mothers of different socioeconomic status in the subjective reporting of symptoms by comparing relative
reporting of the three types of symptoms conditional on a mother ⇥ child fixed effect. We reshape
the data to “stack” three observations per child, one for each symptom: fever, cough, and diarrhea.
The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the mother reported that the child was recently ill
with that symptom. We regress an indicator for a positive report of the symptom on mother ⇥ child
fixed effects.
Ill recentlyijt = a + qijt + g1 coughijt + g2 diarrheaijt

+ y1 coughijt ⇥ M jt + y2 diarrheaijt ⇥ M jt + eijt .

(4)

where aijt are mother ⇥ child FEs. Note that the main effect of M jt is absorbed by aijt . The variables
feverijt and feverijt ⇥ M jt are the excluded categories. In this regression, coughijt and diarrheaijt take
on values of one if the observation corresponds to that symptom type, regardless of whether the
mother reported the symptom as present (Ill recentlyijt = 1) or absent (Ill recentlyijt = 0). Table
A12 reports the coefficients, which show that relative to fever, diarrhea is more strongly negatively
associated with fraction Muslim. Cough, in contrast, is not.
Appendix Figure A5 reports on a non-parametric version of this exercise, plotting residuals from
a regression of symptom indicators on mother ⇥ child fixed effects, separately by symptom, against
54

Appendix - For Online Publication
the religious composition of the PSU. The equation generating the residuals is:
Ill recentlyijt = aijt + g1 feverijt + g2 coughijt + g3 diarrheaijt + eijt .

55

(5)

Appendix - For Online Publication

Figure A1: Correlation between Own and Neighbors’ Open Defecation

0.2

.2.4

.4.6

.6.8

.81

1

Fraction
Fraction
PSU Muslim
PSU Muslim
Hindu Hindu

.2

.4

OD HH

.6

.8

1
.2

.4

OD HH

.6

.8

1
.2

.4

OD HH

.6

.8

1
.8
.6

OD HH
.4
.2

0

1

(B) Household OD vs Neighbors’ OD ( ODij i )

(A) Household OD vs M j

0

0.2

.2.4

.4.6

.6.8

.81

1

Fraction
Fraction
PSU OD
PSU OD

Muslim Muslim

Hindu Hindu

Muslim Muslim

Note: Figure plots local regressions of household OD on the Muslim share of the neighborhood (Panel A) and the
fraction of the PSU that defecates in the open (Panel B). Neighborhoods are defined as survey PSUs. Observations
are live births.

56

Appendix - For Online Publication

-50

Muslim Coeff in IMR Regression
0
50

100

Figure A2: Hindu-Muslim IMR Gap Tracks Heterogeneity in First Stage Relationship Across States

-.4

-.2
0
.2
.4
Mean Hindu OD - Mean Muslim OD

.6

Note: Figure shows how heterogeneity in the first stage relationship between religious identity and open defecation
is reflected in the reduced-form second stage relationship between religious identity and IMR. Scatter points are
Indian states ⇥ survey rounds, with marker size proportional to sample size. The vertical axis measures the Muslim
coefficient in an individual-level regression in which the dependent variable is IMR, estimated separately in each
state ⇥ round. A linear regression is displayed in red, along with 95% confidence intervals. See Figure 6.

57

Appendix - For Online Publication

Figure A3: At All Levels of Parental Wealth and Health, Hindu OD Exposure is Higher
(B) PSU OD vs. Mother’s Height

.6
.5
.3

.4

Neighborhood Open Defecation

.8
.6
.4
.2

Neighborhood Open Defecation

1

.7

(A) PSU OD vs. Asset Wealth

0

100000

200000

300000

140

Asset Wealth Rank
Hindu

150

155

160

165

Mother's Height (cm)

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

(D) Own OD vs. Mother’s Height

.5
.3

.2

.4

.4

.6

Own Open Defecation

.6

.8

1

.7

(C) Own OD vs. Asset Wealth

Own Open Defecation

145

0

100000

200000

300000

Asset Wealth Rank
Hindu

140

145

150

155

160

165

Mother's Height (cm)

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

Note: Figure plots local regressions of neighborhood OD (Panels A and B) and household OD (Panels C and D) on
the economic wellbeing of the household, proxied by asset wealth and mother’s height. Neighborhoods are defined
as survey PSUs. Observations are live births.

58

Appendix - For Online Publication

Figure A4: Hindu-Muslim Differences in OD: Unconditional and Conditional on Owning a Latrine

.6
.4

Open defecation

0

.2

.6
.4
.2
0

Open defecation

.8

(B) By Age; Households that Own Latrines

.8

(A) By Age; All Households

0

20

40

60

0

20

40

Age
Hindu

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

0

.2

.4

.6

Open defecation

.8

1

(D) By Life Satisfaction; Households that Own Latrines

1

(C) By Life Satisfaction; All Households

Open defecation

60

Age

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

Life satisfaction ladder
Hindu

2

4

6

8

Life satisfaction ladder

Muslim

Hindu

Muslim

Note: Figure plots local linear regressions in which the dependent variable is person-specific open defecation. The
sample in the left panels includes all household members for whom a response was recorded. The sample in the right
panels includes only respondents in households that own a latrine, illustrating the preference for open defecation
even when latrines are clearly available. The rows, respectively, condition on age and a life satisfaction “ladder”
question (0 to 10, 10 being the most satisfied). The dataset used to construct these plots is the SQUAT survey. Observations are individuals. See Table 4 for additional data notes.

59

10

Appendix - For Online Publication

.004
.002
0
-.006 -.004 -.002

Fraction recently with disease, residuals

Figure A5: Symptoms by Fraction Muslim: Residuals from Mother ⇥ Child FE Regressions

0

.2

.4
.6
PSU fraction Muslim
diarrhea

fever

.8

1

cough

Note: Figure plots local regressions of symptom residuals on M j . Residuals are generated from a stacked regression
in which an observation is a child ⇥ symptom, for each of three symptoms: fever, cough, and diarrhea. An indicator
for a positive report of the symptom is regressed on mother ⇥ child fixed effects and on indicators for each of the
three symptom types. Residuals are plotted separately by symptom. See Appendix A.4 for additional details.

60

Appendix - For Online Publication

.9
.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

power = 0.80

.2

fraction of simulations with | t | > 1.96

Figure A6: Experimental Sample Size Needed to Identify the Mortality Externalities of OD

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

count of clusters
95% CI

power

Note: Figure plots statistical power against the number of clusters for a hypothetical experiment that generates infant
mortality reductions equal to 5 percent of the mean infant mortality rate via a cluster-level externality. Observations
are generated by sampling NFHS survey data, following a Monte Carlo procedure described in Appendix A.1. The
line in the figure is a local polynomial regression of the simulation result on the cluster count.

61

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A1: Correlates of Muslim Share Across PSUs
dependent&varible:

assets&(fraction&of&7)

electricity

piped&water

urban

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

B0.039***
(0.010)

B0.076***
(0.008)
X

B0.041
(0.029)

B0.155***
(0.023)
X

B0.091**
(0.029)

B0.169***
(0.026)
X

0.077*
(0.035)

B0.032
(0.029)
X

mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(live&births)

0.275
104,090

0.275
104,090

0.569
104,090

0.569
104,090

0.368
104,090

0.368
104,090

0.357
104,090

0.357
104,090

dependent&Varible:

mother&education&in&
years
(9)
(10)

Fraction&PSU&Muslim
HH&Muslim&&&HH&OD

Fraction&PSU&Muslim

dependent&Varible:

Fraction&PSU&Muslim

dependent&Varible:

Fraction&PSU&Muslim

(14)

(15)

(16)

0.005
(0.022)

B0.003
(0.018)
X

0.756***
(0.141)

0.173
(0.145)
X

0.580***
(0.054)

0.255***
(0.054)
X

3.014
104,090

3.014
104,090

0.400
104,090

0.400
104,090

7.553
104,090

7.553
104,090

3.054
104,090

3.054
104,090

father&education&in&years

child&ever&vaccinated

family&has&healthcard

institutional&delivery

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

B0.542***
(0.079)

B0.386***
(0.080)
X

B0.027
(0.021)

B0.006
(0.021)
X

B0.061**
(0.023)

B0.038
(0.022)
X

B0.011
(0.025)

B0.047*
(0.021)
X

3.313
77,122

3.313
77,122

0.790
30,078

0.790
30,078

0.568
30,182

0.568
30,182

0.357
31,252

0.357
31,252

birth&assistance

mother&has&own&money

mother&has&healthcare&
say
(29)
(30)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

B0.047
(0.025)

B0.089***
(0.021)
X

0.004
(0.040)

0.035
(0.042)
X

0.032
(0.024)

0.433
31,271

0.433
31,271

0.441
27,123

0.441
27,123

0.275
26,474

HH&Muslim&&&HH&OD
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(live&births)

birth&order

(13)

B0.258
(0.141)
X

HH&Muslim&&&HH&OD
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(live&births)

household&size

(12)

B0.392*
(0.181)

HH&Muslim&&&HH&OD
mean&of&dep.&var.
observations&(live&births)

mother&literate
(11)

clean&cooking&fuel
(31)

(32)

0.016
(0.026)
X

B0.116**
(0.043)

B0.147***
(0.032)
X

0.275
26,474

0.328
27,111

0.328
27,111

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is a characteristic of a household,
parent, or child, and the single regressor is the fraction of the PSU in which the child resides that is Muslim (M).
The sample is limited to mixed religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). Observations are children (live births), and sample size
varies across regressions because some survey questions were asked to only subsets of respondents. Standard errors
are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

62

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A2: Correlates of IMR: Signing the Potential Biases (see Table A1)
dependent&variable:

Regressor:

Infant&Mortality&(IMR)
assets&&&&&&&&&&
(fraction&of&7)
(1)

electricity

piped&water

urban

(2)

(3)

(4)

coefficient&in&IMR&regression

@76.9***
(3.9)

@35.6***
(2.1)

@22.7***
(2.1)

@27.0***
(2.1)

observations&(live&births)

104,090

104,090

104,090

104,090

household&size

birth&order

(7)

(8)

Regressor:

mother&education&
mother&literate
in&years
(5)
(6)

coefficient&in&IMR&regression

@4.8***
(0.2)

@37.9***
(1.9)

@2.9***
(0.2)

4.3***
(0.5)

observations&(live&births)

104,090

104,090

104,090

104,090

father&education&
in&years
(9)

child&ever&
vaccinated
(10)

family&has&
healthcard
(11)

institutional&
delivery
(12)

coefficient&in&IMR&regression

@2.4***
(0.5)

@116.7***
(4.8)

@57.8***
(2.8)

@26.5***
(2.7)

observations&(live&births)

77,122

30,078

30,182

31,252

(13)

mother&has&own&
money
(14)

mother&has&
healthcare&say
(15)

@29.2***
(2.7)

2.600
(3.3)

0.900
(3.6)

@29.4***
(3.5)

31,271

27,123

26,474

27,111

Regressor:

Regressor:

coefficient&in&IMR&regression

observations&(live&births)

birth&assistance

clean&cooking&fuel
(16)

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is IMR. Each column reports a
separate regression of IMR on a single regressor, which is listed in the column header. Mortality variables are scaled
as described in the text to generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). The
sample is limited to mixed religion PSUs (0 < M < 1) to correspond to Table A1. Observations are children (live
births), and sample size varies across regressions because of the design of the DHS questionnaire, which asked some
questions to only subsets of respondents. Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

63

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A3: Horserace Regressions: OD j , M j , and Mortality
dependent variable:

Infant Mortality (IMR)
(1)
(2)

Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
(3)
(4)

Muslim

-2.5
(2.1)

-3.6
(2.3)

-1.7
(1.7)

-1.6
(1.9)

PSU fraction Muslim

4.6
(2.7)

-4.7
(3.0)

1.5
(2.2)

-2.8
(2.5)

PSU mean OD (except own)

25.6**
(2.1)

9.4**
(3.0)

16.8**
(1.7)

8.0**
(2.4)

own household OD

20.2**
(1.6)

5.9**
(1.8)

12.3**
(1.3)

4.9**
(1.4)

extended controls
mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

X
72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

X
46.2
278,423

46.2
278,423

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. PSU mean OD is calculated over all households in the PSU other
than the respondent household. Controls are as described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions include survey round
fixed effects. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, **
p < 0.01.

64

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A4: Splits by Child Sex, Birth Order, and Urban/Rural
dependent variable:
sample restriction:
Muslim

Full Sample
(1)
(2)
-9.8**
(1.5)

-2.5
(2.3)

Panel A: split by child sex
IMR
Boys
(3)
(4)
-9.0**
(2.0)

-1.3
(3.2)

Girls
(5)

(6)

-10.6**
(2.0)

-3.8
(3.1)

own household OD

20.2**
(1.7)

20.4**
(2.3)

20.1**
(2.4)

PSU mean OD (except own)

25.8**
(2.3)

22.0**
(3.0)

29.9**
(3.1)

X

X

X

indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

dependent variable:
sample restriction:
Muslim

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

73.7
144,269

73.7
144,269

70.6
134,154

70.6
134,154

Panel B: split by child birth order
IMR
Full Sample
First Birth
Second or Higher Birth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-9.8**
(1.5)

-2.5
(2.3)

-6.7*
(2.7)

-1.4
(4.2)

-10.5**
(1.7)

-2.6
(2.7)

own household OD

20.2**
(1.7)

22.7**
(3.0)

19.8**
(2.0)

PSU mean OD (except own)

25.8**
(2.3)

38.4**
(3.8)

21.1**
(2.7)

X

X

X

indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

dependent variable:
sample restriction:
Muslim

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

Full Sample
(1)
(2)
-9.8**
(1.5)

-2.5
(2.3)

74.4
76,253

74.4
76,253

Panel C: split by PSU location
IMR
Urban
(3)
(4)
-3.7
(2.1)

-4.6
(3.4)

71.4
202,170

71.4
202,170

Rural
(5)

(6)

-8.8**
(2.0)

-1.3
(3.1)

own household OD

20.2**
(1.7)

22.4**
(3.1)

19.3**
(2.1)

PSU mean OD (except own)

25.8**
(2.3)

19.3**
(4.8)

26.4**
(3.4)

X

X

X

indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
mean of dep. var.
observations (live births)

72.2
278,423

72.2
278,423

52.0
83,344

52.0
83,344

80.9
195,079

80.9
195,079

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is IMR, scaled as described in the text to
generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). Columns 1 and 2 repeat the
main results from Table 2 for reference. Columns 3 through 6 replicate the regressions in the subsamples defined
in the column headers. All regressions include survey round fixed effects. Observations are children (live births).
Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

65

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A5: Nonparametric Reweight: Counterfactual Hindu Mortality Under Muslim Exposure to Open Defecation

Hindu&Raw& Muslim&Raw& Raw&Gap&to&
Mean:
Mean:
Explain:
73.93
63.17
10.76
Reweighting&variables

Round

X
X
X
X
X

Urban

X
X
X
X

Reweight&Results

House@
hold& House@ Birth&
Assets hold&Size Order

X
X
X

X
X

X

Reweight&
without&OD

Residual&
Gap&to&
Explain

Incremental&
Reweight& Effect&of&OD& Percent&
with&OD
Explained
Reweight

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

73.93
72.63
70.52
72.72
69.58
70.32

10.76
9.46
7.35
9.55
6.41
7.15

62.31
62.29
61.95
65.58
61.76
62.68

11.62
10.34
8.57
7.14
7.82
7.64

108%
109%
117%
75%
122%
107%

Note: Table presents a nonparametric decomposition of the extent to which sanitation differences can account for
infant mortality differences between Hindus and Muslims. Xs in the left of the table indicate the characteristics
over which the reweight of the joint distribution is performed. Column 1 presents counterfactual mortality rates
for Hindu children (⇥1000), using the empirical Hindu distribution of exposure to OD and the Muslim distribution
of other characteristics. Column 3 presents counterfactual mortality rates for Hindu children after matching the
Muslim joint distribution of exposure to OD and the indicated characteristics. The distribution of open defecation
is defined over 20 bins of exposure: 10 bands of local (PSU) open defecation interacted with household open
defecation. Other characteristics are binned as follows: 3 survey rounds, 2 urban statuses, 8 bins of asset ownership,
3 terciles of household size, and 4 quartiles of birth order. The final row matches the distribution of characteristics
across 11,520 (=20⇥3⇥2⇥8⇥3⇥4) cells.

66

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A6: Breastfeeding ⇥ M j Interactions in High and Low IMR Neighborhoods
dependent variable:
sample restriction:

Infant Mortality (IMR)
PSU IMR < Median
(1)

PSU IMR ≥ Median
(2)

Muslim

23.4
(21.1)

-43.4
(36.0)

breastfed X Muslim

-25.9
(21.1)

47.3
(36.4)

PSU fraction Muslim

44.1
(27.1)

32.2
(48.4)

PSU fraction Muslim X breastfed

-45.4
(27.0)

-59.1
(48.5)

PSU OD (except own)

142.2**
(14.7)

137.4**
(23.5)

PSU OD (except own) X breastfed

-148.8**
(14.7)

-172.6**
(23.5)

breastfed

-28.5**
(6.8)

-254.0**
(18.8)

X
X

X
X

7,288
42,775

7,288
40,927

extended controls
indicators for All Muslim & No Muslim
PSUs
observations (live births)

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is IMR, scaled as described in the text
to generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000 (deaths per 1000 children). The breastfed indicator is
equal to one if the infant was exclusively breastfed during the first six months of life if she survived, or until death
if she died. PSU mean OD is calculated over all households in the PSU other than the respondent household. The
sample is split across the columns according to PSU-level mean IMR above or below the median. Controls are as
described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions include survey round fixed effects. Observations are children (live
births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

67

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A7: Summary Statistics from Supplementary Dataset: The India Human Development
Survey
Hindu3Subsample

Muslim3Subsample

Mean
(1)

SD
(2)

Mean
(3)

SD
(4)

household3open3defecation
local3(PSU)3open3defecation
local3(PSU)3fraction3Muslim

0.51
0.50
0.05

0.50
0.35
0.12

0.31
0.33
0.66

0.46
0.34
0.33

household3has3piped3water
household3is3urban
ln(per3capita3consumption)

0.30
0.30
9.90

0.46
0.46
0.68

0.28
0.44
9.83

0.45
0.50
0.61

nonEvegetarian3household
meat,3household3kg3per3month3conditional3on3any
eggs,3household3dozen3per3month
milk,3household3liters3per3month

0.23
3.15
4.17
18.64

0.42
3.65
10.98
29.27

0.40
4.14
9.73
15.41

0.49
3.92
18.64
24.16

0.72
0.96
0.11
0.20

0.45
0.18
0.32
0.40

0.70
0.96
0.12
0.21

0.46
0.20
0.33
0.41

a

always3wash3hands3after3defecating
a
usually3or3always3wash3hands3after3defecating
a
always3purify3water
a
usually3or3always3purify3water
observations

32,572

4,623

Note: Table displays summary statistics for the supplemental dataset used in Section 5.3, the 2012 round of the India
Human Development Survey (IHDS). Observations are households.
a

The sample sizes for the wash and water variables are slightly smaller than for the rest of the table because these
were observed in the female questionnaire, rather than the main household questionnaire. These sample sizes are
32,254 and 4,550 for Hindus and Muslims, respectively.

68

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A8: Reliability of Self-Reported Diarrhea vs. Objective Measures of Acute Malnutrition
dependent-variable:respondent-reportedweight?for?height
-z?score
diarrhea
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mother-some-education

0.008
(0.007)

0.013+
(0.007)

0.341**
(0.027)

0.099**
(0.026)

Mother-high-education

?0.021**
(0.005)

?0.002
(0.007)

0.918**
(0.021)

0.326**
(0.025)

extended-controls
mean-of-dep.-var.
observations-(live-births)

X
0.17
25,684

0.17
25,684

X
?1.90
25,684

?1.90
25,684

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions. In Columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the respondent’s
report of diarrhea in the child. In Columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the surveyor-measured weight
and height, converted to a weight-for-height z-score according to the World Health Organization child growth
standard. Some education corresponds to some primary education. High education corresponds to greater than
primary education. The omitted category is no education. Extended controls are as described in the Table 2 notes.
All regressions control for survey round fixed effects. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are
clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

69

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A9: Robustness of First Stage Result: Splits by Subsamples

dependent&variable:
(1)

(2)

Full&Sample
PSU&fraction&Muslim
own&religion&and&OD
extended&controls
observations&(live&births)

@0.121**
(0.013)
X
104,090

@0.174**
(0.012)
X
X
104,090

Full&Sample
PSU&fraction&Muslim
own&religion&and&OD
extended&controls
observations&(live&births)

@0.121**
(0.013)
X
104,090

own&religion&and&OD
extended&controls
observations&(live&births)

@0.121**
(0.013)
X
104,090

own&religion&and&OD
extended&controls
observations&(live&births)

@0.121**
(0.013)
X
104,090

53,779

@0.174**
(0.012)
X
X
53,779

(5)

(6)&&&
Girls

@0.124**
(0.014)
X
50,311

@0.174**
(0.013)
X
X
50,311

Panel&B:&split&by&child&birth&order
First&Birth
Second&or&Higher&Birth
@0.107**
(0.013)
X
27,020

@0.161**
(0.012)
X
X
27,020

Panel&C:&split&by&own&religion
Muslims

@0.174**
(0.012)
X
X
104,090

Full&Sample
PSU&fraction&Muslim

@0.119**
(0.013)
X

@0.174**
(0.012)
X
X
104,090

Full&Sample
PSU&fraction&Muslim

PSU&mean&OD&(except&own)
(3)
(4)
Panel&A:&split&by&child&sex
Boys

@0.113**
(0.018)
X
34,052

@0.179**
(0.016)
X
X
34,052

@0.127**
(0.014)
X
77,070

Hindus
@0.135**
(0.015)
X
70,038

Panel&D:&split&by&PSU&location
Urban

@0.174**
(0.012)
X
X
104,090

@0.054**
(0.019)
X
37,209

@0.103**
(0.017)
X
X
37,209

@0.178**
(0.013)
X
X
77,070

@0.166**
(0.014)
X
X
70,038

Rural
@0.177**
(0.018)
X
66,881

@0.202**
(0.016)
X
X
66,881

Note: Table reports results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is the mean of neighbors’ open
defecation in the PSU (ODij i ). The regressor of interest is the fraction of the PSU that is Muslim (M). Column 1 reports
results from the full sample. Columns 2 and 3 and Columns 4 and 5 estimate the identical OLS regression for each
of the subsamples defined in the panel headers. All regressions control for own religion and own OD. Regressions
in columns 4 and 6 include the extended controls as described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions include only the
mixed-religion PSU sample over which the IV is defined (0 < M < 1). All regressions include survey round fixed
effects. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

70

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A10: Robustness of IV Results in Table 9: Splits by Subsamples

dependent variable:

Full Sample

Infant Mortality (IMR)
(2)
Panel A: split by child sex
Boys

Girls

61.4**
(21.5)
X
X
104,090

55.2*
(28.0)
X
X
53,779

68.4*
(29.0)
X
X
50,311

(1)

PSU mean OD (except own)
own religion and own OD
extended controls
observations (live births)

Full Sample
PSU mean OD (except own)
own religion and own OD
extended controls
observations (live births)

PSU mean OD (except own)
own religion and own OD
extended controls
observations (live births)

PSU mean OD (except own)
own religion and own OD
extended controls
observations (live births)

(3)

Panel B: split by child birth order
First Birth
Second or Higher Birth

61.4**
(21.5)
X
X
104,090

66.4
(40.7)
X
X
27,020

59.1*
(24.0)
X
X
77,070

Full Sample

Panel C: split by own religion
Muslim

Hindu

61.4**
(21.5)
X
X
104,090

33.5
(26.9)
X
X
34,052

86.9**
(33.4)
X
X
70,038

Full Sample

Panel D: split by PSU location
Urban

Rural

61.4**
(21.5)
X
X
104,090

66.4
(49.0)
X
X
37,209

66.1**
(25.4)
X
X
66,881

Note: Table reports results from IV regressions of mortality on neighbors’ open defecation in the PSU (ODij i ).
Mortality variables are scaled as described in the text to generate coefficients that indicate impacts on rates ⇥ 1000
(deaths per 1000 children). Column 1 reports results from the full sample IV regression in column 7 of Table 9 for
comparison. Columns 2 and 3 estimate the identical IV regression over each of the subsamples defined in the panel
headers. All regressions include only the mixed-religion PSU sample over which the IV is defined (0 < M < 1). All
regressions control for survey round fixed effects, own religion, own OD and the extended controls as described
in the Table 2 notes, except for the single variable on which the sample is split in each panel (sex, birth order, etc.).
Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

71

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A11: Robustness of IV Results: Mortality is Uncorrelated with Residing in a PSU that
is Religiously Dissimilar from the Respondent Household
dependent variable:
sample restriction:
specification:

PSU mean OD (except own)

own household OD

Infant Mortality (IMR)
Mixed Religion PSU
IV
IV
T9 - Col 7
(1)
(2)
61.4**
(21.5)

61.8**
(21.6)

44.1*
(17.4)

44.2*
(17.5)

-14.1
(7.9)

-14.1
(7.9)

-7.8
(6.4)

-7.8
(6.4)

fraction of PSU religiously dissimilar

extended controls
mean of dep. var.
first stage F-stat
observations (live births)

Neonatal Mortality (NMR)
Mixed Religion PSU
IV
IV
T9 - Col 14
(3)
(4)

-4.7
(3.9)

-1.1
(3.2)

X

X

X

X

72.2
230.7
104,090

72.2
231.1
104,090

46.2
230.7
104,090

46.2
231.1
104,090

Note: Table reports results from IV regressions of mortality on neighbors’ open defecation in the PSU (ODij i ),
instrumented with M j . The sample is restricted to the mixed-religion PSU sample over which the IV is defined
(0 < M < 1). Columns 1 and 3 repeat results from Table 9 for comparison. Columns 2 and 4 add a control for the
fraction of the respondent’s neighborhood that is religiously dissimilar, which equals M j for Hindu households and
1 M j for Muslim households. Extended controls are as described in the Table 2 notes. All regressions control for
survey round fixed effects. Observations are children (live births). Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. *
p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

72

Appendix - For Online Publication

Table A12: Diarrhea, Fever, and Cough

dependent variable:

Infant Mortality (IMR)
(1)

cough

-0.0397**
(0.0035)

diarrhea

-0.1275**
(0.0063)

cough X PSU fraction Muslim

0.0001
(0.0092)

diarrhea X PSU fraction Muslim

-0.0293
(0.0172)

mother X child FEs

X

observations (children X symptoms)

189,735

Note: Table reports results from an OLS regression. Observations are children ⇥ symptoms, so that the sample
stacks three observations per child, one for each symptom: fever, cough, and diarrhea. Mother ⇥ child fixed effects
are included. The coefficients are relative to the excluded categories—fever and fever ⇥ M j . The sample consists of
mixed-religion PSUs (0 < M < 1). * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.

73

