                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          POLITICAL BONDS:
POLITICAL HAZARDS AND THE CHOICE OF MUNICIPAL FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS

                                          Abhay Aneja
                                         Marian Moszoro
                                         Pablo T. Spiller

                                       Working Paper 21188
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21188


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2015




Data from Bloomberg Financial is gratefully acknowledged. We are grateful to Fernando Ferreira
and Joseph Gyorko for sharing their municipal election data and Mosche Barache for his assistance
needed to link the bond and election data. We are also thankful to Kenneth Ayotte, Richard Boylan,
David Schleicher, and Eric Singer for extensive and helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Abhay Aneja, Marian Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Bonds: Political Hazards and the Choice of Municipal Financial Instruments
Abhay Aneja, Marian Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller
NBER Working Paper No. 21188
May 2015
JEL No. D23,D73,D78,H57,K23

                                              ABSTRACT

We study the link between the choice of rule-based public contracts and political hazards using the
municipal bond market. While general obligation bonds are serviced from all municipal revenue streams
and offer elected officials financial flexibility, revenue bonds limit the discretion that political agents
have in repaying debt as well as the use of revenues from the projects financed by the debt. We predict
that public officials choose revenue bonds when elections are very contested to signal trustworthiness
and transparency in contracting to the voter. We test this hypothesis on municipal finance data that
includes 6,500 bond issuances nationwide as well as election data on over 400 cities over 20 years.
We provide evidence that in politically contested cities, mayors are more likely to issue revenue bonds.
The correlation is economically significant: a close victory margin of winning candidates and more
partisan swings increases the probability of debt being issued as a revenue bond by 3–15% and the
probability of issuing bonds through competitive bids by 7%. We test a few additional hypotheses
that strengthen the argument that the choice of revenue bonds is a political risk adaptation of public
agents so as to signal commitment and lower the likelihood of successful political challenges of misuse
of funds.


Abhay Aneja                                          Pablo T. Spiller
University of California, Berkeley                   University of California, Berkeley
Walter A. Haas School of Business                    Walter A. Haas School of Business
2200 Piedmont Avenue                                 Faculty Bldg. 593
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
abhay_aneja@haas.berkeley.edu                        and NBER
                                                     spiller@haas.berkeley.edu
Marian Moszoro
University of California, Berkeley
Institute for Business Innovation
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Faculty Bldg. F402
Berkeley, CA 94720
mmoszoro@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction

Municipal bonds are commonly issued by cities and states to raise money for public projects.
These securities comprise a substantial fraction of the overall American securities market.
The municipal bond market accounted for $3.7 trillion in 2014, roughly 10% of the American
public debt.
    The are two main types of securities in this market: general obligation (G.O.) bonds
and revenue bonds. In this paper, we analyze municipal bonds as a type of long-term public
(debt) contract entered into by an elected official. These two types of bonds have different
characteristics. The proceeds of G.O. bonds are used at the discretion of the elected official
and the bonds are backed by all forms of city finances, including general tax revenues, and
offer politicians flexibility in spending. In contrast, revenue bond proceeds are earmarked
for specific purposes and are backed by the revenues related to the investment project they
finance. A combined treatment of municipal finance and political governance is herein pro-
posed. Analogously to Williamson (1988), where “debt governance works mainly out of rules,
while equity governance allows much greater discretion,” we argue that revenue bonds are
more rule-based than G.O. bonds. Accordingly, we consider a G.O. bond to be a flexible,
incomplete-type contract and a revenue bond as a specific-type contract. Moreover, by se-
lecting revenue bond financing the politician can self-restrict the scope of her discretion to
insulate from charges of improper use of public monies.
    We use the municipal bond market to explore the determinants of public contracts.
A significant body of previous work on private and public contracting focuses on concerns
related to efficiency (such as the choice of auctions versus negotiations to sell contracts).
Another prominent strand of literature related to government contracts centers on how con-
tractual discretion relates to the accountability of public officials (elected and appointed)
with contracting power.
    Research suggests that financial needs and risk allocation are the main factors influenc-
ing the choice of municipal bond type (Kidwell and Koc 1982; Ingram, Brooks, and Copeland
1983). In this paper, we offer empirical evidence for a complementary explanation and em-
pirically test for the importance of electoral considerations in public contracting, specifically
in issuing city bonds.


                                               2
        We draw on recent theoretical work about the threats imposed by “third-party/political
opportunists” on public officials and conjecture on several reasons why elected officials select
revenue bonds when elections are tight. First, by choosing revenue bonds city officials signal
“probity” (i.e., transparency and trustworthiness to deliver a project) and limit speculation
on the discretionary use of public monies to enrich themselves and buy political favors.
Second, earmarked proceeds limit the discretion of a successful challenger in the event that
the incumbent loses the next elections. For example, consider a city where the incumbent’s
constituents care about roads, but the challenger’s constituents care about schools. If the
incumbent’s winning margin is close (so the mayor’s seat is more contestable), she will issue
revenue bonds to lower the challenger’s discretion of use of funds for, say, schools ex post.1
Third, unsecured debt (i.e., G.O. bonds) requires more information disclosure to lenders on
municipal financials than secured debt (Myers and Majluf 1984), which a public agent in a
politically contested position maybe less likely willing to provide.
        This article proceeds as follows. We first motivate this topic with a discussion of the
theoretical literature. We then describe the model as well as the institutional setting in which
we will test it. A description of the data and proposed empirical test follows, and then the
results of this estimation exercise. Finally, we provide some concluding thoughts.


2       Conceptual Framework
2.1      Relevant Literature and Proposed Contribution

This study relates to two streams of research on contracts. One common view in economic
literature is that in the context of contracts for goods and services, competition (auctions)
gives firms strong incentives to be efficient and reveal their private costs, relative to negotia-
tions (Bulow and Klemperer 1996). Moreover, because open auctions are a transparent sale
procedure, they are considered less vulnerable to either corruption or favoritism. This view
explains why competitive auctions are often used to award large contracts in public procure-
ment. Recent work suggests, however, that the trade-off between auctions and negotiations
in procurement may be more accurately determined by the complexity of the project. When
dealing with complex projects, buyers may have difficulties specifying all possible contin-

    1
        Analogously to a selective debt overhand effect (Myers 1977).


                                                       3
gencies. Thus incomplete contracts may give rise to costly ex-post adaptations (Bajari and
Tadelis 2001). This line of research suggests that simple projects should have detailed designs
and be procured using fixed-price (competitive) contracts. Complex projects, on the other
hand, are better managed by investing less in project design but using cost-plus contracts
to facilitate easier negotiations in the course of contract completion. Recent empirical work
gives support to this hypothesis (Bajari, Houghton, and Tadelis 2014).
    Another substantial body of literature about government officials’ contractual discretion
has focused on public accountability of officials. Contracting “rigidities” here are the large
number of formal processes put in place to insure against governmental opportunism. “Red
tape” regulations are designed to reduce public employees’ ability to take actions that are
potentially at odds with the general public interest (Kurland and Egan 1999). In other words,
such regulations are bureaucratic instruments that restrict public officials’ discretion.
    These studies are part of the literature exploring the determinants of contract form (e.g.,
fixed-price versus cost-plus) on the basis of economic efficiency considerations. There has,
however, been less study of how political factors influence elected officials and features of pub-
lic contracts. Laffont and Tirole (1993) suggest that the connection “between procurement
and regulation and the associated administrative and political constraints is still unknown
to us or is still in a state of conjecture ... [I]nstitutions are endogenous and should as much
as possible be explained.” To fill this gap, Spiller (2008) and Moszoro and Spiller (2012,
Moszoro and Spiller (2014) have recently proposed a complementary rationale for unique fea-
tures of public contracts in the presence of competitive political markets (multiple competing
political parties). They argue that the choice of contract by an official is also likely to be
influenced by her perceived political hazards, such as challengers for her public office.
    In the Moszoro and Spiller (2012) approach, there are four players involved in a public
contract: the incumbent political agent, the private contractor who can provide the public
good/service, the potential political opponent, and the voting public. The public is implicated
in any transaction between politician and private contractor because contracts affect social
welfare and the public budget. A political challenger can be involved for similar reasons, as
well as intrinsic motivation to be elected to office. When competing for office, an opponent
can mobilize the public to scrutinize an incumbent public official’s decisions. Such scrutiny



                                                4
has the potential to reveal corruption, favoritism, or other improprieties in public contracting.
This public auditing of politicians is a challenge to what Williamson (1999) calls the “probity”
of the public official (and is why Spiller often refers to political challengers as “third-party
opportunists”). Public auditing induced by political challengers may discredit the official in
power, and at the very least, can lead her to incur expenses while defending her actions. In
extreme cases, incumbents may be vulnerable to losing office.
      The “political contestability” framework of Moszoro and Spiller (2012) thus leads to the
prediction that in political environments where elections are heavily contested, politicians
will make procurement decisions that avoid the appearance of indiscretion to deter successful
political challengers. Using this recently developed theoretical framework, we contribute to
the literature on features of public contracts by empirically examining how city-level debt
contracts are correlated with political competition and its accompanying public auditing,
or “third-party opportunism.” We use municipal bond issuances as a contractual setting in
which to test this hypothesis.

2.2    Institutional Setting: U.S. Municipal Finance

Local governments have been issuing public bonds for decades. They are generally used to
finance public infrastructure needs such as roads, schools, power and water facilities, hospitals,
public housing, etc. The U.S. municipal bond market is a large component of domestic public
finance, with the total outstanding debt equaling an all-time high of 22% of U.S. GDP in
2010. The management of public debt, both from the perspective of the borrowing entity
and the market system in general, is critical to financing infrastructure.
      There are two basic types of public debt securities issued by municipalities: general
obligation and revenue bonds. These two types differ in the source of future debt repayment
and the use of funding. General obligation debt instruments commit the full faith and credit
of the issuing city (or state) government to repay debt obligations from any available revenue
stream. In other words, for G.O. bonds, general tax revenues can (or must) be used to pay
the bonds. Revenue-backed debt, on the other hand, is supported from dedicated project fees
or other explicitly allocated sources of revenue. Debt from revenue bonds is thus guaranteed
to be repaid only through the net operating revenues (operating and maintenance costs
subtracted from annual completed project revenues) of the public enterprise. Revenue-backed


                                                5
projects may include airports, toll roads/bridges, or parking garages. Given these differences
in how funds can be used and how debt must be serviced, the two debt instruments impose
different constraints on public officials. Debt through G.O. bonds gives cities flexibility in how
municipal funds are used to fund government projects and how debt is later repaid. Revenue
bonds, on the other hand, constrain public officials’ use of project funds and revenues.
    In principle, the nature of the project to be financed should determine the type of debt
to be utilized. Revenue bonds are typically used in public enterprises that later generate
revenue through service charges or user fees. By contrast, G.O. bonds were initially used
for projects that generate less revenue, such as roads and government office buildings. In
practice, however, general obligation debt can be, and often is, used for revenue-generating
projects because of its cost advantages (i.e., lower transaction costs) over revenue bonds (Vogt
2004). Revenue bonds often require additional components not found in general obligation
debt instruments, such as conducting a feasibility study, as well as covenants and indentures
to protect investors (Howell-Moroney and Hall 2011). Revenue-backed debt often requires
rigorous revenue forecasts, project sensitivity tests, and various forms of risk analysis to be
successful. These elements add significant costs to municipalities that are often resource-
constrained.
    The choice between general obligation bonds and revenue bonds can also be thought to
follow the rationale developed for corporate versus project financing (Esty 2003; Yescombe
2013). In corporate finance, projects are financed from a pool of resources, and debt is
serviced from corporate cash flows. When a corporation chooses to undertake an investment
project, cash flows from existing activities fund this project. The firm has the option to
roll over the project’s capital into newer ventures within the company, without submitting
decisions to the discipline of the capital market. Lenders have recourse to the assets of the
corporation. Thus, corporate financing is a more flexible form of financing.
    Conversely, in project finance, debt is served only from the cash flows generated by the
financed asset, typically through a special purpose vehicle (SPV), and the lenders have no
(or limited) recourse to the shareholders. In this way, the specific cash flows and risks of a
project can be isolated from the corporate cash flows and risks.
    In sum, revenue bonds impose rigidities on public officials in how they use public funds



                                                6
and service public debt relative to general obligation debt. There are also additional transac-
tion costs associated with issuing revenue-backed debt. Thus, we propose that revenue bonds
can be conceptualized as a rigid debt contract.


3     Moszoro-Spiller Model of Contractual Rigidity in the Con-
      text of Public Debt
3.1    Description of Model

Moszoro and Spiller (2012) develop a model to account for the role of political risk faced
by politicians in contracting as discussed in Section 2. This model suggests that the lack of
flexibility in public procurement is a deliberate part of contract design that reflects an elected
official’s political risk adaptation to limit hazards from opportunistic political opponents. We
now present some key results (adapted for our context) to motivate our empirical test.
      Public officials’ choices regarding contract features will be influenced in part by the
need to prevent public suspicion of favoritism or corruption that may be associated with
flexible/discretionary contracts. Contract rigidity thus serves to insulate public officials from
allegations of impropriety in heavily contested political markets. In the context of local
public finance, a revenue bond is a more specific and rigid financial contract than a general
obligation bond, since G.O. bonds are secured by a city’s ability to use all legally available
resources, such as tax revenues, to repay bond holders.
      Contracting cost rises exponentially with contract specificity and rigidity, and helps
determine the trade-off between mayoral flexibility in using city finances and the cost of
contract writing (Schwartz and Watson 2012). In the Moszoro-Spiller model, elected officials
minimize both security issuance costs and political costs, which are given by:

                                min Φ = T0 ρ(R)τ (R) + K(R)                                   (1)
                                  R

where R is the rigidity of a bond. As described above, G.O. bonds represent low-rigidity
instruments, and revenue bonds are high-rigidity instruments. K(R) indicates the cost to a
public official of issuing a bond that rises in bond rigidity. ρ is the likelihood of a challenge
by a political opponent (in the language of Spiller (2008, Moszoro and Spiller (2014), an
“opportunistic third party”), and τ is the likelihood of success of an opportunistic challenge.
ρ and τ are both decreasing in bond rigidity.

                                                7
    The intuition for these assumptions is that when contract terms leave more discretion
to the public official, there is more room for outsiders to challenge the official. As such, the
cost to a political challenger increases with the rigidity of the contract, R; thus, ρ and τ
decrease with R. T0 is the political cost incurred by the official if a challenge by third parties
is successful. Thus, the left term indicates a politician’s expected political cost from a bond,
and the right term is the issuance cost.
    Potential challengers to a public official know their prospective benefits from challenging
an incumbent. However, the elected official does not know ex ante the particular value of
these benefits for the third parties. Third parties’ overall benefits from an opportunistic
challenge correspond to a random normally distributed variable T
                                                               f0 .

    The ability of opportunistic political opponents to challenge public officials will depend
on the political environment in which officials make contracting decisions. Opportunistic
challenges of public contracts require “political contestability” of elected officials or a frag-
mentation of the market for politicians (Spiller 2013). In other words, there must be a certain
level of competition between opposing parties: “centralized party power limits the upward
mobility of political mavericks, and thus the potential for internal third party opportunists.”
    Moszoro and Spiller (2012) show that in equilibrium, political opportunists challenge a
contract (and perhaps more directly, the incumbent official) only if the expected gains T
                                                                                        f0 ζτ

are bigger than the challenging costs c(R). These costs may include campaigning to raise
public awareness, lobbying, and reputational costs borne by the challenger:

                                   ρ ≡ Pr[T
                                          f0 ζτ (R) > c(R)],                                  (2)

where ζ ∈ (0, 1] is a political concentration parameter. If ζ = 1, a challenger’s benefits are
symmetrical to the incumbent’s political costs (e.g., a bipartisan political market); if ζ < 1,
the political market is fragmented and the challenger does not internalize all benefits from a
successful protest.
    Challenging costs c(R) rise in R. Reduced flexibility by earmarked financing and rigid
bond servicing limits the likelihood of opportunistic challenge lowering third parties’ expected
gains (increasing the costs of a challenge). Any deviation from equilibrium rigidity R∗ makes
the elected official worse off:

(a) If R < R∗ , then τ (R) > τ (R∗ ), c(R) < c(R∗ ), therefore ρ > ρ∗ and T0 ρ(R)τ (R) −

                                                8
      T0 ρ(R∗ )τ (R∗ ) > K(R∗ ) − K(R) (the increased political cost of reducing rigidity offsets
      any decreases in bond issuance cost)

(b) If R > R∗ , then T0 ρ(R∗ )τ (R∗ ) − T0 ρ(R)τ (R) < K(R) − K(R∗ ) (the cost increase of
      issuing more rule-based debt outweighs the decrease in political cost)

3.2     Hypotheses: Bond Features under Political Contestability

We argue that whether municipal projects should be financed by revenue bonds or G.O.
bonds depends not only on the characteristics of the assets, but also on the political hazards
of the incumbent public agent. Political-cost reasoning supports the use of revenue bonds
(rules) to finance public interest assets, while idiosyncratic political capital is financed by
G.O. bonds (discretion).
      Moszoro and Spiller’s (2012) model suggests that elected officials will respond to greater
political risk with higher contractual rigidity to lower the likelihood of a successful challenge.
Forming contracts with more rule-based terms signals transparency and integrity to con-
stituents. We thus have empirically testable hypotheses on how the design of municipal bond
issues depend on the political environment: in cities where public officials face a high level
of political competition (where candidates face viable competitors who can mobilize public
scrutiny of their decisions or, alternatively, high ζ), revenue bonds will be chosen more often
than in non-competitive municipalities (low ζ). When political opposition is weak (lower ζ),
the incumbent will not insulate herself from political challenges through contractual rigidities.
In the extreme, a very low ζ environment resembles a single party system.
      If political risk affects elected officials’ contract choices, then the time when bonds are
issued are implicated. In particular, officials may engage in strategic timing of issuing different
bond types, choosing more restrictive bonds to signal transparency and integrity closer to an
election (i.e., in years 3 and 4 of a typical four-year political cycle).
      In sum, we test the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 1 Elected officials are more likely to issue revenue bonds in politically contested
municipalities.

Hypothesis 2 Elected officials are more likely to issue revenue bonds in politically contested
municipalities closer to the next elections, i.e., later in a mayoral term.

                                                  9
Our definition of political risk as political contestability will rely on the outcomes of city
general elections for mayor. We now discuss how we construct these measures as well as our
methodological approach.


4       Data and Empirical Methodology
4.1      Data Description

To carry out this study, we construct a national dataset of municipal debt issuances, mayoral
elections, as well as economic and demographic characteristics for U.S. cities and towns. In
this section, we describe the dataset used in our empirical analysis.
        We are interested in analyzing how political risk affects public officials’ contracting,
using characteristics of municipal bonds as a measure of contractual rigidity. To this end,
we first create a comprehensive database of municipal bond information using information
on all public bonds from Bloomberg Financial LP. We gather data for all municipal issues
between 1980 and 2002. Each city-issuance observation contains several pieces of information,
including the specific issuer (including city and usually the affiliated municipal agency), the
date of issue, the coupon type (fixed, zero coupon, etc.), the size of the project for which the
bond is issued, the commercial grade of the bond, the industry in which the project requiring
financing is being undertaken, the sale method for the security (i.e., whether the issuance
was negotiated or competitively bid-for),2 and most importantly for our purposes, the bond
type—G.O. or revenue bond.
        The mayoral election data used in this paper is based on a sample of cities described in
Ferreira and Gyourko (2009). The city-level information is based on a survey of all cities in
the United States with more than 25,000 inhabitants as of the year 2000. Information was
requested on the timing of all mayoral elections since 1950, the name of the elected mayor and
the runner-up candidate, vote totals for each candidate (and aggregate vote totals), partisan
affiliation, the type of election (i.e., partisan or non-partisan), as well as other information
related to specific political events, such as runoff elections or special elections. We start with
data for more than 5,500 elections held in 575 cities between 1950 and 2005. Importantly,

    2
       A sale of public debt allocated by a competitive bid mechanism is one in which buyers compete by
offering lower interest rates.



                                                  10
Ferreira and Gyourko (2009) suggest that the data are representative of cities nationwide
across many observable dimensions (although the municipalities in the sample are larger
than the average municipality).
       We are able to collect data on 38,904 different municipal debt offerings made by US
municipalities between 1980 and 2002. Not all of the debt-issuing cities over this time period
are contained in the sample for which we have election data. Using a computerized “fuzzy
match,” though, we are able to match the bonds sold for 416 of the 575 cities for which we
have political data. In total, we are able to match 6,505 of the bonds for which we have data
to election and controls data.
       As other studies point out (see for example, Gao and Qi (2012)), there are potential
confounding factors that may affect a mayor’s choice of flexible or rigid funding choices. We
thus control for several local-level attributes. Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau, we
account for the size of a municipality using population and population density.3 Moreover,
we control for a city’s overall economic conditions using both real income per capita and
the unemployment rate from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. At the current time,
we were only able to obtain this information at the county level, but argue that this data
is highly correlated with city-level traits, and hence would still serve our purposes well for
this empirical exercise. Finally, we control for a city’s financial stability/the riskiness of
projects undertaken using bond ratings data from Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s (S&P).
We converted the bond ratings into cardinal codes as in Anderson, Mansi, and Reeb (2003).
The ratings conversion codes are in Table 1. We then averaged the conversion numbers for
each municipality, year, and type of bond.
       After collecting all the data, we link the municipal bond data to city election outcomes.

4.2     Empirical Strategy

Our goal is to understand if a public official’s exposure to political competition and polit-
ical risk affects the type of debt instruments that she uses. All results presented here are
correlational.
       Elections typically occur every two or four years, so there are many more municipal-year

   3
       We use the natural logarithm of population and population density to normalize their distributions.



                                                     11
observations in our bond data than in the elections data. As such, we adopt two strategies
for our empirical analysis to analyze the correlation between political contestability and bond
type. First, we use a linear probability model and the bond-level data to measure if political
contestability,P C, is predictive of type of individual bonds. We regress a dummy variable
(revenue bond = 1) on various measures of political risk and control variables. Second, we
aggregate bond data by both year and election cycles. Both of these approaches allow us to
assign all bonds within a mayor’s term to that mayor.
    The basic linear probability specification for the first strategy is as follow:

                      BondT ypei,m,t = α0 + β1 P Ci,t + γXi,m,t + εi,m,t                   (3)

where i is the bond index, t is the year of issue, and m is the municipality of issue. P Cm is
our political contestability measure that describes the extent to which the mayor presiding
over the municipal bond issue is subjected to the risk of opportunistic challengers.
    To estimate the the coefficient on P Cm we use two main sets of political risk measures
that are adopted from Moszoro, Spiller, and Stolorz (2013), who analyze how the political
risks faced by governors affect procurement contract rigidity as proxied by length and con-
tractual features. We measure both the closeness of both individual mayoral races as well as
the degree to which the political party in control of the mayor’s seat changes over time (i.e.,
the frequency of “partisan swings”).
    The first measure we denote margin, and it is defined as the difference in a mayoral
election between vote shares obtained by the winning party candidate and the runner-up.
We create three variants of this measure, with the first being the straight-forward victory
margin:
                                 M arginm,t = Wm,t − RUm,t                                 (4)

                             M argin2m,t = (Wm,t − RUm,t )2                                (5)
                                       
                                          1 if |Wm,t − RUm,t | > λ
                     Large marginm,t =                                                     (6)
                                          0 if else
where Wm,t and RUm,t are the winning and runner-up parties’ vote share in municipality
m at time t. For large margin, λ is an a priori threshold for a given level of “high”
political contestability (usually 10% for national and 20% for local races in the U.S.; we use
λ = 20%), all in basis percentage points. The intuition for using margin as a possible measure

                                               12
political contestability measures is straight-forward: a large margin of victory indicates a less
competitive political market. In our framework, if a mayor is elected by a slim vote margin
(and hence faces a highly competitive political market and credible political challenges), she
will enjoy less flexibility to issue unconstrained municipal debt. To prevent future political
challenges, she will engage in more transparent contracts to signal probity to voters. In the
context of municipal finance, we expect that in cities with large victory margins, mayors will
be less likely to issue revenue bonds, where the mayor cannot control the use of funds nor the
method of debt servicing. In most regressions, we use margin quintiles to correct for the
abnormal distribution of margin. Margin quintiles correspond to the “ranking” of political
contestability.4
        Our second measure of the political contestability faced by elected officials is the degree
to which the mayor’s seat changes party hands over time, also adopted from Moszoro, Spiller,
and Stolorz (2013). We denote this risk measure partisan swings defined as:
                                                            3
                                                            X
                             P artisan swingsm,t =                P artyChangem,t                             (7)
                                                            t=1

where P artyChange is a dummy variable equaling one if a mayor’s seat changes party hands
in municipality m at time t.
        These two basic measures of political risk (six including variants of the margins and
swings) faced by a mayor are used in Equation (3) for P C. The coefficient of interest is then
β1 . As described above, we also control for several factors that may also explain the choice
of G.O. or revenue bonds. We account for project complexity using the size of the deal. We
control for economic conditions using per capita income and size by city population. We
also control for municipality and time fixed effects to account for unobserved fixed regional
effects or time-specific effects. We also control for the riskiness of projects and city finance
by controlling for a city’s average bond rating (Rubinfeld 1973). In future work, we hope to
also control for municipality indebtedness to tax revenue.
        In addition to our binary choice regressions, we also aggregate the bond data to the
city-year level, and perform similar estimations to above. We then re-test hypothesis (1) by

    4
     Quintiles are different in the span of margin of victory, with their width increasing in the upper quintiles.
We also run the regressions using fixed 20%-margin bins instead of quintiles and obtained similar results.



                                                       13
estimating OLS regressions of the share of revenue bonds of total bond issues (both by year
and cycle) on our measures of political contestability:
                             
                      RB
                                   = α0 + β1 P Cm,t + γControlsm,t + εm,t                   (8)
                    GO + RB m,t
where m is the municipality index. The coefficient of interest β1 indicates the significance
of political risk to city officials when choosing the proportion of overall debt that will be
issued as the more rigid form of debt. P Cm are the same political contestability instrumental
variables in municipality i as described above. RB is the total value of all revenue bonds
issued in city m, while GO is the total value of all general obligation bonds issued. We use the
same set of controls as above, except bond-level attributes now are a deal-weighted average.


5     Results
5.1    Descriptive Statistics

Before moving to the main analysis, we discuss some basic features of the city-level data,
which is summarized in Table 2. Panel A suggests that we are able to analyze a broad
range of municipalities. There are 416 cities across 45 states in our dataset, with a range
of demographic and economic characteristics. The cities range from very urban (around
32,000 residents per square mile) to quite rural (10 residents per square mile). There is
also variation in size—the average county population (which we use temporarily as a proxy
for city population) is 1.5 million, but the range of the population distribution is over 9.5
million. The cities vary by economic conditions as well. Average unemployment over the
sample ranges between 2 and 13% over the time period of our sample. Similarly, there are
some cities that are wealthier than others, as judged by median per capita income. The
average municipal median income is 9,043 USD.
      There is also heterogeneity within the city-level election data (see Table 2, panel B).
There is a relatively even distribution of elections in which Democratic candidates win (39%)
and Republicans win (32%). The average margin of victory for a winning mayoral candidate
is 39%. This large margin, however, can be attributed to the fact that several elections in our
dataset are uncontested (just one candidate, who wins by default). Excluding these elections,
the average margin decreases substantially to 20%. Importantly, however, taking victory
margin as a measure of competitiveness, the political races vary substantially between very

                                              14
competitive (suggesting high political contestability) and noncompetitive (not contestable
environments for political challengers).
      General obligation bonds and revenue bonds account for 27.55% and 52.19% of our ob-
servations, respectively (see Table 2, panel C). Other types of bonds issued by municipalities
are: Certificate of Participation (3.84% of observations), G.O. Limited Bonds (2.11%), Notes
(0.02%), and Special Assessment (3.07%), Special Tax (2.60%), and Tax Allocation (3.62%)
bonds.
      Because G.O. and revenue bonds are by far the main types in our sample, we collapse
these categories into a dichotomous “G.O. or revenue bond” categorization. On average,
municipal bonds are issued for deals worth approximately 86 million USD. According to
the summary statistics, public bonds are issued for a variety of types of projects. In our
sample, bonds are issued most commonly to finance education projects (i.e., building schools,
universities, etc.). Interestingly, the majority of the bonds in our sample are issued via a sale
mechanism. Only 17% are issued via a competitive bid process (bonds are awarded to the
bidder offering the lowest interest cost). The average bond rating across two indices is between
AA and A+ according to S&P (Aa3 and A1 for Moodys). Bond ratings are concentrated at
the higher end of the ratings scale.

5.2    Main Results

We start by estimating Equation (3) using a linear probability model, and probit and logit
models for robustness. Table 3 provides estimates from the sparse baseline specification,
separately using the three different measures of political contestability and few city control
variables. We control only for the size of the municipal offering (log-transformed deal size) and
the riskiness of the city’s finances (the average bond rating). All regressions were estimated
using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
      The results provide evidence that political risk does influence a city’s selection of bond
type. As discussed above, the main independent variable of interest is P Cm , which is some
variant of either margin or swings as defined in Equations (4) through (7). In column (1) of
Table ??, we see that the margin of victory in a mayoral election is negatively correlated with
the likelihood of issuing debt as a municipal bond rather than a G.O. bond. The negative
sign on the coefficient is as expected, since an increase in the margin of victory suggests


                                               15
a less competitive political market. This less competitive institutional environment raises
the likelihood that a public official will issue the more flexible form of debt contract. The
coefficient is economically and statistically significant, suggesting that an increase in the
margin of victory by quintile lowers the probability of issuing a bond as revenue-backed debt
by 1.9%.
    The sign on the large margin is negative and significant. The larger magnitude is as
expected, since our theoretical framework suggests that if a mayor’s margin of victory is
arbitrarily large (in our case, a difference in winner and runner-up vote shares larger than
20%), then the likelihood of issuing a revenue bond should be relatively low. The coefficient
on large margin is indeed negative and larger than the coefficient on margin: large margins
of victory are associated with 4.5% decrease in the probability of issuing revenue bonds.
    The results in column (3) in which our measure of political contestability is the number
of partisan swings in the previous three elections further suggests that political risk is a
factor in public debt issuance. One change of a mayoral political party in recent election
cycles increases the likelihood of issuing revenue-backed debt rather than general obligation
debt by 11.2%. We also conducted the same regressions using a probit (columns 4–6) and
logit (columns 7–9) specifications; the results are qualitatively similar.
    Table 3 also provides further interesting evidence about how political factors may affect
public officials’ contracting decisions. In particular, when testing Hypothesis 2 it appears that
the year within a mayor’s political cycle may be meaningfully correlated with the likelihood
of issuing a revenue bond. In particular, holding other factors constant, the issuance of debt
as a revenue bond is most likely in the third and fourth years of an election cycle, ranging
between 5.2 and 9.4%. One possible explanation for this is that in the early years of a mayor’s
term she feels less need to insulate herself from allegations of impropriety, so issuing more
flexible debt is less risky at the beginning of a mayor’s term. However, in their third year,
a mayor is beginning to prepare for a potential reelection campaign, and so issues the more
rigid form of municipal debt to maintain the appearance of probity. The same can be said
for the fourth year, although perhaps by this point, a mayor’s image is more crystallized in
the minds of voters.
    To sum up, our baseline estimates suggest that political contestability is a meaningful



                                               16
determinant of whether a municipal bond is issued as a revenue bond. The results are
consistent with the hypothesis that in cities with a high degree of political competition, as
approximated by low margins and more shifts in political power over time, one is less likely
to observe more flexible G.O. bonds issued.
    In Table 4, we adopt city-specific and bond-specific controls in the spirit of Gao and Qi
(2012). We also include state and year-fixed effects to control for either time-invariant state
conditions and laws, or nationwide shocks that may affect the selection of bond features.
    We again begin with margin-of-election-win as our measure of political contestability.
An increase by a quintile in margin is associated with a 2.3% decrease in the likelihood of
issuing a revenue bond. The point estimate for large margin is significant: a victory above
20% the mayor race is correlated with a 3.7% decrease in likelihood of an issuance being a
revenue bond. The estimate in column 3 using party swings as the independent variable of
interest is also qualitatively similar: more party swings are correlated with a 14.7% increase
in the likelihood of issuing revenue bonds. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that
in districts where the party in power is historically susceptible to change (suggestive of more
evenly distributed political power and more political competition), mayors are more likely to
insulate themselves from opportunistic challengers by issuing securities as revenue bonds.
    Finally, to address potential concerns about within-group or serial correlation, in columns
4–6 we adjust the standard errors by allowing for correlation in the error term by city. With
clustered standard errors, the results remain similar to without this correction. Margin
measures of political risk are not significant. This may be due to the short time series and
low within-city variation, as we only have 5–6 elections for each city.
    In Table 5, we run the regressions of models 1–3 from Table 4 in subgroups by the
ruling political party at the moment of debt issuance. Interestingly, the relationship is not
symmetrical: politicians affiliated with opposing parties do not react similarly when facing
similar political hazards. Independent officials seem to be the most responsive to political
hazards. Democrats are more sensitive to political hazards than Republicans. This may
suggest that Democrats are politically driven, while Republicans are agenda/ideologically
driven.
    We now discuss results when aggregating bonds by year and election cycle. The results



                                              17
are similar. Table 6 shows the correlation between political contestability as measured by
election victory margin and the percentage of municipal bonds issued as revenue bonds within
a year (columns 1–3) and mayor’s term, i.e., her political cycle (columns 4–6). The signs on
the coefficients of interest are as expected: as the margin of victory in a mayoral election
increases the proportion of revenue bonds decreases. The margin and large margin variables
are of the expected sign, statistically significant, and economically meaningful: an increase in
one quintile in the winning margin decreases by 3.9–4.1%, and a large margin of win increases
by 8.3–10% the share of revenue bonds in the portfolio of debt issuance. P artisan swings
are of the right sign, but not significant at the year and election cycle aggregation.

5.3    Sale Method: Negotiated versus Competitive

Previous empirical papers have focused on the economic efficiency considerations that af-
fect the choice of award procedure for contracts. In their widely-cited article, Bulow and
Klemperer (1996) show the benefits of competitive auctions as a mechanism for the sale or
procurement of government goods and services. Recent work highlights the potential limits
of competitive sale mechanisms. Work by Bajari, McMillan, and Tadelis (2009), for example,
suggests that the decision between auctions and negotiations should depend on the project’s
complexity.
      Using data on the method of bond sale, we explore whether political considerations can
play a role in awarding mechanisms for public (debt) contracts. We supplement our main
hypothesis by exploring whether political contestability risk is significantly correlated with
the method of sale. If the desire to demonstrate probity to the voting public significantly
affects current politicians, we would expect mayors in more contested municipalities to use
competitive bid procedures to sell bonds. Negotiated sales of public debt represent a more
discretionary form of public contracting. Under this sale method, an underwriter is selected
to purchase the public securities, and the security terms are tailored to meet the demands of
the underwriter’s demands. On the other hand, competitive sales are analogous to auctions
and are a more rigid sale mechanism: the bond is simply awarded to the bidder offering the
lowest interest cost.
      Using the same data as before, we test whether in areas with less political scrutiny
mayors choose the negotiated sale procedures to issue public debt. Confirmatory evidence


                                              18
would further support the notion that political considerations may supplement economic
efficiency considerations as an explanation for features of public contracts. As in our first set
of regression above, we estimate linear probability regressions with the sale method as the
dependent variable (with a dummy variable equal to one if the method is competitive sale).
The specifications are otherwise identical to those above.
    The results from this set of regressions are consistent with our predictions. Table 7
presents estimates from a linear probability regression of the competitive sale dummy variable
on political contestability as measured by the margin of victory, large winning margin, and
partisan swings. Similar to Table 3, the coefficients on the political risk measure are signed
as expected and significant. The point estimates suggest that an increase in the winning
candidate’s margin of victory one quintile is correlated with a 1.7% decrease in the probability
of debt being issued in a competitive bid. The large margin variable is larger in magnitude—
5.4%—suggesting that very contested municipalities are more likely to issue bonds through
competitive sales at a level that is both economically and statistically significant.
    We see similar results using the number of party swings to measure political risk (column
3). The sign is as expected and significant. The point estimate on partisan swings suggests
that one additional political party change in the last three cycles increases the likelihood of
using a competitive sale procedure by 7.4%.
    When including city-level economic and demographic controls (columns 4–6), the signs
and significance of the coefficients remain the same, with even higher magnitudes. When
clustering at the city level (columns 7–9), we only lose significance on margin measures (we
have a limited number of elections per city). As a robustness check, we rerun the same
specification with logit regressions: Results remained qualitatively the same (see Table 8).


6    Limitations and Prospective Research

Our research is stinted by a number of limitations. First, our time series are from 1980
to 2002, with a maximum of five elections and three partisan swings in this period. The
within-city variation is too small to check for political contestability clustered at the city
level. Second, the demographics and financial data on municipalities is not standardized,
so we had to rely on county-level data. Third and most notably, all regressions presented



                                               19
here are correlations between political risk and either the probability of issuing a revenue
bond or the composition of revenue bonds relative to total bonds. One possible way to test
for a potential causal relationship between political risk and bond type would be to exploit
an exogenous shock to political risk (e.g., an external event that affects electoral changes of
incumbents differentially). Unfortunately, we are unable to exploit such variation with our
data.
    Two alternative (and interrelated) stories to the third-party political opportunism hy-
pothesis might confound our results. Foremost, observed project types might be endogenous
to the political environment of the public agent and correlated with financing bond type.
For example, perhaps, where political contestability is high, mayors are more likely to issue
public debt to fund more popular and visible projects, such as schools, rather than debt for
projects that impact, let’s say, public utilities (Robinson and Torvik 2005). Subsequently, a
mayor might be unable of issuing G.O. bonds due to debt overhung from former administra-
tions and forced to issue revenue bonds. In both cases, revenue bonds will be correlated with
political contestability.
    Although we are not able to fully reject these alternative explanations empirically, in
our opinion the aforementioned factors are of lesser concern to our setup. First, a preference
for popular expenses would bias our estimates downwards (i.e., political contestability would
be rather correlated with more G.O. bonds.) Second, even if the type of project is correlated
with the type of bond, it does not diminish the fact that the choice of projects and adequate
financing instruments was driven by political concerns. In this case, the type of bond can
be interpreted as an “instrument” of the preferences for the type of project under political
competition. Finally, should political contestability lead to general debt overhung initially
and, next, to forced revenue bond financing, our estimates would be netted by the preference
for G.O. in previous contested administrations, for which we control with the partisan swings
variable.
    There are a number of tests that can be prospectively conducted, both to check the
robustness of the results presented here as well as to test additional hypotheses:

(a) Mayors versus city managers
    Our empirical test relies on the assumption that mayors are responsible for issuing public


                                              20
   debt. If mayor are not responsible for issuing bonds, then our political risk variables
   should not be predictive of bond type. Thus, following Levin and Tadelis (2010), we
   explore whether our results are robust to differentiation between mayor-run and manager-
   run cities. There is variation across cities in the form of governance, with the two most
   common forms being Council-Manager and Mayor-Council (Levin and Tadelis 2010). In a
   Council-Manager government, a professional city manager—who is appointed by the city
   council—is responsible for administration. The city council is generally prohibited from
   interfering with the city manager’s administration, but the manager serves at the councils
   discretion. The position of “mayor” in these cities is largely ceremonial. In contrast, a
   Mayor-Council government consists of an elected mayor who serves as the city’s chief
   executive officer. These cities may also appoint a city manager, but the mayor maintains
   authority over city operations. Given the differences between these two forms of local
   governance, measures of political risk should not be a factor in bond type in cities where
   mayors do not have the administrative authority to issue municipal securities. Thus, our
   results can be tested by estimating the baseline specification above for the subset of cities
   that have a Council-Manager form of government. We expect the political contestability
   variables to have no explanatory power over bond features. To perform this test, it is
   necessary to collect data on whether the cities in our sample have Council-Manager forms
   of governance or Mayor-Council governance.

(b) Term limits
   We might expect that mayors who are in the final term of office before being “termed
   out” would not be sensitive to political risk (although they may still be concerned about
   their legacy and the party’s reputation). As such, for this subset of mayors who are in
   their final term of office as mayor, political risk should not be a determinant of bond
   type. Conducting this check will require collecting data on the term limit for all cities in
   our sample.

(c) Debt Ceilings and Referenda
   Being up against a local debt limit can encourage local governments to use revenue bonds
   (often exempted from debt limits under the “special fund” doctrine). If cities close to their
   debt limits are more likely to have competitive elections (e.g., because voters are unhappy

                                              21
    with the excessive debt), they may issue more revenue bonds. Similarly, cities often do
    not have to submit the issuance of revenue bonds to a referendum, in contrast with
    general obligation bonds. Cities with debt referenda requirements might be politically
    more competitive (e.g., they may have been enacted because of an involved electorate),
    and may use more revenue bonds. In both cases, revenue bonds would be correlated with
    political contestability, but not for the probity reasons we suggest.

    Unfortunately, we do not have data on standardized debt levels by cities for our whole
    sample. Even though we do control for city credit ratings (time-varying average of two
    major agencies notch by notch, which should arguably take into consideration debt con-
    straints if debt limit is a function of debt capacity), debt closer to the limit would not
    necessarily be rated worse than a similar city with a similar debt load and no debt limit.
    After all, a lender to a city with a debt limit may think that the city will not keep
    borrowing further, endangering its ability to pay the lender back. Conversely, a lender
    to a similar city without a debt limit might be afraid that the city will keep borrowing,
    making their investment worse. Moreover, debt limits are set by state constitutions (i.e.,
    by a different sovereign) and are often long in the tooth, and thus are plausibly exogenous
    to municipal politics.

    Laws governing bond referenda, on the other hand, may be a complementary mechanism
    through which our story can work. If a city has a referendum requirement for issuance of
    new G.O. debt but not for revenue bonds (a frequent setup), politicians in closely con-
    tested cities may seek to use revenue bonds to avoid the referendum (because there will be
    organized opposition in it), whereas uncompetitive cities see that there is little organized
    opposition that they will have to face down, and thus find the referenda requirement for
    G.O. debt unthreatening.


7    Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we test whether political contestability is a determinant of the type of bond is-
sued by municipalities. Using several types of specifications and measures of political risk, we
find empirical evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis that mayors in more contested
political environments issue more rigid bond types. In both the baseline regressions as well


                                              22
as the regressions using city-level control variables, the point estimates on both the closeness
of mayoral races and degree that the mayor’s seat changes party hands are of the expected
sign and significant. These results are seen using both bond-level and city-level data.
    We find also evidence that revenue bonds are more likely to be issued during the later
years of mayoral terms and that more contested municipalities are more likely to issue bond
through competitive bidding instead of discretionary negotiations.




                                              23
Table 1: This table provides bond rating conversion codes for Moody’s and S&P ratings used in the
analysis.

 Conversion number                 Moodys ratings                 S&P ratings
 23                               Aaa+                            AAA+
 22                               Aaa                             AAA
 21                               Aa1                             AA+
 20                               Aa2                             AA
 19                               Aa3                             AA–
 18                               A1                              A+
 17                               A2                              A
 16                               A3                              A–
 15                               Baa1                            BBB+
 14                               Baa2                            BBB
 13                               Baa3                            BBB–
 12                               Ba1                             BB+
 11                               Ba2                             BB
 10                               Ba3                             BB–
 9                                B1                              B+
 8                                B2                              B
 7                                B3                              B–
 6                                Caa1                            CCC+
 5                                Caa2                            CCC
 4                                Caa3                            CCC–
 3                                Ca                              CC
 2                                C                               C
 1                                D                               D




                                               24
Table 2: This table presents summary statistics of city traits, political variables, and municipal
bonds.

 Variable                                   Mean      Std. Dev.      Min.       Max.       N
 Panel A: City Traits
 County Population (thousands ppl.)       1454.49       2105.22       18.11    9663.08    1173
 Median Real Per Capita Income ($)        23380.68      9043.66      3474.1   63205.38    1181
 Unemployment Rate                          5.48          1.66         2.3      12.8      1105
 Population Density                       1925.51       4084.15       10.31   32082.28    1173
 Panel B: Political Variables
 Democrat (mean=%)                           0.4         0.49           0         1        819
 Republican (mean=%)                        0.32         0.47          0          1        819
 Victory margin (%)                         38.61        31.54        0.01       100       792
 Partisan swings                             0.2         0.45          0          3        819
 Panel C: Municipal Bonds
 Revenue Bonds (mean=%)                     0.65          0.48         0          1       6505
 Bond Total Size ($ millions)               86.19        165.26       0.05       985      6491
 Bond Face Value ($ millions)                9.87         28.71       0.01       650      5776
 Moodys Rating                              17.95         2.92          2         22      3941
 S&P Rating                                 18.61         2.36         1          22      3604
 Competitive Bidding Mech.                   0.17         0.37          0         1       6505
 Industry-Trans. (mean=%)                    0.03         0.17          0         1       6505
 Industry-Housing (mean=%)                  0.12          0.33         0          1       6505
 Industry-Education (mean=%)                 0.21         0.41         0          1       6505
 Industry-Economic Dev.(mean=%)              0.05         0.22         0           1      6505
 Industry-Public Utility (mean=%)             0.1         0.29         0          1       6505
 Fixed Coupon Bond (mean=%)                  0.63         0.48         0          1       6505
 Zero Coupon Bond (mean=%)                   0.24         0.43         0          1       6505
 Adj. Coupon Bond (mean=%)                   0.12         0.32         0          1       6505
 Maturity Length (yrs)                      22.17          6.8          1        100      6505




                                               25
     Table 3: This table presents results from linear probability, probit, and logit regressions of the choice of bond structure (revenue bond=1)
     on political contestability. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to 1 when the
     winning margin was large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include a city’s average bond
     ratings, the natural logarithm of deal size, and the year within a mayor’s term. The sample period is 1980-2002. In probit and logit regressions
     we report marginal effects. T -statistics are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                                             Election Outcome and Choice of Revenue Bonds
                                (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)                             (8)           (9)
                               OLS           OLS       OLS     Probit    Probit   Probit     Logit                           Logit         Logit
       Margin Quintiles     -0.0192∗∗∗                       -0.0186∗∗∗                   -0.0194∗∗∗
                                (-3.99)                          (-3.91)                      (-4.09)

       Large Margin                       -0.0449∗∗∗                               -0.0432∗∗∗                              -0.0455∗∗∗
                                              (-3.23)                                  (-3.13)                                 (-3.31)

       Partisan Swings                                   0.112∗∗∗                                 0.112∗∗∗                                0.116∗∗∗
                                                           (9.14)                                   (9.16)                                 (9.19)




26
       Avg. Rating          -0.0354∗∗∗    -0.0361∗∗∗    -0.0378∗∗∗   -0.0423∗∗∗    -0.0431∗∗∗    -0.0449∗∗∗   -0.0412∗∗∗   -0.0421∗∗∗    -0.0438∗∗∗
                              (-14.19)      (-14.57)      (-15.32)     (-14.93)      (-15.35)      (-16.11)     (-14.50)     (-14.94)      (-15.68)

       Deal Size             0.0516∗∗∗     0.0528∗∗∗    0.0447∗∗∗     0.0508∗∗∗    0.0521∗∗∗     0.0436∗∗∗    0.0512∗∗∗     0.0524∗∗∗    0.0436∗∗∗
                               (12.28)       (12.69)      (10.57)       (12.78)      (13.25)       (10.76)      (12.78)       (13.22)     (10.67)

       2nd year in office      -0.0131       -0.0200      -0.0189       -0.0105       -0.0176      -0.0163      -0.0120       -0.0193      -0.0191
                                (-0.76)       (-1.18)      (-1.13)       (-0.62)       (-1.06)      (-0.99)      (-0.71)       (-1.17)     (-1.17)

       3rd year in office    0.0863∗∗∗     0.0797∗∗∗    0.0864∗∗∗     0.0943∗∗∗    0.0878∗∗∗     0.0911∗∗∗    0.0929∗∗∗     0.0861∗∗∗    0.0897∗∗∗
                                (4.28)        (4.00)       (4.37)        (4.63)       (4.36)        (4.58)       (4.52)        (4.24)       (4.46)

       4th year in office    0.0564∗∗∗     0.0531∗∗∗    0.0549∗∗∗     0.0558∗∗∗    0.0523∗∗∗     0.0542∗∗∗    0.0560∗∗∗     0.0524∗∗∗    0.0538∗∗∗
                                (2.78)        (2.64)       (2.77)        (2.78)       (2.62)        (2.75)       (2.76)        (2.60)       (2.71)
       Observations               4654          4715         4715         4654         4715          4715         4654          4715         4715
       R2                        0.075         0.077        0.091
       Pseudo R2                                                          0.064         0.065        0.077        0.063         0.064        0.076
     Table 4: This table presents results from linear probability regressions of the choice of bond structure (revenue bond=1) on political contesta-
     bility. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to 1 when the winning margin was
     large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include average bond ratings, the natural logarithm
     of deal size, population, and population density, median real income per capita in thousand US$, unemployment rate, and the year within a
     mayor’s term. Regressions also include year and state fixed effects. The sample period is 1980-2002. Standard errors are clustered at the city
     level. T -statistics are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                                             Election Outcome and Choice of Revenue Bonds
                                          with City-level Controls and Clustered Standard Errors
                            DV: Revenue Bonds Dummy           (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)
                            Margin Quintiles              -0.0225∗∗∗                                     -0.0225
                                                              (-4.15)                                     (-1.56)

                            Large Margin                                 -0.0373∗∗                                     -0.0373
                                                                            (-2.46)                                     (-0.89)

                            Partisan Swings                                             0.147∗∗∗                                    0.147∗∗∗
                                                                                         (10.47)                                     (2.81)

                            Avg. Rating                   -0.0335∗∗∗    -0.0346∗∗∗     -0.0349∗∗∗     -0.0335∗∗∗    -0.0346∗∗∗     -0.0349∗∗∗
                                                            (-12.69)      (-13.12)       (-13.41)         (-5.84)       (-5.82)       (-5.83)




27
                            Deal Size                     0.0291∗∗∗      0.0315∗∗∗     0.0255∗∗∗         0.0291        0.0315         0.0255
                                                             (6.05)         (6.54)        (5.33)         (1.03)        (1.10)         (0.94)

                            Population                    0.0433∗∗∗      0.0341∗∗∗        0.0160         0.0433        0.0341         0.0160
                                                             (4.30)         (3.41)        (1.60)         (1.19)        (0.92)         (0.45)

                            Density                          0.0133        0.0183∗     0.0254∗∗∗         0.0133        0.0183         0.0254
                                                             (1.40)          (1.93)       (2.70)         (0.42)        (0.58)         (0.78)

                            Income per Capita              -0.00164     -0.00323∗∗     -0.00230∗       -0.00164      -0.00323       -0.00230
                                                             (-1.22)        (-2.44)       (-1.76)        (-0.38)       (-0.74)       (-0.54)

                            Unemployment Rate             0.0488∗∗∗      0.0428∗∗∗        0.0240        0.0488∗       0.0428∗         0.0240
                                                             (3.23)         (2.83)        (1.59)          (1.89)        (1.69)        (0.90)

                            Year fixed effects                   Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes

                            State fixed effects                  Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
                            Observations                        4143          4203          4203            4143          4203          4203
                            R2                                 0.327         0.319         0.335           0.327         0.319         0.335
                            Clustered at municipality            No            No            No              Yes           Yes           Yes
     Table 5: This table presents results from linear probability regressions of the choice of bond structure (revenue bond=1) on political contesta-
     bility in subgroups by political parties. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to 1
     when the winning margin was large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include average bond
     ratings, the natural logarithm of deal size, population, and population density, median real income per capita in thousand US$, unemployment
     rate, and the year within a mayor’s term. The sample period is 1980-2002. T -statistics are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at 10%,
     ∗∗
        significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                                                  Election Outcome and Choice of Revenue Bonds
                                                          in Subgroups by Political Parties
          Dependent Variable:           (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)           (9)
          Revenue Bonds Dummy          Dem           Dem           Dem             Rep           Rep            Rep           Other         Other         Other
          Margin Quintiles          -0.0266∗∗∗                                    -0.00806                                  -0.0717∗∗∗
                                        (-3.42)                                     (-0.70)                                     (-6.84)

          Large Margin                              -0.125∗∗∗                                      0.0475                                  -0.200∗∗∗
                                                      (-5.64)                                      (1.57)                                    (-6.25)

          Partisan Swings                                        0.0900∗∗∗                                      0.00579                                  0.486∗∗∗
                                                                    (3.71)                                        (0.25)                                  (6.64)

          Avg. Rating               -0.0282∗∗∗     -0.0289∗∗∗    -0.0270∗∗∗     -0.0288∗∗∗     -0.0282∗∗∗     -0.0275∗∗∗    -0.0649∗∗∗    -0.0709∗∗∗    -0.0629∗∗∗




28
                                        (-7.94)        (-8.20)       (-7.64)        (-6.16)        (-6.13)        (-6.01)     (-11.13)      (-12.00)      (-10.64)

          Deal Size                  0.0295∗∗∗     0.0290∗∗∗     0.0301∗∗∗      -0.0401∗∗∗     -0.0384∗∗∗     -0.0396∗∗∗      0.126∗∗∗      0.131∗∗∗     0.118∗∗∗
                                        (4.69)        (4.64)        (4.79)          (-5.03)        (-4.87)        (-4.98)      (10.34)       (10.24)      (9.42)

          Population                 0.0782∗∗∗     0.0714∗∗∗     0.0648∗∗∗          0.0242         0.0164         0.0192    0.0533∗∗∗        0.0216        0.0272
                                        (4.47)        (4.17)        (3.63)          (1.21)         (0.84)         (0.98)       (2.84)        (1.14)        (1.45)

          Density                   -0.0588∗∗∗     -0.0512∗∗∗    -0.0541∗∗∗       0.106∗∗∗       0.112∗∗∗       0.110∗∗∗     -0.125∗∗∗    -0.0994∗∗∗     -0.107∗∗∗
                                        (-3.91)        (-3.43)       (-3.60)        (4.97)         (5.34)         (5.26)       (-5.71)        (-4.60)      (-4.95)

          Income per Capita         -0.0116∗∗∗     -0.0120∗∗∗    -0.0113∗∗∗    -0.00710∗∗∗    -0.00876∗∗∗    -0.00818∗∗∗    0.0280∗∗∗     0.0206∗∗∗     0.0197∗∗∗
                                        (-5.96)        (-6.28)       (-5.80)        (-2.87)        (-3.65)        (-3.40)      (8.59)        (6.48)        (6.21)

          Unemployment Rate           -0.00436      -0.00619       0.00638          0.0128       -0.00237     -0.000124       0.158∗∗∗      0.206∗∗∗      0.125∗∗
                                        (-0.19)       (-0.27)        (0.28)         (0.38)         (-0.07)       (-0.00)        (2.82)        (3.57)      (2.18)

          Year fixed effects               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes

          State fixed effects              Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
          Observations                    1748           1762          1762           1529           1553           1553           866           888          888
          R2                             0.450          0.459         0.454          0.396          0.399          0.398         0.506         0.463        0.466
     Table 6: This table presents results from OLS regressions of the percentage of revenue bonds in a given year (Panel A) and over a mayor’s
     term (Panel B) on political contestability. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to
     1 when the winning margin was large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include average bond
     ratings, the natural logarithm of deal size, population, and population density, median real income per capita in thousand US$, unemployment
     rate, and the year within a mayor’s term. Regressions also include year and state fixed effects. The sample period is 1980-2002. T -statistics
     are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                     Panel A: Revenue Bonds by Year                                    Panel B: Revenue Bonds by Election Cycle
           DV: Revenue Bonds %          (1)          (2)            (3)               DV: Revenue Bonds %         (1)          (2)            (3)
           Margin Quintiles         -0.0387∗∗∗                                        Margin Quintiles        -0.0415∗∗∗
                                        (-3.39)                                                                   (-3.14)

           Large Margin                           -0.0834∗∗                           Large Margin                           -0.100∗∗∗
                                                     (-2.58)                                                                   (-2.64)

           Partisan Swings                                          0.0421            Partisan Swings                                         0.0467
                                                                    (1.34)                                                                    (1.18)

           Avg. Rating              -0.0231∗∗∗    -0.0258∗∗∗     -0.0257∗∗∗           Avg. Rating             -0.0214∗∗∗    -0.0247∗∗∗     -0.0245∗∗∗
                                        (-3.95)       (-4.42)       (-4.38)                                       (-2.96)       (-3.43)       (-3.39)

           Deal Size                  0.00601       0.00903        0.00945            Deal Size                  0.0169∗     0.0190∗∗       0.0192∗∗




29
                                        (0.71)        (1.07)        (1.11)                                         (1.79)       (2.01)        (2.00)

           Population                  0.0307        0.0229         0.0191            Population                  0.0198      0.00964        0.00666
                                       (1.40)        (1.05)         (0.87)                                        (0.74)        (0.37)        (0.25)

           Density                    0.00296       0.00670        0.00714            Density                     0.0109       0.0179         0.0188
                                        (0.14)        (0.33)        (0.35)                                        (0.43)       (0.70)         (0.74)

           Income per Capita          0.00113      -0.00108       -0.00148            Income per Capita         0.000381     -0.00203       -0.00260
                                        (0.38)       (-0.37)       (-0.51)                                         (0.11)      (-0.59)       (-0.75)

           Unemployment Rate           0.0340        0.0352         0.0322            Unemployment Rate           0.0223       0.0162         0.0144
                                       (1.21)        (1.26)         (1.15)                                        (0.71)       (0.52)         (0.46)

           Years in Office             0.0116        0.0120         0.0127            Terms in Office            0.00353       0.0200         0.0137
                                       (0.75)        (0.78)         (0.81)                                         (0.11)      (0.62)         (0.42)

           Year fixed effects              Yes             Yes        Yes             Year fixed effects             Yes             Yes        Yes

           State fixed effects             Yes           Yes           Yes            State fixed effects            Yes           Yes           Yes
           Observations                    730           748           748            Observations                   531           549           549
           R2                            0.337         0.326         0.321            R2                           0.369         0.354         0.347
     Table 7: This table presents results from linear probability regressions of the method of sale of municipal bonds (competitive bidding=1)
     on political contestability. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to 1 when the
     winning margin was large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include average bond ratings, the
     natural logarithm of deal size, population, and population density, median real income per capita in thousand US$, unemployment rate, and
     the year within a mayor’s term. The sample period is 1980-2002. T -statistics are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance
     at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                                               Election Outcome Margins and Method of Sale
      DV: Competitive Sales Dummy           (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)            (9)
      Margin Quintiles                  -0.0166∗∗∗                                  -0.0230∗∗∗                                     -0.0230
                                            (-3.61)                                     (-4.85)                                     (-1.50)

      Large Margin                                    -0.0543∗∗∗                                  -0.0648∗∗∗                                     -0.0648
                                                          (-4.26)                                     (-4.93)                                     (-1.64)

      Partisan Swings                                                 0.0741∗∗∗                                   0.0833∗∗∗                                    0.0833∗
                                                                         (6.46)                                      (6.90)                                     (1.94)

      Avg. Rating                      0.00880∗∗∗     0.00919∗∗∗     0.00855∗∗∗     0.00786∗∗∗    0.00829∗∗∗     0.00778∗∗∗       0.00786       0.00829        0.00778
                                           (3.93)         (4.14)         (3.86)         (3.36)        (3.58)         (3.36)         (1.02)        (1.09)        (1.03)




30
      Deal Size                         -0.0283∗∗∗    -0.0283∗∗∗     -0.0315∗∗∗     -0.0325∗∗∗    -0.0326∗∗∗     -0.0366∗∗∗     -0.0325∗∗∗    -0.0326∗∗∗     -0.0366∗∗∗
                                            (-7.61)       (-7.65)        (-8.47)        (-7.62)       (-7.67)        (-8.60)        (-2.98)       (-2.97)       (-3.12)

      Population                                                                      0.0166∗        0.0125        0.00183         0.0166        0.0125        0.00183
                                                                                        (1.94)       (1.48)          (0.21)        (0.52)        (0.38)         (0.06)

      Density                                                                         -0.0143∗       -0.0125      -0.00821         -0.0143       -0.0125      -0.00821
                                                                                        (-1.75)       (-1.54)       (-1.01)         (-0.55)       (-0.49)      (-0.32)

      Income per Capita                                                             0.00744∗∗∗    0.00699∗∗∗     0.00710∗∗∗     0.00744∗∗      0.00699∗      0.00710∗∗
                                                                                        (6.43)        (6.21)         (6.33)         (2.05)        (1.96)        (2.05)

      Unemployment Rate                                                             -0.0451∗∗∗    -0.0474∗∗∗     -0.0602∗∗∗        -0.0451       -0.0474     -0.0602∗∗
                                                                                        (-3.19)       (-3.37)        (-4.26)        (-1.45)       (-1.62)      (-2.00)

      Year fixed effects                       Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes

      State fixed effects                      Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
      Observations                            4363          4423           4423           3887          3947           3947           3887          3947          3947
      R2                                     0.213         0.212          0.216          0.245         0.243          0.248          0.245         0.243         0.248
      Clustered at municipality                No             No            No             No            No             No             Yes           Yes           Yes
     Table 8: This table presents results from logit regressions of the method of sale of municipal bonds (competitive bidding=1) on political
     contestability. Political contestability measures are given by election margins of victory quintiles, a dummy equal to 1 when the winning
     margin was large (above 20%), and the number of political party swings in mayoral control. Controls include average bond ratings, the natural
     logarithm of deal size, population, and population density, median real income per capita in thousand US$, unemployment rate, and the year
     within a mayor’s term. The sample period is 1980-2002. We report marginal effects. T -statistics are in parenthesis; ∗ denotes significance at
     10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

                                                 Election Outcome Margins and Method of Sale
                                       (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)            (9)
       Margin Quintiles            -0.0157∗∗∗                                  -0.0218∗∗∗                                     -0.0218
                                       (-3.44)                                     (-4.52)                                     (-1.43)

       Large Margin                              -0.0407∗∗∗                                  -0.0501∗∗∗                                     -0.0501
                                                     (-3.28)                                     (-3.78)                                     (-1.32)

       Partisan Swings                                           0.0653∗∗∗                                   0.0726∗∗∗                                   0.0726∗∗
                                                                    (6.06)                                      (6.16)                                     (2.14)

       Avg. Rating                 0.0100∗∗∗      0.0102∗∗∗     0.00988∗∗∗     0.00951∗∗∗    0.00975∗∗∗     0.00968∗∗∗       0.00951       0.00975        0.00968
                                      (4.10)         (4.23)         (4.08)         (3.68)        (3.77)         (3.75)         (1.09)        (1.11)        (1.09)




31
       Deal Size                   -0.0324∗∗∗    -0.0322∗∗∗     -0.0350∗∗∗     -0.0385∗∗∗    -0.0384∗∗∗     -0.0416∗∗∗     -0.0385∗∗∗    -0.0384∗∗∗     -0.0416∗∗∗
                                       (-8.13)       (-8.13)        (-8.85)        (-8.13)       (-8.11)        (-8.83)        (-3.41)       (-3.28)       (-3.57)

       Population                                                               0.0214∗∗∗     0.0187∗∗        0.00789         0.0214        0.0187        0.00789
                                                                                   (2.58)        (2.27)         (0.94)        (0.74)        (0.63)         (0.29)

       Density                                                                   -0.0138∗      -0.0142∗      -0.00849         -0.0138       -0.0142      -0.00849
                                                                                   (-1.74)       (-1.80)       (-1.07)         (-0.60)       (-0.62)      (-0.36)

       Income per Capita                                                       0.00543∗∗∗    0.00523∗∗∗     0.00511∗∗∗      0.00543∗      0.00523∗       0.00511∗
                                                                                   (5.21)        (5.09)         (5.06)         (1.82)        (1.72)        (1.77)

       Unemployment Rate                                                       -0.0684∗∗∗    -0.0651∗∗∗     -0.0722∗∗∗     -0.0684∗∗     -0.0651∗∗      -0.0722∗∗∗
                                                                                   (-4.30)       (-4.08)        (-4.47)       (-2.32)       (-2.27)        (-2.61)

       Year fixed effects                 Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes

       State fixed effects                Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
       Observations                      4211          4272           4272           3669          3703           3703           3669          3703          3703
       Pseudo R2                        0.201         0.200          0.206          0.231         0.226          0.232          0.231         0.226         0.232
       Clustered at municipality          No             No             No             No           No             No             Yes           Yes           Yes
Appendix A            Construction of Dataset

We merged two datasets: municipal bonds issued in 1981-2002 and election outcomes in
mayor cities in 1980-2004. The bond dataset have more municipal-year observations than
the elections dataset. We thus adopted a two-way strategy. First, we applied all the election-
year data (which constitutes the data used to create the political risk measures) in all years
between elections. We also then (separately) aggregated all bond data data by election cycles.
    Specifically, we treated the data as follows:

  1. In the bond database, we aggregated bonds by type and municipality-year of issuance

  2. In the elections database we:

     (a) Generated a dummy variable election year dummy = 1 for all records

     (b) Generated last election year = year

     (c) Generated non-election subsequent years in year, and repeated all other variables—
         last election year and last election outcomes—until the next election year obser-
         vation

     (d) Generated a variable timingt = yeart − last election yeart to check for opportunis-
         tic electoral cycle timing (timing fixed effects)

     (e) Generated a variable tenure yearst = arg max j|mayor namet = mayor namet−j
         ∧ j = {1, 2, . . . , 20} for the same mayor in office (by name) to check for risk propen-
         sity and learning by mayors (tenure year fixed effects)

      (f) Generated a variable tenure cyclest = Z [tenure yearst /4] for the same mayor in
         office (by name) to check for risk propensity and learning by mayors (tenure cycles
         fixed effects)

  3. We merged the two datasets matched by municipality and year:

     (a) For year regressions, we collapsed the merged dataset summing bond issues by
         municipality, type of bond, and year of issuance

     (b) For political cycle regressions, we collapsed the merged dataset summing bond
         issues by municipality, type of bond, and last election year

                                              32
Appendix B            Types of Bonds

In addition to G.O. and revenue bonds, there are a few other common types of municipal
securities. We describe these securities here. For some of these categories, because they
are closely related to either G.O. or revenue bonds, we lumped them into one of the two
categories.
    Certificates of Participation (COPs) are a form of lease revenue bond that permit the
investor to participate in a stream of lease payments, installment payments, or loan payments
relating to the acquisition or construction of specific equipment, land or facilities. In theory
the certificate holder could foreclose on the equipment or facility financed in the event of
default, but so far no investor has ended up owning a piece of a school house or a storm
drainage system.
    Municipal Notes are short-term obligations, generally maturing in one year or less. The
most common types are (1) bond anticipation notes (BANs), (2) grant anticipation notes
(GANs), (3) revenue anticipation notes (RANs), (4) tax anticipation notes (TANs), (5) Tax
and Revenue Anticipation Notes (TRANs), (6) project notes, and (7) construction loan notes.
    Special Taxes and Assessments are often due on the same dates as property taxes, to
compensate for their levied but still unpaid share.
    Tax Allocation bonds are issued to pay the cost of land and building acquisition and
their redevelopment and are repaid by the incremental increase in tax revenues produced by
the increase assessed value of the area after redevelopment.

Appendix B.1        Data Treatment

In the construction of the final bond dataset, we deleted Notes (only one observation), Special
Taxes and Assessments, and Tax Allocation bonds, and then aggregated:

(a) G.O. Limited Bonds into general obligation bonds and

(b) COPs and Tax Allocation bonds into revenue bonds.

    Many states, such as California under Proposition 13, do not allow local governments
to issue unlimited-tax general obligation debt without a public vote. A limited-tax general
obligation pledge requires a local government to levy a property tax sufficient to meet its debt


                                              33
service obligations, but only up to a statutory limit. Generally, local governments already
levy a property tax and can choose to use a portion of the property tax it already levies,
use some other revenue stream, or increase its property tax by an amount equal to its debt
service payments.




                                            34
References

 Anderson, R. C., S. A. Mansi, and D. M. Reeb (2003). Founding family ownership and the
    agency cost of debt. Journal of Financial Economics 68 (2), 263–285.

 Bajari, P., S. Houghton, and S. Tadelis (2014). Bidding for incomplete contracts: An
    empirical analysis of adaptation costs. American Economic Review 104 (4), 1288–1319.

 Bajari, P., R. McMillan, and S. Tadelis (2009). Auctions versus negotiations in procure-
    ment: An empirical analysis. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 25 (2),
    372–399.

 Bajari, P. and S. Tadelis (2001). Incentives versus transaction costs: A theory of procure-
    ment contracts. RAND Journal of Economics 32 (3), 387–407.

 Bulow, J. and P. Klemperer (1996). Auctions versus negotiations. American Economic
    Review 86 (1), 180–194.

 Esty, B. C. (2003). The economic motivations for using Project Finance. Technical Re-
    port 28, Harvard Business School.

 Ferreira, F. and J. Gyourko (2009). Do political parties matter? Evidence from US cities.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1), 399–422.

 Gao, P. and Y. Qi (2012). Political uncertainty and public financing costs: Evidence from
    US municipal bond markets. Technical report, SSRN.

 Howell-Moroney, M. E. and J. L. Hall (2011). Waste in the sewer: The collapse of ac-
    countability and transparency in public finance in Jefferson County, Alabama. Public
    Administration Review 71 (2), 232–242.

 Ingram, R. W., L. D. Brooks, and R. M. Copeland (1983). The information content of
    municipal bond rating changes: A note. Journal of Finance 38 (3), 997–1003.

 Kidwell, D. S. and T. W. Koc (1982). The behavior of the interest rate differential between
    tax-exempt revenue and general obligation bonds: A test of risk preferences and market
    segmentation. Journal of Finance 37 (1), 73–85.

 Kurland, N. B. and T. D. Egan (1999). Public v. private perceptions of formalization,
    outcomes, and justice. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 9 (3),

                                            35
   437–458.

Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1993). A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levin, J. and S. Tadelis (2010). Contracting for government services. Journal of Industrial
   Economics LVIII (3), 507–541.

Moszoro, M. and P. T. Spiller (2012). Third-party opportunism and the nature of public
   contracts. Working Paper 18636, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Moszoro, M. W. and P. T. Spiller (2014). Third-party opportunism and the theory of pub-
   lic contracts: Operationalization and applications. In E. Brousseau and J.-M. Glachant
   (Eds.), The Manufacturing of Markets: Legal, Political and Economic Dynamics. Flo-
   rence: Cambridge University Press.

Moszoro, M. W., P. T. Spiller, and S. Stolorz (2013). Rigidity of public contracts. Technical
   report, GMU School of Public Policy Research Paper No. 2013-13.

Myers, S. C. (1977). Determinants of corporate borrowing. Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 5 (2), 147–175.

Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majluf (1984). Corporate financing and investment decisions
   when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Eco-
   nomics 13 (2), 187–221.

Robinson, J. A. and R. Torvik (2005). White elephants. Journal of Public Economics 89 (2),
   197–210.

Rubinfeld, D. (1973). Credit ratings and the market for general obligation municipal bonds.
   National Tax Journal 26 (1), 17–27.

Schwartz, A. and J. Watson (2012). Conceptualizing contractual interpretation. Research
   Paper 447, Yale Law & Economics.

Spiller, P. T. (2008). An institutional theory of public contracts: Regulatory implications.
   NBER Working Paper 14152, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Spiller, P. T. (2013). Transaction cost regulation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Or-
   ganization 89, 232–242.


                                            36
Vogt, J. (2004). Capital budgeting and finance: A guide for local governments. Washington,
   DC: International City/County Management Association.

Williamson, O. E. (1988). Corporate finance and corporate governance. Journal of Fi-
   nance 43 (3), 567—591.

Williamson, O. E. (1999). Public and private bureaucracies: A transaction cost economics
   perspectives. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15 (1), 306–342.

Yescombe, E. R. (2013). Principles of Project Finance. Academic Press.




                                          37
