NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RIGIDITY OF PUBLIC CONTRACTS
Marian Moszoro
Pablo T. Spiller
Sebastian Stolorz
Working Paper 21186
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21186

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

This research received financial support from the Jeffrey A. Jacobs Distinguished Professor of Business
and Technology Chair at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley and IESE's
Public-Private Sector Research Center. Data from SEC's EDGAR database, CORI K-Base, Wharton
Research Data Services (WRDS), and the CQ Voting and Elections Collection are gratefully acknowledged.
We thank the participants in the presentations made at the NBER Summer Institute, Duke University,
University of California, Berkeley (Haas), California Polytechnic State University (San Luis Obispo,
CA), ETH-Zurich (Law & Economics), FGV (Rio de Janeiro), National Research University-Higher
School of Economics (Moscow), Université Paris-Sorbonne (Chaire EPPP), Université Paris-Dauphine/European
University Institute (ISNIE 2013), and the World Bank for their comments. We are particularly indebted
to Emmanuelle Auriol, Lisa Bernstein, Oliver Hart, Jack Gansler, Ricard Gil, Paul Grout, Jeremy Mayer,
Edward Rhodes, Stéphane Saussier, Giancarlo Spagnolo, and Joao Veiga Malta for their helpful suggestions
and to Scott Masten for his extensive review of an early version of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Marian Moszoro, Pablo T. Spiller, and Sebastian Stolorz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Rigidity of Public Contracts
Marian Moszoro, Pablo T. Spiller, and Sebastian Stolorz
NBER Working Paper No. 21186
May 2015
JEL No. D23,D73,D78,H57,K23
ABSTRACT
We apply algorithmic data reading and textual analysis to compare the features of contracts in regulated
industries subject to public scrutiny (which we call "public contracts") with relational private contracts.
We show that public contracts are lengthier and have more rule-based rigid clauses; in addition, their
renegotiation is formalized in amendments. We also find that contract length and the frequency of
rigidity clauses increases in political contestability and closer to upcoming elections. We maintain
that the higher rigidity of public contracts is a political risk adaptation strategy carried out by public
agents attempting to lower third-party opportunistic challenges.

Marian Moszoro
University of California
Institute for Business Innovation
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Faculty Bldg. F402
Berkeley, CA 94720
mmoszoro@berkeley.edu
Pablo T. Spiller
University of California
Walter A. Haas School of Business
Faculty Bldg. 593
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
spiller@haas.berkeley.edu

Sebastian Stolorz
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
sstolorz@worldbank.org

Contracting is at the basis of every economic activity and has been an important subject
of study at law, economics, and business schools. Yet scant empirical studies have examined
contract features of large samples of contracts (Schwartz and Scott 2010).
Previous—mostly theoretical—works have focused on contract completeness (Schwartz
and Scott 2003; Shavell 2006), particularly contract interpretation. The cost of writing a
contract increases with the number of contingencies addressed in the contract (Dye 1985).
Incompleteness arises endogenously from an insufficient description of the parties’ behavior
(i.e., discretion) and insufficient contingency of the parties’ obligations to external states—
that is, rigidity (Battigalli and Maggi 2002). The costs of designing optimal complex contracts
can be prohibitively expensive for the involved parties. Enforcing such contracts can also be
costly. Therefore, involved parties often prefer to use simple contracts (Schwartz and Watson
2004). A positive correlation exists between complexity (e.g., measured by contract length)
and the probability that parties choose arbitration over court litigation (Drahozal and Ware
2010), with arbitration being preferred for contracts with more “implicit” terms (Drahozal and
Hylton 2003).
The empirical analysis of contracts presents two challenges: the dearth of explanatory
variables and the subtle contract variations arising from the interaction of terms. A series of
contracting papers published beginning in the mid-1980s addressed these hindrances. Joskow
(1985, 1987) analyzed vertical integration, contract duration, and relation-specific investments
based on contracts between coal suppliers and electric utilities. Masten and Crocker (1985,
1988, 1991) examined the tradeoffs between the design and duration under price regulation
and the processes by which parties adjust prices in long-term contracts to encourage flexibility
and avoid opportunism in the production of onshore natural gas wells. Crocker and Reynolds
(1993) studied the optimal degree of contractual incompleteness in pricing procedures used in
Air Force engine procurement contracts. Lafontaine (1992, 1993) explored the determinants of
franchise agreements under risk sharing and moral hazard in various business activities. Masten
and Snyder (1993) analyzed the use of specific lease provisions to supply quality equipment
without the need for comprehensive contracting in the shoemaking industry. Leffler and Rucker
(1991) investigated the incentives associated with lump-sum (transaction costs-covering) and
per unit payment (risk-sharing) provisions in timber-harvesting contracts. Similarly, Allen
and Lueck (1992, 1993) looked at cash rent versus cropshare agricultural contracts. Yet these
2

studies, with a few exceptions, focused on particular sectors, were geographically restricted,
and were based on a limited number of observations.1 In most cases, contractual attributes
were identified as dummy or ordered variables.
Schwartz and Watson (2012) tackled the question of which institutional environment
demonstrates a preference for arbitration. Arbitration is less costly than court trials, but
requires more accurate contracts. These authors provided a model, supported by empirical evidence using a large set of contracts filed through the Stock and Exchange Commission (SEC),
in which a welfare-maximizing enforcer induces the contracting parties to make socially efficient trade-offs between interpretation accuracy and cost of contract writing—namely, between
the trial cost and investment in the deal.
Spiller (2008) and Moszoro and Spiller (2012) presented a complementary rationale for
public contracts’ rigidity in politically contestable markets. Even if the enforcer is a welfare
maximizer, the public agent is subject to political hazards. Therefore, public contracts are
more rigid—have more rule-based “explicit” terms—than purely private contracts as a political
risk adaptation of the public agent to keep at bay plausible challenges by third parties. The
increased cost of rigidity is externalized to the public at large.
Strong anecdotical evidence indicates the rigidity of public contracts, but no comprehensive empirical study exists. Our approach is similar to that of Schwartz and Watson (2012) in
that we use the same data source (SEC filings) and analogous algorithmic data reading, but
our study differs in its controls, treatment, and testable predictions. Using data scraping and
word clustering from more than 200,000 contracts across all states and a wide variety of industries filed through the SEC’s Electronic Data-Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR)
system, we test Moszoro and Spiller’s (2012) hypothesis of higher rigidity of public contracts
compared with the rigidity of purely private contracts.
1

With the exception of Allen and Lueck (1992, 1993), who collected an impressive survey of 1,628–3,432
agricultural contracts, and Lafontaine (1992, 1993), who relied on a cross-section of 548 contracts, these studies
were based on datasets that included from 44 to 299 observations.

3

A Model of Contractual Rigidity2

1

Contract rigidity refers to rule-based (bureaucratic) implementation; i.e., the addition of contractual provisions and specifications that impose ex post stiff enforcement, intolerance to
adaptation, and penalties for deviation.3 Therefore, contract rigidity—although generally correlated with—differs from Arrow-Debreu’s (1954) state-contingent contracts, which point to
the ex ante complexity of the subject and the completeness of the clauses, technical provisions,
and processing costs (Laffont and Tirole 1993). From the contractor’s perspective, contractual
rigidity minimizes the risk of governmental opportunism, i.e., unfair administrative treat and
unfavorable renegotiations (e.g., creeping expropriation).
Contracting cost rises exponentially with contract rigidity and determines the trade-off
between interpretation accuracy and the cost of contract writing, as shown by Schwartz and
Watson (2012).
In Spiller (2008), the lack of flexibility in public procurement design and implementation
reflects public agents’ political risk adaptation aimed at limiting the hazards from opportunistic third parties—political opponents, competitors, interest groups—while externalizing the
associated adaptation costs to the public at large. Following Moszoro and Spiller (2012), we
assume that public agents minimize both contracting and political costs given by:
minimize Φ = T0 ρ(R)τ (R) + K(R)
R

(1)

where K(R) is adaptation costs rising exponentially with contract rigidity, ρ is the likelihood of
a challenge by an opportunistic third party and τ is the likelihood of success of an opportunistic
challenge (both decreasing with contract rigidity), and T0 is the public agent’s (political) cost
if a challenge by third parties is successful. Third parties observe benefits from opportunistic
challenge, but the public agent does not know ex ante the particular value of these benefits
for third parties. Third parties’ overall benefits from an opportunistic challenge correspond to
f0 .
a random normally distributed variable T

Moszoro and Spiller (2012) showed that in equilibrium third parties challenge a contract

2
3

This section follows Moszoro and Spiller (2012).
In this regard, contract rigidity is the opposite of “best efforts” or “reasonable adaptation” clauses.

4

f0 ζτ are greater than litigation costs c(R):
only if expected gains T
f0 ζτ (R) > c(R)],
ρ ≡ Pr[T

(2)

where ζ ∈ (0, 1] is a political concentration parameter: if ζ = 1, the TPO challenger’s benefits
are symmetrical to the incumbent public agent’s TPO costs (e.g., a bipartisan political market);
if ζ < 1, the political market is fragmented and the challenger does not internalize all benefits
from a successful contract protest.
Litigation costs c(R) rise in R. Reduced flexibility limits the likelihood of opportunistic
challenge, thereby lowering third parties’ expected gains and increasing litigation costs. Any
deviation from equilibrium rigidity R∗ makes the public agent worse off:
(a) If R < R∗ , then τ (R) > τ (R∗ ), c(R) < c(R∗ ), therefore ρ > ρ∗ and T0 ρ(R)τ (R) −
T0 ρ(R∗ )τ (R∗ ) > K(R∗ ) − K(R) (political cost increase offsets gains in contracting cost
decrease)
(b) If R > R∗ , then T0 ρ(R∗ )τ (R∗ ) − T0 ρ(R)τ (R) < K(R) − K(R∗ ) (contracting cost increase
outmatches gains in political cost decrease)
Moszoro and Spiller (2012) derive two testable predictions on the contractual design depending on the characteristics of the contracting parties:
Prediction 1 Equilibrium contract rigidity increases in political costs; thus, contracts subject
to public scrutiny show more rigidity clauses than purely private (i.e., relational) contracts.
Prediction 2 In the sub-sample of public contracts, rigidity increases with political contestability (high ζ).

2
2.1

Data and Methodology
SEC’s EDGAR Database

All public companies operating in the U.S., both foreign and domestic, are required to file
registration statements, periodic reports, and other forms electronically through the SEC’s
EDGAR system. The required disclosure filings made by publicly traded companies frequently
contain contracts that are of material interest to investors. Filing requirements for compli-

5

ance with SEC’s regulations are described in Overdahl (1991).4 Although this information is
available to the public, research on contracting has been stymied by a lack of parametrization.5
We used the directEDGAR engine developed by Burch Kealey from the University of
Nebraska at Omaha to extract all data in Exhibit 10 from the 10-K filings filed from 1998 to
2013. The following subsections describe the data treatment step by step.

2.2

Data Treatment

Step 1: Rough Data
An issuer must file an Exhibit 10 to a registration statement and periodically report “material
contracts” described in items 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K and Regulation S-B. Examples of
different types of material contracts include: asset purchase agreements; bridge loan agreements, cash bonus plans, director fee agreements, director indemnification plans, employment
agreements, executive compensation plans and incentive plans, financial services agreements,
joint venture agreements, lease agreements, letters of intent, license agreements, pension plans,
profit sharing plans, purchase agreements, stock option agreements, stock purchase agreements,
and termination agreements.
We retrieved material contracts through directEDGAR, which collects data from the SEC’s
FTP server. The data in this system consists of electronic filings by corporations and individual
filers to the SEC. We used the form type index to identify Exhibit 10 documents included with
the filing of forms 10-K, which require the inclusion of material contracts, and then retrieved
each Exhibit 10 from the location indicated in the filing index.
We retrieved 206,677 contracts dated from 1998 to 2013 and translated all files to machinereadable ASCII text format.6 We measured contract length by the geometric average of the
word count of three common English words: “the”, “and”, and “of”. We then used the natural
logarithm of character count for file length normalization.
4

A modern index to forms is available at: http://www.sec.gov/ info/edgar/forms/edgform.pdf.
The Contracting and Organizations Research Institute (CORI) based at the University of MissouriColumbia facilitates access to the EDGAR database. CORI’s K-Base library contains more than 690,000
contracts, but its query system only allows for individual downloads.
6
Although EDGAR was launched in 1994, filings from early years are random and incomplete. To increase
the reliability of our data, we collected contracts from 1998 onwards.
5

6

Step 2: Company Identification
We identified each filing company by the SEC’s Central Index Key (CIK) and linked it to
the company’s ticker, Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code, location, and financial
characteristics retrieved from the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS).7 We dropped
26,282 filings to which no CIK or SIC code was associated.
Step 3: Public versus Private
We classified the contracts as “Utilities” and “Quasi-regulated” (i.e., where one public agency,
state, county, or municipality is involved) versus purely “Private” using the SIC code8 of the
filing party. Unfortunately, we were not able to identify non-reporting contractees.
(a) Filing companies whose SIC code begins with 6 (Finance) and 9 (Administration) were
filtered out
(b) “Utilities”: filing companies whose SIC code is between 4900 and 4999—namely, electric,
gas and sanitary services, electric services, natural gas transmission, natural gas transmission and distribution, natural gas distribution, electric and other services combined, gas
and other services combined, water supply, sanitary services, refuse systems, hazardous
waste management, steam and air-conditioning supply,9 and cogeneration services and
small power producers.
(c) “Quasi-regulated industries”: filing companies whose SIC code is between 4000 and 4499
and between 4800 and 4899—namely, railroad switching and terminal establishments, local
and suburban transit, interurban highway passenger transportation, trucking and courier
services (no air), trucking (no local), public warehousing and storage, terminal maintenance
facilities for motor freight transport, water transportation, deep sea foreign transportation
7

See http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/cik.htm and http://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/
companysearch.html (accessed on September 24, 2012) for a list of CIK and SIC codes.
8
See, e.g., Matsumoto (2002) for a treatment of SIC codes regarding regulation. We modified his treatment and classified companies whose SIC code is between 4800 and 4899 as “quasi-regulated industries”. See
http://www.sec.gov/info/edgar/siccodes.htm (accessed on September 24, 2012) for the SIC Code List description.
9
For the sake of clarity, SIC code 4961: Steam and Air-conditioning Supply refers to utilities engaged
in the production and/or distribution of steam and heated or cooled air for sale, not to commercial and industrial air-conditioning equipment. Its equivalent NAICS Code is 221330. For a manual of SIC codes, see:
https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/sic manual.html.

7

of freight, telephone communications (no radiotelephone), telegraph and other message
communications, radio broadcasting stations, television broadcasting stations, cable and
other pay television services, and communication services.
(d) “Private”: filing companies whose SIC code starts with 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, or 8 and whose SIC
code is between 4500 and 4799.
Public utilities provide and maintain the infrastructure for key public services—electricity,
natural gas, water, and sewage. In the U.S., public utilities are often natural monopolies
because of the high costs involved in developing the necessary infrastructure. Due to their
social impact, public utilities are subject to forms of public scrutiny and regulation ranging from
local community-based groups to state-wide government monopolies. If privately owned, these
utility companies enjoy limited business autonomy and their activities are specially regulated
and subject to public scrutiny by a public utilities commission.10
We distilled 20,200 public contracts and 123,543 private contracts.
Step 4: Word Count and Categorization
We used Schwartz and Watson’s (2012) keyword list of arbitration clauses—arbitration (and
variants), whereas, court, appeal, mediation, litigation, warranty, guaranty, specification, and
deposition—as the starting point and complemented the list with 21 keywords, grouped them
into seven rigidity categories: arbitration, certification, evaluation, litigation, penalties, termination, and design.
In textual analysis and computer science, these categories are referred to as “dictionaries.”
We used them to “teach” our software to machine-read contractual categories. Our use of
categories is analogous to Parkhe’s (1993) efforts in the management literature concerning
contract analysis and to Loughran and McDonald’s (2011) work in the finance and accounting
literature dealing with corporate filings. In a small contract sample, Parkhe (1993) used dummy
variables equal to one when specific clauses—written reports of relevant transactions, promptly
written notice of departures from the agreement, the right to examine and audit relevant records
using a firm of certified public accountants, designation of certain information as proprietary
and subject to confidentiality provisions of the contract’s non-use of proprietary information
10

For public scrutiny and accountability in the contracting practice at a water utility, see Appendix A.

8

even after termination of the agreement, termination of agreement, arbitration clauses, and
lawsuit provisions—were contained in a contract. Loughran and McDonald (2011) applied
word counts of negative words, positive words, uncertainty words, litigious words, strong modal
words, and weak modal words in a large number of SEC filings.
Arbitration clauses submit plausible disputes to an arbitrator instead of a court.11 Certification clauses regulates the contractor. Evaluation clauses introduce duties regarding delivery.
Litigation clauses appear in triggers to a lawsuit. Termination clauses signal ways to resolve
intractable contract disruption. Finally, design clauses impose product or service features.
We conjecture, following Spiller (2008) and Moszoro and Spiller (2012), that these rigidity
categories capture relevant contractual clauses that lower the likelihood of a challenge by
opportunistic third parties. Our rationale for (and contribution to) the use of rigidity categories
instead of the use of a simple aggregate is to open the black box on contractual rigidity and
assess its magnitude and significance at a granular level.
We developed an keyword count by data scraping. Table (1) presents keywords clustered
in rigidity categories.
Overall, we counted 5,644,668 keywords: arbitration 396,178; certification 872,843; evaluation 1,304,934; litigation 289,750; penalties 773,392; termination 1,940,419; and design 67,152.
Step 5: Descriptive Categories
We scraped keywords contained in the first 100 lines of the filings to identify the type of
contract, as presented in Table (2). We identified these types for 126,913 filings: amendment
96,552; commercial contracts 54,344; compensation/employment 88,238; consulting 4,559; and
finance 50,492. This categorization is not unique for each contract, meaning our identified
categories overlap. Indeed any type of contract may be subject to amendments.
Our focus is on commercial contracts. We adopted a cautious approach, in which we
identify as commercial contracts only those that do not share attributes with compensation/employment, consulting, or finance descriptive categories. Finally, we processed 7,190
commercial contracts, out of which we identified 1,808 as license contracts and 5,382 as
11

Contracts submitting to arbitration have more details because there will be less deposition opportunities.
Public contracts may have more arbitration clauses to minimize the risks of (unfavorable) court decisions. Public
agents may also prefer arbitration because it is faster and more confidential than courts, so they are less exposed
to third parties.

9

sale/procurement contracts.12
Our identification of amendments by keywords in the document heading may capture primary contracts with an “integration” (also known as “merger” or “entire agreement”) clause.13
Integrated agreements, however, are a formal amendment for the purposes of this research and
does not confound our results.
Table (3) presents the summary of the dataset construction step by step, and Tables (4)
and (5) present the characterization and summary statistics of the output dataset of commercial
contracts.

3

Contract Features and Hypotheses

The contract features that we use as proxies of complexity are: length, clusters of rigidity
clauses, and number of amendments to contracts. Descriptive categories are used as control
variables for fixed effects. We were unable to extract the duration and value of the contracts.
We advance the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1 Public contracts are lengthier than private contracts.
Hypothesis 2 Public contracts have more rigidity clauses than private contracts.
Hypothesis 3 Public contracts are renegotiated through formal processes and, thus, have more
amendments than private contracts; in addition, public contracts’ amendments include more
rigidity clauses than private contracts’ amendments.
Figure (1) maps these hypotheses graphically.

4

Identification Strategy

As “predictors” of complexity of public contracts, we used length (hypothesis (1)) and frequency of rigidity clauses (hypothesis (2)). We tested these hypotheses with OLS regressions
12

It is noteworthy that these contracts are commonly agreements related to the ongoing business activities,
not only one-time events as, for example, the construction of a generation plant for an electric utility.
13
An example of an integration clause is provided below:
This is the entire agreement between the parties. It replaces and supersedes any and all oral
agreements between the parties, as well as any prior writings. Modifications and amendments to
this agreement, including any exhibit or appendix, shall be enforceable only if they are in writing
and are signed by authorized representatives of both parties.

10

Rule-based,
rigid contracts

[H1]
Length

[H2, H3b]
Rigidities
arbitration,
certification,
evaluation,
litigation,
penalties,
termination,
design

Formal
renegotiations

[H3a]
Amendments

Figure 1: Hypotheses and research approach

for contract length and for rigidity category as described in equations (3) and (4), respectively:
Lengthi = α0 + α1 U tilitiesi + α2 Quasi regulatedi + Controlsi + εi

(3)

Rigiditiesi,l = α0 + α1 U tilitiesi + α2 Quasi regulatedi + Controlsi + εi

(4)

where i is the contract index, U tilitiesi is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the
contract i is a utilities contract and 0 otherwise, Quasi regulatedi is a dummy variable that is
equal to 1 when the contract i is a quasi-regulated contract and 0 otherwise (thus when both
U tilitiesi and Quasi regulatedi equal zero, it is a private-to-private contract), Lengthi is the
length of contract i,14 and Rigidityi,l is the frequency of rigidity keywords clustered in clauses
l—arbitration, certification, evaluation, litigation, penalties, termination, and design as shown
in table (1)—conditional on contract i having a clause l (intensive margins), calculated as the
natural logarithm of the count of rigidity keywords divided by Length of file i:
Rigidityi,l = ln

Count of keywords of rigidity clause l in file i
Lengthi

(5)

14
We proxied contract length by the geometric average of the count of the three most frequent words in
English—“the”, “and”, and “of”—to circumvent the different formats of the filings and to cut outliers.

11

We controlled for total assets, capital expenditure, and sales; type of contract (license or
sale/procurement); and industry (one-digit SIC),15 state, and year fixed effects. We also
checked our results by filtering for long contracts only (without low decile filings in length).
We applied log transformations to normalize skewed and wide distributions as well as provide
a straightforward interpretation of our coefficients in relative terms.
To prove hypothesis (3), we applied logit regressions of amendments on contract characteristics, controlling for contract length, sales, and state fixed effects, as specified in equation
(6), and OLS regressions of the average number of amendments to total documents at the firm
k level, as specified in equation (7):
Amendmenti = α0 + α1 U tilitiesi + α2 Quasi regulatedi + α3 Lengthi + Controlsi + εi (6)
P
i Amendment
P
Pi,k
= α0 + α1 U tilitiesi + α2 Quasi regulatedi
(7)
i Amendmenti,k +
i M aini,k
+α3 Lengthi + Controlsi + εi
In addition, we tested for rigidity clauses in amendments with analogous OLS equations
to equation (4), filtering for amendments, as shown in equation (8):
(Rigiditiesi,l | Amendmenti = 1) = α0 + α1 U tilitiesi + α2 Quasi regulatedi
(8)
+Controlsi + εi

5

Empirical Results

We found that utility contracts are lengthier, have more arbitration, evaluation, litigation, and
penalty clauses, and have more amendments with more arbitration, evaluation, and penalty
clauses than private contracts. Contracts in quasi-regulated industries are not significantly
lengthier, but in some cases incorporate more penalty and design clauses than private contracts.
Table (6) shows the unconditional mean lengths of public utilities, quasi-regulated, and
private contracts, and Table (7) shows the length mean-comparison t-test of public versus
private contracts. On average, public contracts are lengthier than private contracts.
Table (8) presents results of OLS regressions of main contract length on contract attributes:
public utilities and quasi-regulated versus private industry dummies, controlling for industry
(one-digit SIC) fixed effects and excluding short filings (without the bottom 10% in terms of
15

A one-digit SIC compares utilities and quasi-regulated companies with other industries within the same
SIC code starting with “4,” which are arguably closer to the analyzed groups.

12

length). It shows that contracts are significantly lengthier when the filing entity is a public
utility. Also, we cannot statistically reject the hypothesis that contracts of quasi-regulated
companies are lengthier than private contracts.
Tables (9), (10), and (11) show results of OLS regressions of rigidity clauses on contract
characteristics. Public utilities contracts feature more rigidity clauses than private contracts.
In our general specification, public contracts feature more arbitration, evaluation, litigation,
and penalty clauses. Negative coefficients of contractual rigidity clauses are statistically insignificant.
As our variables are log-transformed on both sides, length estimates show the length
elasticity of rigidity clauses. An increase in length is associated with more, but less frequent
appearances of, rigidity clauses.
The fact that certification and design clauses do not appear to be statistically significant
reinforces our rationale and excludes possible contract tailoring: Too specific certification and
design could indicate “designative” or “tailored” specifications—that is, point to a specific
contractor and be the source of favoritism (Lambert-Mogiliansky and Kosenok 2009).
Tables (13) and (14) show that the likelihood of an amendment is higher for public utilities and companies in quasi-regulated industries and that that average number of amendments
clustered at the company level is higher for public utilities. Table (15) shows that amendments
in public utilities contracts feature more arbitration, evaluation, litigation, and termination
clauses than in private contract amendments. We conjecture that public contracts are renegotiated formally through amendments instead of relationally.

6

Robustness Check: Flexibility Words

Flexible clauses shift the emphasis of the contractual relationship from a detailed specification
to adaptive terms in the face of changing circumstances (Goldberg 1976). Therefore, relational
long-term contracts (e.g., public utilities contracts) should show more flexible provisions to
facilitate efficient adjustments that subdue the costs of plausible opportunistic renegotiations
(Crocker and Masten 1991).
To compare this view with ours, we counted words that introduce flexibility clauses: satisfactory, timely, good faith, diligent, proper, reasonable, reasonably, and unreasonably. Next,
we tested whether these clauses better explain the contractual differences between public and
13

private contracts.16
Table 12 presents results of several regression specifications of flexibility words on contract characteristics. We found that public and private contracts use flexibility clauses in the
same way. This could suggest that public contracts are more state-contingent than private
contracts—namely, equally flexible, but severely limited in the form revisions can take (Hart
and Moore 1988).

7

Contractual Response to Political Contestability

Political contestability is the “extent to which a collective political actor or a system of such
political actors possesses attributes, resources, positions, or other factors, in themselves or in
their environments, that promote the ability to compete effectively in the political process”
(Mitnick 1993, 12). If a political system is characterized by contestability, then it is rational
for interest groups to petition the government on behalf of their members (Getz 1997). In fact,
in the U.S. and other democracies, interest groups do convey the concerns of their members to
government officials and, thus, are a means by which citizens can influence government (Mundo
1992).
A contract is politically contestable when contractual decisions are subject to influence
by potential (opportunistic) challengers.17 If the political opposition is fragmented (low ζ),
benefits from a challenge can go to any of the political competitors, not necessarily to the
challenger who bears the cost of challenge c in equation (2). Public agents will respond to
higher political contestability with higher contractual rigidity to reduce the likelihood of a
challenge (Moszoro and Spiller 2012).
Analogously to our previous hypotheses, we test within the regulated and quasi-regulated
contracts sample the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4 In politically contestable markets, public contracts:
(a) are lengthier,
(b) have more rigidity clauses, and
16

We are thankful to Scott Masten for suggesting this test and set of words.
In Capitol Hill jargon, political contestability is usually referred to as the “Washington Post test,” a
commonly used phrase in D.C. when working on a project—“How would it look on the front page of the
Washington Post?”
17

14

(c) are renegotiated through formal processes and, thus, have more amendments
than in less politically contestable markets.

8

Evidence of Political Contestability

We used the outcome of general elections for state governors to compute the measures of
political contestability that might affect public contracts.18 We assembled a dataset of general
gubernatorial elections from 1980 to 2013 for all 50 U.S. states from the CQ Voting and
Elections Collection (2014). The time span of the political series is larger to account for
cumulative swings in the governmental administration at the time of signing the contract.
Next, we interpolated the last election outcome for non-election years and merged the resulting
dataset with the subsample of public—utilities and quasi-regulated—contracts by state and
year. Finally, we added to the dataset a “year in office” variable equal to the difference between
the contract year and the last election year plus one, thereby defining the tenure of the governor
at the time of signing the contract.
We defined several complementary measures of political contestability:
W inning marginz,t = |Az,t − Bz,t |
Small winning marginz,t =



1 if |Az,t − Bz,t | < λ
0 if else

(9)
(10)

where Az,t and Bz,t are the winning and runner-up parties’ vote shares respectively in district
z at time t, and λ is an a priori threshold for political contestability (usually 10% in the U.S.),
all in percentage points. In addition:
P olitical opposition strengthz,t =

2 + C 2 + D2 + . . .
Bz,t
z,t
z,t
1 − Az,t

(11)

which measures the strength of the political opposition using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) of residual (non-winning) parties’ vote share weighted by the overall non-winning vote
share in general elections in district z at time t. We expect the winning margin coefficients to
be negative and the small winning margin and political opposition strength coefficients to be
positive.
18

We are thankful to Jeremy Mayer and Edward Rhodes for their insights on the mechanisms of American
politics.

15

Using public contracts, we tested hypothesis (4) by running in-sample regressions using
our measures of political contestability:
Lengthi,t = α0 + α1 P Ci,t + Controlsi + εi,t

(12)

Rigiditiesi,l,t = α0 + α1 P Ci,t + Controlsi + εi,t

(13)

Amendmenti,t = α0 + α1 P Ci,t + α2 Lengthi + Controlsi + εi,t

(14)

(Rigiditiesi,l,t | Amendmenti,t = 1) = α0 + α1 P Ci,t + Controlsi + εi,t

(15)

where i is the contract index, P Ci,t are our political contestability variables (equations 9–11)
in contract i matched by the state code and year, and Lengthi and Rigidityi,l are as defined
in section 4. We control for type of contract and state fixed effects.
Table (16) presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of contract length in the
subsample of public contracts on political contestability variables. We found that public contract length rises in political contestability when controlling for state fixed effects: As expected,
winning margins are inversely correlated with contract length and contract length increases
when winning margins are narrow (i.e., the winning margin is below 10%) and the concentration of the political opposition is strong. The fact that political contestability variables are
significant only when controlling for state fixed effects might indicate that they have a strong
predicting power for time-varying political contestability within states, but not across states.19
In political practice, the first and second year in office are “warming-up years”; the third
year can be portrayed as the “working year” that will capitalize during the fourth and last
year—the “elections race year”. Accordingly, we found a significant increase in contract length
in governors’ third year of tenure in office, which might suggest that politicians are more careful
in crafting their contracts to avoid political challenges.
Tables (17) and (18) show the results of OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of
rigidity clauses in the subsample of public contracts on winning margins and winning margin
dummies. The data indicate that increased political contestability increases the frequency of
19

The 16-year time period of our contracts sample overlaps with on average 4.4 governmental elections—
spanning from four elections for 36 states to eight elections in New Hampshire and Vermont, which hold governmental elections every two years. Thus, we are confident that our political dataset captures sufficient within-state
political variation.

16

the appearance of arbitration and litigation clauses in public contracts. Interestingly, the political contestability effect is augmented when we regress only those states where the Republican
Party won by a narrow margin, as shown in Table (19), panels A and B. This could suggest
that the Republican Party is more sensitive to political risks, while the Democratic Party is
more concerned about the agenda.
In unreported regressions, we also checked the sum, time-weighted, and average of partisan
swings in the previous three elections at each year, as well as the winning margin squares for
non-linear effects, but found that these variables are not explanatory of public contracting
at the state level. We do not claim that our choice of political contestabiity variables is
unique across all administrations. The set of variables that capture political contestability
effects in a particular market may vary across countries and—within countries—across levels
of administration.
We did not find evidence, however, that public contracts show more amendments in politically contestable markets (see Table 20). Unfortunately, we were not able to link amendments
to contacts; therefore, we had to rely on the average number of amendments and average values
of political contestability, thereby losing the within-state time variability.
Our estimations looked at the effects of political contestability on public contracts only.
As a robustness check, we reran our regressions for private contracts only (see Table 21). We
found that private contracts are significantly lengthier for only one variable in one specification: winning margin with state fixed effects. However, the magnitude was economically
insignificant (less than 0.5% lengthier contracts when the winning margin increases by one
standard deviation) and the coefficient was positive (i.e., contrary to the expected). Therefore,
we reject the alternative hypothesis that a common factor affects state political contestability
and contract design (e.g., economic downturn).

9

Scope and Limitations of the Research

The presented results are robust to a series of tests controlling for corporate financials, state,
and length and type of document. They are also robust to alternative explanations: Flexibility
clauses and the subsample of private contracts do not show the same patterns as observed in
rigidity clauses and public contracts.
Our estimates may be driven by sector/industry specificity; for example, public utilities
17

contracts have more of certain rigidity clauses than private contracts. Furthermore, utilities
have been around longer and may have learned to contract differently to survive. It is precisely
this evolution into contract rigidities what we are trying to capture and endogenize. Public
contracts are subject to third-party challenges; consequently, public agents have learned to
minimize political hazards with contract rigidities.
Our results are, however, limited by the nature and sourcing of our data. Spiller (2008)
and Moszoro and Spiller (2012) developed a theory of higher rigidity of public contracts related
to similar goods/services procured by public versus private agents, whereas contracts filed in
the 10-K of public utilities and private companies are not necessarily for similar goods/services.
We believe that the large sample of contracts in our collection reduces this object bias.
Contract complexity is correlated with the duration, geographical scope, and value of the
contracts. Due to data treatment constraints, we were not able to excerpt and control for these
variables, but somehow ameliorated these limitations through state and financial controls.
The results are also stained by two other implicit biases: subject and sample biases. As
for the subject bias, we identified contracts of public utilities as public contracts. Truly public
contracts would include procurement contracts from public agencies, government-sponsored
enterprises, and governments—municipalities, counties, states, and the federal government.
These institutions, however, do not file 10-Q and 10-K and their records are not standardized
and directly comparable.
As for the sample bias, it seems the SEC’s EDGAR—although large—is not (yet) a comprehensive contract set. The small but still quantifiable ratio of unidentified companies by
CIK raises concerns about sample bias as well. We cannot rule out multiple occurrences of the
same contract.20 We assume, however, that the filings and our sample are heterogeneous and
representative of the whole contract population.
Contracting markets and political markets overlap only partially. Perfect overlapping
implies local administrative or natural monopolies. Our measures of political contestability are
determined by political districts, whereas contracting markets are given by the area covered
by the companies.
Finally, conclusions from our algorithmic data reading and word clustering methodology
20

For example, if Exxon sold cold to DTE Energy, the contract could show twice.

18

may differ by jurisdictions—between statutory and common law worlds, and within the common law system—thereby limiting its potential applicability. We partially addressed this issue
by using state fixed effects to account for state law differences.

10

Concluding Remarks

The results of our textual analysis show that public contracts are lengthier and feature more
arbitration, evaluation, litigation, and penalty clauses; in addition, their renegotiation is formalized in amendments with more arbitration, evaluation, litigation, and termination clauses.
We further found that these patterns are reinforced in political contestability in the subsample
of public contracts.
Apart from the empirical results themselves, our paper contributes to the literature in a
threefold manner:
(a) We provide a replicable methodology for the analysis of contracts. Textual analysis is a
young, but promising avenue of research. It enables the creation of novel datasets from
document libraries (i.e., plain text) to test a variety of contractual theories and bridge law
and economics research and practice.
(b) We construct dictionaries that are descriptive of the multidimentional characteristics of
public versus public contracts. These dictionaries can serve as a reference that can be
further developed and extended to other contractual characteristics.
(c) We advance a plausible rationale with testable hypotheses of the difference between public
and purely private contracts. Following Moszoro and Spiller (2012), we sustain that the
higher rigidity of public contracts is a political risk adaptation of public agents by which
they lower the likelihood of success of third-party (opportunistic) challengers. Our results
are consistent with this view.
Prospective research includes extending the analysis to other types of contracts (e.g.,
employment/compensation). On the methodology side, spacial analysis can be applied to
identify the separating hyperplane of public and private contracts.
On a policy note, it would be worthy for the SEC to require in Exhibit 10 of the 10-Q and
10-K filings the description of type of contract filed (e.g., according to the ones described in
19

items 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K and Regulation S-B) and the identification of the non-filing
counter party by CIK.

20

Appendix A

Rigidity in Public Contracting at a Municipal
Utility21

Public agencies in the State of California follow the California Public Contract Code (PCC) for procurement
of materials and supplies, professional and general services, and construction contracts. The exact provisions of
the contract vary by type and by agency. Almost universally, materials and supplies are awarded on a low bid
basis, and professional and general services on a qualifications basis. The PCC has very limited applicability for
design-build contracting (contracts for construction that are awarded to a designer and contractor on a the basis
of a qualifications based construction process). Contracts must exceed a certain dollar threshold, be of a certain
type (buildings, certain public works), and follow guidelines for a selection process and then final reporting to
state agencies.
The letter and intention of the PCC are to provide for equity and fairness in contracting and eliminate
favoritism and collusion. To that end, public contracting procedures and contract documents contain provisions
to comply with these requirements and guiding principals.
Public utilities have contract templates that have been developed over a period of several decades. Those
utilities with active in-house design and contracting groups maintain their contract templates so that they
comply with current legal requirements.
A list of standard contractual features, which ensure fairness and minimize collusion and protests, is
presented below:
1. Public works construction contracts over a certain dollar threshold (in the case of the EBMUD, $70,000)
must be publicly advertised and bid. Bids are publicly opened in an agency’s board boom or similar
public room, after being stamped and dated in the agency’s purchasing division. Bids’ documents are
available for review by any interested party immediately after bid opening, and afterwards upon request.
Bid results are summarized and posted online within one business day.
2. Employees with a financial interest in a company cannot be involved in a selection process that involves
or potentially involves that company. Elected board officials cannot vote on contracts where they have
a financial involvement. All supervisors and managers whose job involves public procurement decisions
must file a Statement of Economic Interests annually with the Secretary of the District—this is a public
record, available for public review.
3. Bids are objective and compared based on a total bid cost. Bid exceptions are not allowed. To make
this possible, prescriptive specifications are developed to give clear, objective criteria on which bidders
can base their bid. On occasion, performance based specifications are used, but enough specificity is
provided to allow bidders to prepare a fixed price bid. Sole-source contracts are used on a very limited
basis and are only allowed in limited circumstances under the PCC. Internal procedures exist to evaluate
and approve the appropriateness of any sole-source specification. Regarding the bids themselves, official
bid forms must be used, which include:
(a) A bid form with line items including either lump sum or unit cost bid; line items such as “allowances”
are rarely used, and if used, it is in minor amounts with clear guidelines on how funds are to be
authorized—in writing, after receiving and reviewing an estimate, only for specific tasks, etc.
(b) A description of bid items, describing the basis for the evaluation of bids;
(c) A signed and notarized bidder’s bond;
(d) A signed and notarized proposal form, signed by an authorized agent of the company;
(e) A declaration on non-collusion;
(f) A declaration of eligibility to work on public works project;
(g) Designation of subcontracts; and
(h) Contract Equity program documents—usually specific to an agency, containing documentation of
compliance with any local, small, or minority- and/or women-owned business requirements.

21

We are grateful to Elisabeth Bialek for her firsthand insights into the practice of public contracting at
East Bay Municipal Utility District, Oakland, California.

21

4. Bids are evaluated and reference documents checked, and ultimately formally awarded by the agency’s
regulating board:
(a) Bids can only be withdrawn in limited circumstances, as defined in the PCC (clerical error). This
ensures fairness and stops the case of bidders testing the waters with a low bid and withdrawing if
they find that they are significantly lower than other bidders.
(b) Bids with irregularities cannot be accepted (errors in bid documents that would allow a bidder to
withdraw cannot be accepted, even if the bidder does not withdraw).
(c) Insurance, performance bonds, and eligibility to work on public works projects are checked.
5. Contracts are administered by construction management professionals. To track progress, make appropriate payments, and ensure completion of the project and that it meets appropriate standards, the
following contract features are included:
(a) Payment and performance bonds for the full contract value
(b) Liability, workers compensation, and builders risk insurance (the latter only if applicable)
(c) Payment procedures, including requirements for schedule submittals, and documentation of charges,
including payment of prevailing wages (required for all public works contracts)
(d) Submittal procedures (for verifying if materials and equipment conform to specifications—prior to
ordering and installation)
(e) Construction inspection and independent materials testing
(f) Change order procedures (usually issued on a lump sum basis, based on a contractor quote, reviewed
and approved by an engineer, and signed off by a senior or manager, as appropriate for the amount of
the change order; time and materials/force account change orders are used in limited circumstances)
(g) Claims and dispute resolution procedures
(h) Liquidated damages procedures for unapproved delays in contract completion (raging from $1,000
to several thousands per day, depending on actual damages)
(i) Contracts are audited periodically
6. On higher-risk projects (higher risk due to cost, liability, and criticality of infrastructure), the following
procedures are sometimes included:
(a) Expanded evaluation of bidder’s and qualifications—in essence, a pre-qualification procedure. Contractors are selected on a low-bid basis, but must meet more stringent qualifications requirements
(b) Higher insurance thresholds
(c) Escrow bid documents: contractors submit their actual bid documents to the awarding agency after
award; these are sealed by the contractor, stored in escrow, and only opened by both parties in the
presence of a third party in case of a dispute. This aids in the equitable resolution of disputes
(d) Higher liquidated damages (must be based on realistic estimates of damages)
(e) Alternate dispute resolution procedures, involving appointed resolution boards, binding or nonbinding arbitration, mediation, etc.
(f) Specific processing provisions for third-party claims
(g) Detailed pre-construction surveys on a property-by-property basis
Regarding cost specifics:
1. Typical planning, design, and construction management costs amount to 10–15 percent of the total
construction cost. These numbers vary based on job complexity and scale. Overall, smaller, more
complex jobs have higher design and administration costs on a percentage basis.
2. Actual change order percentages for contracts tend to be around 5 percent (EBMUD budgets for 5–10
percent).

22

3. Protests on bids typically cost an agency $5,000–15,000, not including the differential cost to go to the
next lowest bid. If a protest raises questions that are legitimate enough to question the low bid, but
not definitive enough to reject the low bid without the risk of a counter-protest or further litigation, the
option of re-bid (re-advertise and solicit for new bids) is usually chosen. If a re-bid is required, costs
are $20,000–30,000, which does not include any possible increases in contract cost, even without scope
changes.
4. Bid amount or ultimate contract cost as compared to engineer’s estimate (EE) varies. The PCC requires
that agencies demonstrate that adequate funding is available for a public works project before it is
advertised. To comply with this, an in-house EE is prepared prior to advertising a project for award.
When bids are received, if there is more than a 10 percent deviation between the low bid and the EE,
the specifics are investigated. It is not uncommon to have a wider deviation. After an evaluation, if bids
are deemed reasonable, adequate funding exists, and the work is deemed necessary, projects are awarded,
even if they exceed the engineer’s estimate. Typical reasons for cost deviation are as follows:
(a) When multiple bids (more than 3 to 5) are received, costs tend to be lower.
(b) In crisis times—like the current economy—favorable bids are received for most projects, since private
sector work has significantly slowed over the past 2–3 years. In calendar years 2009–2010, bids on
average, were 18 percent below the EE. In calendar year 2011, bids, on average were 3 percent under
the EE. Part of this may reflect an improvement in the economy and more work available for bidders
(meaning less need to bid low on public works projects). Part may be due to the agency’s adjustment
of EE to reflect current market costs.
(c) It seems to be consistently difficult to estimate costs on projects with extensive electrical work,
instrumentation/controls or other technology projects, or work that the agency does not typically
bid out.
(d) Certain commodities’ costs fluctuate widely (e.g., concrete, metals), and so bids may be higher when
costs are up or expected to widely fluctuate for the duration of the project. Contractors bid high to
minimize their risk.
(e) Certain commodities have widely varying costs based on the quantity purchased (e.g., paving, fencing,
concrete).
(f) Certain services, such as rock, concrete, asphalt, and soil disposal, vary widely in cost and based on
local market. These services range in cost from free to being a revenue source or being a liability
with a high cost per ton for disposal.
(g) On occasion, elements may be underestimated or overestimated by the agency due to an error with
data or assumptions.
5. It is difficult to quantify costs for minimizing political risks. Agency projects are developed under the
California Environmental Quality Act, which requires public input into projects and the mitigation of
adverse effects. There is a political influence to shaping projects. Mitigation measures always add
costs to a project (tree re-plantings, habitat restoration, longer pipeline routings to minimize traffic
impacts, sound barriers, limited work hours, noise mitigations, etc.). These costs are scrutinized during
project development, and a balance is made between the need to minimize impacts and responsibly spend
public funds. Agencies may have internal guidelines for what constitutes appropriate and not excessive
mitigation measures.

23

References
Allen, D. and D. Lueck (1992). Contract choice in modern agriculture: Cash rent versus
cropshare. Journal of Law and Economics 35 (2), 397–426.
Allen, D. and D. Lueck (1993). Transaction costs and the design of cropshare contracts.
RAND Journal of Economics 24 (1), 78–100.
Arrow, K. J. and G. Debreu (1954). Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy.
Econometrica 22 (3), 265–290.
Battigalli, P. and G. Maggi (2002). Rigidity, discretion, and the costs of writing contracts.
American Economic Review 92 (4), 798–817.
CQ

Voting and Elections Collection
http://library.cqpress.com/elections/.

(2014).

CQ

Press,

Washington,

D.C.

Crocker, K. J. and S. E. Masten (1988). Mitigating contractual hazards: Unilateral options
and contract length. RAND Journal of Economics 19 (3), 327–343.
Crocker, K. J. and S. E. Masten (1991). Pretia ex machina? Prices and process in long-term
contracts. Journal of Law and Economics 34 (1), 69–99.
Crocker, K. J. and K. J. Reynolds (1993). The efficiency of incomplete contracts: An empirical analysis of Air Force engine procurement. RAND Journal of Economics 24 (1),
126–146.
Drahozal, C. R. and K. N. Hylton (2003). The economics of litigation and arbitration.
Journal of Legal Studies 32 (2), 549–584.
Drahozal, C. R. and S. J. Ware (2010). Why do businesses use (or not use) arbitration
clauses? Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution 25 (2), 433–476.
Dye, R. A. (1985). Costly contract contingencies. International Economic Journal 26 (1),
233–250.
Getz, K. A. (1997). Research in corporate political action: Integration and assessment.
Business & Society 36 (1), 32–72.
Goldberg, V. P. (1976). Toward an expanded economic theory of contract. Journal of Economic Issues 10 (1), 45–61.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1988). Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica 56 (4),
755–785.
Joskow, P. L. (1985). Vertical integration and long-term contracts: The case of coal-burning
electric generating plants. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 1 (1), 33–80.
Joskow, P. L. (1987). Contract duration and relationship-specific investments: Empirical
evidence from coal markets. American Economic Review 77 (1), 168–185.
Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1993). A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lafontaine, F. (1992). Agency theory and franchising: Some empirical results. RAND Journal of Economics 23 (2), 263–283.
Lafontaine, F. (1993). Contractual arrangements as signaling devices: Evidence from franchising. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 9 (2), 256–289.
24

Lambert-Mogiliansky, A. and G. Kosenok (2009). Fine-tailored for the cartel-favoritism in
procurement. Review of Industrial Organization 35 (1–2), 95–121.
Leffler, K. B. and R. R. Rucker (1991). Transactions costs and the efficient organization of
production: A study of timber-harvesting contracts. Journal of Political Economy 99 (5),
1060–1087.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2011). When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-Ks. Journal of Finance 66 (1), 35–65.
Masten, S. E. and K. J. Crocker (1985). Efficient adaptation in long-term contracts: Takeor-pay provisions for natural gas. American Economic Review 75 (5), 1083–1093.
Masten, S. E. and E. A. Snyder (1993). United States versus United Shoe Machinery Corporation: On the merits. Journal of Law and Economics 36 (1), 33–70.
Matsumoto, D. A. (2002). Management’s incentives to avoid negative earnings surprises.
The Accounting Review 77 (3), 483–514.
Mitnick, B. M. (1993). Political contestability. In B. M. Mitnick (Ed.), Corporate Political
Agency: The Construction of Competition in Public Affairs, pp. 11–66. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Moszoro, M. and P. T. Spiller (2012). Third-party opportunism and the nature of public
contracts. Working Paper 18636, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mundo, P. A. (1992). Interest Groups: Cases and Characteristics. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Overdahl, J. A. (1991). A researcher’s guide to the contracts of firms filing with the sec.
Journal of Law and Economics 34 (October), 695–701.
Parkhe, A. (1993). Strategic alliance structuring: A game theoretic and transaction cost
examination of interfirm cooperation. The Academy of Management Journal 36 (4), 794–
829.
Schwartz, A. and R. E. Scott (2003). Contract theory and the limits of contract law. Yale
Law Journal 113, 541–619.
Schwartz, A. and R. E. Scott (2010). Contract interpretation redux. Yale Law Journal 119,
926–964.
Schwartz, A. and J. Watson (2004). The law and economics of costly contracting. Journal
of Law, Economics, and Organization 20 (1), 2—31.
Schwartz, A. and J. Watson (2012). Conceptualizing contractual interpretation. Research
Paper 447, Yale Law & Economics.
Shavell, S. (2006). On the writing and the interpretation of contracts. Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 22 (2), 289–314.
Spiller, P. T. (2008). An institutional theory of public contracts: Regulatory implications.
NBER Working Paper 14152, National Bureau of Economic Research.

25

Table 1: This table presents the keywords searched and grouped into contract rigidity categories.
Plurals (e.g., penalties) and variations (e.g., penalized) are also counted.
Arbitration
arbitration, conciliation,
settlement, whereas22

Certification
certification, regulation

Evaluation
obligation,
scrutiny

quality,

Penalties
fine, penalty, sanction

Termination
dissolution, termination

Design
anticipation,
scenario

planning,

Litigation
dispute,
indictment,
jury, litigation

Table 2: This table presents the keywords used for file subject identification and descriptive category
grouping.

Types of contract

Keywords in file’s first 100 lines

Amendment

amend, amended, amendment, and release, and restated, change in,
change of, modification agreement

Commercial contracts

license, purchase, sale, supply

Compensation/Employment

award agreement, bonus plan, compensation, director stock, employee stock, employment, equity incentive, executive employment,
executive officer, executive retirement, incentive, indemnification
agreement, management agreement, management incentive, nonemployee director, of director, of executive, option agreement, option
grant, option plan, restricted stock, retention agreement, retirement
plan, savings plan, separation agreement, service agreement, services
agreement, settlement agreement, severance agreement, stock agreement, stock award, stock incentive, stock option, stock plan, stock
purchase, supplemental executive, term incentive

Consulting

consulting

Finance

credit, lease, loan, pledge, promissory note, revolving

22

See Schwartz and Watson (2012) for an explanation of the appropriateness of “whereas” as an arbitration
keyword.

26

Table 3: This table presents statistics for the dataset at each stage.

Step Treatment

Count

1

Readable filings
Filing companies
Average filings per company
Average filing length (geometric average of “the”, “and”, and “of”)

206,677
14,043
15
285

2

Sample industry diversity: identified different 4-code SIC
Dropped non-readable filings
Dropped files with no CIK or SIC codes identified
Dropped files SIC 6*** (Finance) and SIC 9*** (Administration)

443
3,670
26,282
32,982

Public utilities contracts (SIC 4900–4999)
Quasi-regulated industries contracts (SIC 4000–4499 & 4800–4899)
Total public contracts
Total private contracts

11,657
8,543
20,200
123,543

4

Keyword count overall
Arbitration
Certification
Evaluation
Litigation
Penalties
Termination
Design

5,644,668
396,178
872,843
1,304,934
289,750
773,392
1,940,419
67,152

5

Filings with identified categories (categories may overlap)
Amendment
Commercial contracts
Compensation/Employment
Consulting
Finance

126,913
96,552
54,344
88,238
4,559
50,492

Table 4: This table presents the breakdown of commercial contracts by main contracts and amendments and by public or private filer, where a public filer is a public utility or a quasi-regulated company.

Public

Private

Total

Main contracts
Amendments

230
659

2,129
4,172

2,359
4,831

Total

889

6,301

7,190

27

Table 5: This table presents the summary statistics of the words counted in commercial contracts and
amendments to commercial contracts by contractual clauses.

Variable

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Arbitration
Certification
Evaluation
Litigation
Penalties
Termination
Design

7190
7190
7190
7190
7190
7190
7190

3.5
7.9
11.5
2.7
5.6
12.0
0.5

8.1
14.4
22.0
5.9
12.7
18.3
1.4

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

189
228
496
140
522
439
38

Table 6: This table presents summary statistics of contract length broken down by types of commercial
contract Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”.
Public contracts are public utility and quasi-regulated industry filings, and private contracts are the
remaining filings.

Type of commercial contract

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1.6
2.3
.7

7
7.7
8.3

1.5
1.4
1.4

1.8
1.8
.7

7.6
7.9
8.6

1.6
1.4
1.4

1.6
1.8
.7

7.6
7.9
8.6

License contracts
Length
Length
Length
Length
Length
Length
Length
Length
Length

12
26
611
Sale/procurement

4.7
1.6
5.1
1.2
5.1
1.4
contracts

96
5.3
96
5
1518
4.9
All contracts
108
122
2129

28

5.3
5
5

Table 7: This table presents the public versus private length mean-comparison t-test. Length is
the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and
quasi-regulated are contracts filed by a public utility or a quasi-regulated industry, respectively; private
contracts are the remaining filings.

Filing company

Obs

Mean

Std. Err.

Std. Dev.

Public
Private

230
2129

5.146447
4.969246

.0968425
.0302541

1.468689
1.395955

4.955631
4.909915

5.337263
5.028576

Combined

2359

4.986523

.0289044

1.403875

4.929842

5.043203

.1772009

.097393

-.013784

.3681858

Difference

Difference = mean(Public) – mean(Private)
Ho: diff = 0
Ha: diff < 0
Ha: diff 6= 0
Pr(T < t) = 0.9655
Pr(| T |>| t |) = 0.0690

29

[95% Conf. Interval]

t = 1.8194
Degrees of freedom = 2357
Ha: diff > 0
Pr(T > t) = 0.0345

30

Short contracts off
Observations
Adjusted R2

One-digit SIC

Constant

Assets Total

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

No
2359
0.001

No

4.969∗∗∗
(163.41)

0.0806
(0.62)

(1)
Length
0.286∗∗
(2.07)

No
251
0.045

Yes

3.929∗∗∗
(11.95)

1.121∗∗∗
(3.15)

(2)
Length
1.327∗∗∗
(3.69)

Yes
2109
0.001

No

5.286∗∗∗
(206.21)

0.0181
(0.17)

(3)
Length
0.247∗∗
(2.15)

Yes
224
0.007

Yes

4.945∗∗∗
(14.85)

0.359
(1.02)

(4)
Length
0.589∗
(1.65)

No
2176
0.002

No

4.906∗∗∗
(78.81)

0.0170
(1.45)

0.0247
(0.19)

(5)
Length
0.252∗
(1.73)

Length of Public Contracts

No
244
0.044

Yes

3.867∗∗∗
(8.53)

0.00797
(0.20)

1.119∗∗∗
(3.08)

(6)
Length
1.360∗∗∗
(3.76)

Yes
1951
0.005

No

5.185∗∗∗
(99.50)

0.0242∗∗
(2.46)

-0.0344
(-0.31)

(7)
Length
0.213∗
(1.76)

Yes
217
0.026

Yes

4.458∗∗∗
(10.90)

0.0679∗∗
(1.99)

0.431
(1.23)

(8)
Length
0.606∗
(1.72)

Table 8: This table presents results from cross-section OLS regressions of main contract length on contract attributes: public utilities and quasiregulated versus private industries. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and
quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Assets
total, capital expenditure, and sales equal the natural logarithm of these values in US$. Controls include: assets total, capital expenditure, sales,
industry (one-digit SIC) fixed effects, and excluding short filings (without bottom 10% in length). Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database.
Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

31

Observations
Adjusted R2

Constant

Assets Total

Length

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

-1.167∗∗∗
(-6.06)
1008
0.221

-0.0180
(-1.47)

-0.535∗∗∗
(-16.64)

-0.137
(-1.03)

(1)
Arbitration
0.368∗∗
(2.55)

-2.917∗∗∗
(-27.72)
1552
0.048

-0.0201∗∗∗
(-2.74)

-0.150∗∗∗
(-8.17)

0.0123
(0.14)

(2)
Certification
0.175∗∗
(1.98)

-3.045∗∗∗
(-29.99)
1661
0.020

-0.0268∗∗∗
(-3.67)

-0.0667∗∗∗
(-3.76)

0.0494
(0.60)

(3)
Evaluation
0.353∗∗∗
(3.91)

-1.760∗∗∗
(-11.89)
1044
0.262

-0.0357∗∗∗
(-3.64)

-0.456∗∗∗
(-17.94)

-0.0223
(-0.21)

(4)
Litigation
0.524∗∗∗
(4.34)

Rigidity Clauses in Public Contracts

-2.399∗∗∗
(-25.83)
1640
0.233

0.0364∗∗∗
(5.16)

-0.337∗∗∗
(-21.58)

0.0574
(0.74)

(5)
Penalties
0.234∗∗∗
(2.76)

-1.939∗∗∗
(-17.36)
1664
0.112

0.0307∗∗∗
(3.69)

-0.270∗∗∗
(-14.18)

-0.0896
(-0.95)

(6)
Termination
-0.133
(-1.25)

-1.050∗∗∗
(-6.34)
487
0.632

0.0102
(0.98)

-0.754∗∗∗
(-28.89)

0.144
(1.19)

(7)
Design
0.0810
(0.76)

Table 9: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses on contract attributes: public versus
private and contract length. The frequency of each rigidity clause is computed as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the count of rigidity
words divided by the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of
the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility
or a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in
parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

32

Yes
Yes
Yes
1095
0.244

State fixed effects

Year fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

-2.305∗∗
(-1.97)

Constant

Type of contract

-0.544∗∗∗
(-16.64)

-0.177
(-1.30)

Length

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Arbitration
0.240+
(1.54)

Yes
1666
0.051

Yes

Yes
1797
0.032

Yes

Yes

-1.415∗
(-1.67)

-4.536∗∗∗
(-5.47)
Yes

-0.0686∗∗∗
(-3.91)

0.0392
(0.46)

(3)
Evaluation
0.212∗∗
(2.28)

-0.141∗∗∗
(-7.63)

-0.0369
(-0.41)

(2)
Certification
-0.0233
(-0.25)

Yes
1140
0.309

Yes

Yes

-2.582∗∗∗
(-2.90)

-0.473∗∗∗
(-19.10)

-0.0763
(-0.71)

(4)
Litigation
0.391∗∗∗
(3.07)

Rigidity Clauses in Public Contracts

Yes
1769
0.237

Yes

Yes

-1.916∗∗
(-2.37)

Yes
1811
0.139

Yes

Yes
537
0.630

Yes

Yes

-0.426
(-0.55)

-1.439+
(-1.50)
Yes

-0.764∗∗∗
(-28.39)

0.302∗∗
(2.30)

(7)
Design
0.191+
(1.50)

-0.264∗∗∗
(-14.29)

0.0971
(1.02)

0.114+
(1.45)
-0.328∗∗∗
(-21.27)

(6)
Termination
0.0109
(0.10)

(5)
Penalties
0.349∗∗∗
(3.89)

Table 10: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses on contract attributes: public versus
private and contract length. The frequency of each rigidity clause is computed as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the count of rigidity
words divided by the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the
sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or
a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Controls include: type of contract, state, and year fixed effects. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR
database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; + denotes significance at 15%, ∗ significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance
at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

33

Yes
Yes
Yes
1083
0.195

State fixed effects

Year fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

-2.628∗∗
(-2.23)

Constant

Short contracts off

-0.524∗∗∗
(-15.29)

-0.194
(-1.39)

Length

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Arbitration
0.189
(1.21)

Yes
1643
0.021

Yes

Yes
1771
-0.004

Yes

Yes

-1.922∗∗
(-2.30)

-4.706∗∗∗
(-5.80)
Yes

-0.0187
(-1.03)

0.0529
(0.63)

(3)
Evaluation
0.177∗
(1.93)

-0.0907∗∗∗
(-4.78)

-0.00410
(-0.05)

(2)
Certification
-0.0333
(-0.36)

Yes
1128
0.251

Yes

Yes

-2.972∗∗∗
(-3.31)

-0.451∗∗∗
(-17.33)

-0.0728
(-0.67)

(4)
Litigation
0.337∗∗∗
(2.63)

Rigidity Clauses in Public Contracts

Yes
1725
0.159

Yes

Yes

-2.202∗∗∗
(-2.76)

-0.273∗∗∗
(-16.30)

0.122
(1.54)

(5)
Penalties
0.347∗∗∗
(3.90)

Yes
1755
0.096

Yes

Yes

-1.777∗
(-1.82)

-0.237∗∗∗
(-11.32)

0.0977
(0.98)

(6)
Termination
-0.0287
(-0.26)

Yes
534
0.611

Yes

Yes

-0.604
(-0.78)

-0.745∗∗∗
(-26.94)

0.313∗∗
(2.40)

(7)
Design
0.142
(1.11)

Table 11: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses on contract attributes: public versus
private and contract length. The frequency of each rigidity clause is computed as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the count of rigidity
words divided by the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the
sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or a
quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Controls include state and year fixed effects. We excluded short filings (bottom 10% in length). Data are
from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance
at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

34

No

Year fixed effects
No
1901
0.031

No

State fixed effects

Short contracts off
Observations
Adjusted R2

No

-3.576∗∗∗
(-45.43)

Constant

Type of contract

0.111∗∗∗
(7.81)

-0.0778
(-1.12)

Length

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Flexibility
0.0468
(0.64)

No
1901
0.034

No

No

No
1901
0.067

No

Yes

Yes

-3.592∗∗∗
(-5.45)

-3.514∗∗∗
(-42.64)
Yes

0.114∗∗∗
(7.94)

-0.105
(-1.47)

(3)
Flexibility
0.0770
(0.99)

0.110∗∗∗
(7.78)

-0.0721
(-1.04)

(2)
Flexibility
0.0627
(0.85)

No
1901
0.074

Yes

Yes

Yes

-2.986∗∗∗
(-4.07)

0.114∗∗∗
(7.94)

-0.102
(-1.43)

(4)
Flexibility
0.0575
(0.74)

Yes
1865
0.068

No

No

No

-3.941∗∗∗
(-47.39)

0.174∗∗∗
(11.68)

-0.0671
(-1.00)

(5)
Flexibility
0.0240
(0.34)

Flexibility Clauses in Public Contracts

Yes
1865
0.071

No

No

Yes

-3.876∗∗∗
(-44.88)

0.173∗∗∗
(11.68)

-0.0612
(-0.91)

(6)
Flexibility
0.0409
(0.57)

Yes
1865
0.093

No

Yes

Yes

-3.861∗∗∗
(-6.01)

0.168∗∗∗
(11.16)

-0.0913
(-1.30)

(7)
Flexibility
0.0556
(0.73)

Yes
1865
0.101

Yes

Yes

Yes

-3.298∗∗∗
(-4.62)

0.170∗∗∗
(11.24)

-0.0897
(-1.28)

(8)
Flexibility
0.0320
(0.42)

Table 12: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of flexibility clauses on contract attributes: public versus
private and contract length. The frequency of each flexibility clause is computed as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the count of rigidity
words divided by the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the
sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Utilities and quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or a
quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Controls include state and year fixed effects. We excluded short filings (bottom 10% in length). Data are
from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance
at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

35

No
7190
0.004

State fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2
Pseudo R2

0.706∗∗∗
(34.64)

Constant
No

-0.00897∗∗
(-2.26)

Length

Type of contract

0.0605∗∗∗
(2.61)

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Amendments
0.0994∗∗∗
(4.35)

-0.0111∗∗∗
(-2.79)
0.826∗∗∗
(3.95)

-0.00855∗∗
(-2.16)
0.679∗∗∗
(29.78)

No
7190
0.004

Yes
7190
0.020

Yes

0.0525∗∗
(2.20)

0.0596∗∗
(2.58)

Yes

(3)
Amendments
0.0874∗∗∗
(3.58)

(2)
Amendments
0.0930∗∗∗
(4.05)

No
7190
0.004

0.003

Yes

-0.00857∗∗
(-2.16)

0.0616∗∗
(2.56)

(5)
Amendments
0.101∗∗∗
(4.04)

No
7190

No

-0.00900∗∗
(-2.27)

0.0624∗∗∗
(2.59)

(4)
Amendments
0.107∗∗∗
(4.31)

Likelihood of Amendments of Public Contracts compared with Private Contracts

0.022

Yes
7183

Yes

-0.0111∗∗∗
(-2.81)

0.0538∗∗
(2.18)

(6)
Amendments
0.0942∗∗∗
(3.59)

Table 13: This table presents results OLS (models 1–3) and logit (models 4–6) cross-section regressions of the likelihood of an amendment for
public utilities, quasi-regulated industries, and private companies. The dependent variable equals one when a document is an amendment. The
dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one when the filing is an amendment to a commercial contract. Utilities and quasi-regulated
are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Length is the natural
logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Controls include: length and type of contract and state fixed effects.
Marginal effects are reported for logit regressions (models 4–6). Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013.
Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

36
No
No
3799
0.002

State fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.656∗∗∗
(87.77)

0.0360
(1.20)

Type of contract

Constant

Sales

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Avg. Amends
0.0875∗∗∗
(2.63)

Yes
3799
0.008

No

0.833∗∗∗
(3.33)

0.0358
(1.16)

(2)
Avg. Amends
0.0895∗∗∗
(2.64)

No
3412
0.010

No

0.600∗∗∗
(41.33)

0.0142∗∗∗
(5.39)

0.0147
(0.48)

(3)
Avg. Amends
0.0576∗
(1.70)

Yes
3412
0.013

No

0.811∗∗∗
(3.28)

0.0133∗∗∗
(4.85)

0.0156
(0.49)

(4)
Avg. Amends
0.0620∗
(1.79)

No
3799
0.004

Yes

0.618∗∗∗
(46.46)

0.0349
(1.17)

(5)
Avg. Amends
0.0809∗∗
(2.43)

Yes
3799
0.010

Yes

0.784∗∗∗
(3.13)

0.0355
(1.16)

(6)
Avg. Amends
0.0846∗∗
(2.49)

No
3412
0.011

Yes

0.577∗∗∗
(32.79)

0.0134∗∗∗
(5.04)

0.0146
(0.47)

(7)
Avg. Amends
0.0548
(1.62)

Average Number of Amendments to Public Contracts Compared with Private Contracts

Yes
3412
0.014

Yes

0.778∗∗∗
(3.14)

0.0127∗∗∗
(4.60)

0.0158
(0.50)

(8)
Avg. Amends
0.0599∗
(1.73)

Table 14: This table presents results from OLS regressions of the average number of amendments in public utilities, quasi-regulated industries,
and private companies. The dependent variable is the ratio of total number of amendments to total number of filings per company. Utilities and
quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Sales
the natural logarithm of sales in US$. Controls include: sales and type of contract (license or sale/procurement) and state fixed effects. Data are
from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance
at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

37

Yes
Yes
Yes
1994
0.257

State fixed effects

Year fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

-1.890∗∗∗
(-2.98)

Constant

Type of contract

-0.599∗∗∗
(-24.61)

-0.110
(-1.13)

Length

Quasi-regulated

Utilities

(1)
Arbitration
0.211∗
(1.86)

Yes
3137
0.018

Yes

Yes

-3.048∗∗∗
(-5.63)

-0.0611∗∗∗
(-4.54)

-0.154∗∗∗
(-2.75)

(2)
Certification
0.0656
(1.13)

Yes
3556
0.042

Yes

Yes

-2.452∗∗∗
(-4.56)

-0.0618∗∗∗
(-5.26)

0.0266
(0.50)

(3)
Evaluation
0.166∗∗∗
(2.96)

Yes
2119
0.200

Yes

Yes

-0.642
(-0.87)

-0.410∗∗∗
(-21.72)

-0.125∗
(-1.73)

(4)
Litigation
0.0827
(1.01)

Yes
3800
0.285

Yes

Yes

-1.752∗∗∗
(-3.88)

-0.350∗∗∗
(-36.94)

0.0963∗∗
(2.04)

(5)
Penalties
0.128∗∗∗
(2.65)

Yes
3527
0.105

Yes

Yes

-1.755∗∗∗
(-2.59)

-0.233∗∗∗
(-17.81)

-0.0256
(-0.42)

(6)
Termination
0.110∗
(1.71)

Rigidity Clauses in Public Contract Amendments Compared with Private Contracts

Yes
1075
0.701

Yes

Yes

-0.350
(-0.42)

-0.805∗∗∗
(-47.79)

0.0598
(0.74)

(7)
Design
-0.0593
(-0.81)

Table 15: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses in public contract amendments compared
with private contract amendments. Utilities and quasi-regulated are dummy variables equal to one when the filing company is a public utility or
a quasi-regulated industry, respectively. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. Controls
include: length and and type of contract (license or sale/procurement), state, and year fixed effects. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database.
Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

38

Yes
No
842
0.004

Type of contract

State fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

4.989∗∗∗
(30.73)

Yes
842
0.073

Yes

4.864∗∗∗
(7.82)

No
842
0.005

Yes

4.894∗∗∗
(32.32)

0.282∗∗
(2.14)

Yes
842
0.074

Yes

4.552∗∗∗
(7.25)

0.341∗∗
(2.50)

No
842
0.003

Yes

4.994∗∗∗
(19.22)

0.287∗∗
(2.17)

-0.0239
(-0.18)

Constant

0.326∗∗
(2.39)

0.0353
(0.25)

0.282∗∗
(2.13)

-0.0216
(-0.16)

3rd year in office

0.0346
(0.24)

-0.0232
(-0.17)

2nd year in office

-0.00179
(-0.01)

-0.0197
(-0.14)

-0.0211
(-0.15)

(5)
Length

-0.0225
(-0.16)

0.259∗∗
(2.20)

(4)
Length

1st year in office

0.140
(1.40)

(3)
Length

-0.134
(-0.22)
-0.0110
(-0.08)

(2)
Length
-0.0111∗∗
(-2.00)

Political opposition strength

Small winning margin

Winning margin

(1)
Length
-0.00263
(-0.63)

Political Contestability Effects on Public Contract Length

Yes
842
0.072

Yes

4.157∗∗∗
(5.85)

0.315∗∗
(2.31)

0.0131
(0.09)

-0.0173
(-0.12)

1.719∗
(1.76)

(6)
Length

Table 16: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of public contract length on political contestability variables. Winning
margin is the difference between the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points; small winning margin is a variable equal to
one when the winning margin is narrow (below 10%); and political opposition strength is measured as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
of residual (non-winning) parties’ vote share in general elections weighted by the overall non-winning vote share in general elections. Controls
include: governor’s tenure in office, type of contract (license or sale/procurement), and state fixed effects. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR
database and the CQ Voting and Elections Collection. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at
10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

39

Yes
342
0.178

-1.491∗∗∗
(-4.24)

Constant

Type of contract
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.458∗∗∗
(-8.34)

Length

Winning margin

(1)
Arbitration
-0.00938∗
(-1.90)

Yes
576
0.034

Yes
626
0.012

-3.043∗∗∗
(-16.68)

-0.0456
(-1.59)

-0.0814∗∗∗
(-3.02)
-3.646∗∗∗
(-20.78)

(3)
Evaluation
-0.00121
(-0.43)

(2)
Certification
0.00224
(0.86)

Yes
380
0.135

-2.597∗∗∗
(-9.56)

-0.311∗∗∗
(-7.26)

(4)
Litigation
-0.0101∗∗∗
(-2.94)

Yes
678
0.197

-2.442∗∗∗
(-17.73)

-0.276∗∗∗
(-12.92)

(5)
Penalties
0.00199
(0.87)

Winning Margin Effect on Public Contract Rigidity Clauses

Yes
629
0.112

-1.841∗∗∗
(-9.90)

-0.251∗∗∗
(-8.65)

(6)
Termination
0.00196
(0.64)

Yes
243
0.666

-0.791∗∗∗
(-3.01)

-0.781∗∗∗
(-21.23)

(7)
Design
0.00184
(0.55)

Table 17: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses in public contracts on winning margins.
Winning margin is the difference between the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points. Length is the natural logarithm
of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. We control for type of contract (license or sale/procurement). Data are from
the SEC’s EDGAR database and the CQ Voting and Elections Collection. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗
denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

40

Yes
342
0.189

-1.734∗∗∗
(-5.27)

Constant

Type of contract
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.463∗∗∗
(-8.50)

Length

Small winning margin

(1)
Arbitration
0.316∗∗∗
(2.83)

Yes
576
0.035

-3.579∗∗∗
(-21.13)

-0.0824∗∗∗
(-3.06)

(2)
Certification
-0.0691
(-1.11)

Yes
626
0.015

-3.090∗∗∗
(-17.86)

-0.0473∗
(-1.66)

(3)
Evaluation
0.0921
(1.36)

Yes
380
0.133

-2.867∗∗∗
(-10.85)

-0.307∗∗∗
(-7.17)

(4)
Litigation
0.234∗∗∗
(2.77)

Yes
678
0.197

-2.420∗∗∗
(-18.34)

-0.278∗∗∗
(-13.02)

(5)
Penalties
0.0512
(0.94)

Yes
629
0.113

-1.820∗∗∗
(-10.32)

-0.255∗∗∗
(-8.79)

(6)
Termination
0.0757
(1.01)

Winning Margin Dummies Effect on Public Contract Rigidity Clauses

Yes
243
0.667

-0.738∗∗∗
(-3.08)

-0.779∗∗∗
(-21.47)

(7)
Design
-0.0946
(-1.16)

Table 18: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses in public contracts on winning margin
dummies. Winning margin is the difference between the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points. Length is the natural
logarithm of the geometric average of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. We control for type of contract. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR
database and the CQ Voting and Elections Collection. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at
10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

41

Yes
193
0.203

-1.777∗∗∗
(-4.10)

Constant

Type of contract
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.477∗∗∗
(-6.81)

Length

Small winning margin

(1)
Arbitration
0.548∗∗∗
(3.49)

Yes
149
0.197

-1.561∗∗∗
(-3.05)

Constant

Type of contract
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.465∗∗∗
(-5.39)

Length

Small winning margin

(1)
Arbitration
0.0849
(0.54)

Yes
251
0.013

Yes
155
0.099

-3.170∗∗∗
(-8.03)

-0.246∗∗∗
(-3.80)

(4)
Litigation
0.110
(0.90)

Yes
375
0.018

-3.183∗∗∗
(-14.90)

-3.825∗∗∗
(-17.13)
Yes
329
0.029

-0.0439
(-1.25)

(3)
Evaluation
0.201∗∗
(2.19)

-0.0310
(-0.89)

(2)
Certification
-0.208∗∗
(-2.42)

Yes
225
0.165

-2.597∗∗∗
(-7.25)

-0.358∗∗∗
(-6.31)

(4)
Litigation
0.378∗∗∗
(3.22)

Panel B: Republican States

Yes
247
0.061

-2.818∗∗∗
(-9.43)

-0.0704
(-1.44)

-0.141∗∗∗
(-3.31)
-3.326∗∗∗
(-12.50)

(3)
Evaluation
-0.0907
(-0.86)

(2)
Certification
0.0606
(0.65)

Panel A: Democratic States

Yes
387
0.200

-2.442∗∗∗
(-14.67)

-0.268∗∗∗
(-9.95)

(5)
Penalties
0.0593
(0.81)

Yes
291
0.194

-2.365∗∗∗
(-10.90)

-0.296∗∗∗
(-8.44)

(5)
Penalties
0.0742
(0.88)

Yes
361
0.083

-2.136∗∗∗
(-9.14)

-0.226∗∗∗
(-5.95)

(6)
Termination
0.118
(1.10)

Yes
268
0.164

-1.371∗∗∗
(-5.03)

-0.308∗∗∗
(-6.81)

(6)
Termination
0.0220
(0.20)

Yes
154
0.714

-0.879∗∗∗
(-3.36)

-0.772∗∗∗
(-18.78)

(7)
Design
-0.0825
(-0.90)

Yes
89
0.608

-0.520
(-1.09)

-0.781∗∗∗
(-11.48)

(7)
Design
-0.184
(-1.15)

Winning Margin Dummies Effect on Public Contract Rigidity Clauses by Political Party

Table 19: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of frequency of rigidity clauses in public contracts on winning margin
dummies by political party. Winning margin is the difference between the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points when the
Democratic Party (panel A) or the Republican Party (panel B) won the election race. Length is the natural logarithm of the geometric average
of the sum of “the”, “and”, and “of”. We control for type of contract. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database and the CQ Voting and
Elections Collection. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and
∗∗∗
significance at 1%.

42
0.00814
(0.85)

Yes
No
360
0.002

State fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

0.602∗∗∗
(8.61)

Type of contract

Constant

Yes
360
-0.006

Yes

0.672∗∗∗
(3.15)

No
360
0.006

Yes

0.647∗∗∗
(9.92)

0.0121
(1.43)

Yes
360
-0.003

Yes

0.723∗∗∗
(3.37)

0.00864
(0.90)

No
360
0.001

Yes

0.565∗∗∗
(4.29)

0.0119
(1.40)

0.0113
(1.33)

Sales

-0.0595
(-1.07)
0.154
(0.51)

-0.0638
(-1.41)

Avg. political opposition strength

Avg. winning margin dummy

Political Contestabilty Effects on Average Amendments in Public Contracts
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Avg. Amends Avg. Amends Avg. Amends Avg. Amends Avg. Amends
Avg. winning margin
0.00150
0.000790
(0.72)
(0.28)

Yes
360
-0.000

Yes

0.429
(1.54)

0.00826
(0.87)

0.701
(1.36)

(6)
Avg. Amends

Table 20: This table presents results from OLS regressions of total amendments to total documents per public company on political contestability
variables. Average amendments is the ratio of the total number of amendments to total number of filings per public company. Average winning
margin is the difference between the average of the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points; average small winning margin
is a the average of the dummy variable equal to one when the winning margin is narrow (below 10%); and average political opposition strength
is measured as the average of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of residual (non-winning) parties’ vote share in general elections weighted
by the overall non-winning vote share in general elections. Controls include: the natural logarithm of sales in US$ and type of contract (license
or sale/procurement) and state fixed effects. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR database. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in
parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at 10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

43

Yes
No
5979
0.003

Type of contract

State fixed effects
Observations
Adjusted R2

5.025∗∗∗
(93.47)

Yes
5979
0.012

Yes

5.451∗∗∗
(8.75)

No
5979
0.003

Yes

5.066∗∗∗
(102.54)

-0.0668
(-1.35)

Yes
5979
0.011

Yes

5.547∗∗∗
(8.90)

-0.0638
(-1.28)

No
5979
0.003

Yes

5.038∗∗∗
(44.57)

-0.0659
(-1.33)

0.0835
(1.62)

Constant

-0.0633
(-1.27)

0.0802
(1.55)

-0.0660
(-1.33)

0.0842
(1.64)

3rd year in office

0.0848
(1.64)

0.0849∗
(1.65)

2nd year in office

-0.0350
(-0.66)

-0.0298
(-0.57)

-0.0276
(-0.52)

(5)
Length

-0.0270
(-0.51)

-0.0604
(-1.42)

(4)
Length

1st year in office

-0.0577
(-1.58)

(3)
Length

0.0160
(0.06)
-0.0284
(-0.53)

(2)
Length
0.00450∗∗
(2.06)

Political opposition strength

Small winning margin

Winning margin

(1)
Length
0.00131
(0.75)

Political Contestability Effects on Private Contract Length

Yes
5979
0.011

Yes

5.537∗∗∗
(8.58)

-0.0637
(-1.28)

0.0794
(1.54)

-0.0374
(-0.71)

-0.0829
(-0.21)

(6)
Length

Table 21: This table presents results from OLS cross-section regressions of private contract length on political contestability variables. Winning
margin is the difference between the winner’s and the runner-up’s share vote in percentage points; small winning margin is a variable equal to
one when the winning margin is narrow (below 10%); and political opposition strength is measured as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
of residual (non-winning) parties’ vote share in general elections weighted by the overall non-winning vote share in general elections. Controls
include: governor’s tenure in office, type of contract (license or sale/procurement), and state fixed effects. Data are from the SEC’s EDGAR
database and the CQ Voting and Elections Collection. Sample period is 1998–2013. Standard errors are in parentheses; ∗ denotes significance at
10%, ∗∗ significance at 5%, and ∗∗∗ significance at 1%.

