NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REGULATING INTERNALITIES
Hunt Allcott
Cass R. Sunstein
Working Paper 21187
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21187

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We thank Joe Aldy, Michael Greenstone, Jim Sallee, and Dmitry Taubinsky for helpful feedback.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Hunt Allcott and Cass R. Sunstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Regulating Internalities
Hunt Allcott and Cass R. Sunstein
NBER Working Paper No. 21187
May 2015
JEL No. D03,D04,D10,D18,D61,D83,H21,K0,K20,L51,L94,Q48
ABSTRACT
This paper offers a framework for regulating internalities. Using a simple economic model, we provide
four principles for designing and evaluating behaviorally-motivated policy. We then outline rules for
determining which contexts reliably reflect true preferences and discuss empirical strategies for measuring
internalities. As a case study, we focus on energy efficiency policy, including Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards and appliance and lighting energy efficiency standards.

Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu
Cass R. Sunstein
Areeda Hall 225
Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138
csunstei@law.harvard.edu

Introduction
It is well-established that governments can increase welfare by providing public goods and
addressing market failures such as externalities, asymmetric information, and market power. In practice,
governments also regulate to address “internalities” – that is, costs we impose on ourselves by taking
actions that are not in our own best interest. Such “paternalistic” regulation brings up a series of important
questions. In what settings should the government intervene at all? If intervening, what policy instrument
should be used - a tax, a ban, a “nudge,” or some other policy? How stringent should the policy be? And
crucially, how can we do cost-benefit analysis using individuals’ revealed preferences, instead of
imposing the regulator’s preferences on individuals?
This paper describes an approach to regulating internalities that aims to set and evaluate
regulations on the basis of individuals’ own preferences. The key is to focus regulation on situations when
an individual’s choices are inconsistent across contexts, but principled analysis can be used to determine
which context more reliably reflects “true preferences.” As examples, Kling et al. (2012) show that
people are more likely to choose a lower-cost health insurance plan when given simplified comparison
information; Carroll et al. (2009) show that more people enroll in 401k savings plans when making active
choices instead of passive “opt-in” choices; and Hossein and Morgan (2006) show that consumers are less
likely to buy a product when more of the cost is included in the base price instead of “shrouded” as part of
shipping and handling charges. In all three examples, people’s choices differ between two contexts
(informed vs. uninformed, active vs. passive choice, clearly-presented vs. shrouded costs), and the first of
the two contexts more plausibly reflects true preferences.
Using a simple economic model, we provide four principles for designing and evaluating
behaviorally-motivated policy. We then provide rules for determining which contexts reliably reflect true
preferences and discuss strategies for measuring internalities. Throughout the paper, we use energy
efficiency policy as a case study. See Allcott and Sunstein (2015) for a longer version with additional
considerations and more thorough citations to the related literature.

Background: The Behavioral Motivation for Energy Efficiency Policy
Energy efficiency policies such as Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards and
appliance energy efficiency standards are important case studies of behaviorally-motivated policy because
they often involve large costs and because federal agencies have pointed to what they see as substantial
net benefits from internality reduction.
Consider the NHTSA (2012) RIA for the light duty CAFE standards for 2011-2025. Projected
social benefits far outweigh projected social costs ($629 billion vs. $153 billion). The net externality
reductions are valued at $61 billion, while the net private benefits (i.e. net social benefits excluding

externalities) are $475 billion. 1 Of course, positive net private benefits could arise only in the presence of
some non-externality distortion.2 Drawing directly on behavioral research, the RIA points to “phenomena
observed in the field of behavioral economics, including loss aversion, inadequate consumer attention to
long-term savings, or a lack of salience of relevant benefits (such as fuel savings, or time savings
associated with refueling) to consumers at the time they make purchasing decisions.”
The 2009 technical support document for appliance and lighting energy efficiency standards
promulgated under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) similarly finds large net
private cost savings: $27 to $64 billion in net savings over 30 years (DOE 2009). As with CAFE
standards, net private savings are much more important than externalities: net private savings outweigh
the value of carbon externality reductions by 34 to 194 percent.

A Model of Optimal Policy under Inconsistent Choice
We present a simplified version of the “reduced form model of behavioral public finance” from
Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012) and Allcott and Taubinsky (2015). Individuals decide
whether or not to take an action, such as whether to open a retirement account, quit smoking, get
preventive healthcare, or buy a higher fuel economy car. The action has equilibrium price p, and the
perfectly-competitive supply curve is S(p).
Consumers incur true utility v when taking the action. In the standard economic model,
consumers take the action if v>p. The “behavioral” model generalizes the standard model by allowing
consumers to take the action if d>p, where d=v-b is “decision utility” and b is some bias which could be
zero, positive, or negative. In the language of Kahneman et al. (1997), v represents “experienced utility”
and d represents “decision utility.”
The bias parameter b could reflect different specific inconsistencies in different contexts. Under
present bias, individuals might decide today to quit smoking tomorrow, but when tomorrow arrives they
might not quit smoking. Under inattention, individuals might buy an energy efficient lightbulb if energy
costs and prices are presented together, but they might ignore energy costs and buy the cheaper energy
inefficient bulb if energy costs are not salient.

1

These figures are from Table 13, for NHTSA’s “preferred alternative,” assuming a three percent discount rate and
using the 2010 baseline fleet.
2
It is sometimes argued that the fact that gross private benefits (without netting out increases in vehicle costs) are
much larger than externality benefits is evidence that the CAFE RIA assumes internalities. This is not correct. Even
assuming zero internalities, any CAFE cost-benefit analysis will find that private benefits are a large share of gross
benefits, because the policy primarily saves gasoline, and private costs are a large share of gasoline’s assessed social
costs. What is true is that some non-externality market failure is required for net private benefits to be positive.

Figure 1 illustrates the model. DM(p) is market demand – it reflects the heterogeneity in decision
utility d across consumers. Imagine that all consumers have homogenous bias b1>0 against the action, so

Figure 1: Graphical Model of Internalities

the demand curve if consumers were
unbiased would be DU(p), and it is DU(p)

D2

that reflects experienced utility. Bias b1 is

DU

difference between DM and DU. The

DM

quantified in dollars as the vertical

in

g
e

$

market equilibrium is at point a, whereas

h

a

f

l

efficient

equilibrium,

all

consumers to the left of points f and k
would take the action.
While consumer bias is not a
traditional market failure, the source of

k

S

m

the

inefficiency is clear: consumers between

n

points a and k on the market demand
curve don’t take the action even though
their true utility exceeds the cost. There

0 Share of consumers taking the action 1

is thus a distortion with welfare loss
equal to triangle aef. The role of

government in this model is also clear: if the policymaker subsidizes the action by amount s*=b1, the
equilibrium moves from point a to point k, and the social optimum is achieved. This government
intervention has eliminated the distortion, increasing welfare by amount aef. Notice here the direct
analogy between internalities and externalities: if we reinterpret b1 as an externality, this model simply
restates the standard Pigouvian model of externality taxation. It is thus useful to think of internalities as
“externalities that individuals impose on themselves.”

Principles of Behaviorally-Informed Regulation
Here we discuss four principles that follow from our simple model and use them to comment on
major energy efficiency policies.
Principle 1: Taxes and subsidies are more allocatively efficient than mandates or bans
In our model, imagine that the policymaker has two instruments available: a subsidy of amount s
and a mandate that all consumers take the action. Per above, the optimal subsidy generates welfare gain
aef. Similarly, the mandate also increases welfare for consumers between a and k on the market demand
curve. However, for consumers to the right of k (those with true utility v<p), the mandate decreases

welfare by forcing them to take an action that they value at less than cost. Thus, the net welfare effects of
a ban are aef minus fmn. Except for the special case where all consumers have v>p and an infinite
subsidy is thus optimal, a mandate is thus strictly worse than the optimal subsidy. In this drawing, a
mandate is also worse than no policy at all, because aef is smaller than fmn.
A preference for price instruments instead of mandates or bans has direct implications for energy
efficiency policy. Federal minimum standards ban energy inefficient appliance models. A different
approach that taxed energy inefficient appliances at the level of the average marginal distortion (including
internalities, uninternalized externalities, and any other market failures) would be more allocatively
efficient. Intuitively, this is because there are some people who use air conditioners infrequently or face
low electricity prices and thus would optimally own an energy inefficient air conditioner that is currently
prohibited. Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) quantify this point in the lightbulb market. For the consumers in
their randomized experiments, a moderate tax on energy inefficient lightbulbs might increase welfare by
reducing internalities, but some consumers still strongly prefer traditional incandescent lightbulbs even
when given clear information about their energy costs, and banning them from buying incandescents
reduces welfare.
Principle 2: Target the distortion
With heterogeneous bias, the optimal subsidy level is the average marginal bias – i.e. the average
bias of consumers that are on the margin at the subsidized price. This is analogous to Diamond’s (1973)
result that the optimal externality tax equals the average marginal externality. Under heterogeneity, the
uniform subsidy no longer delivers the best possible outcome, because even the “optimal” uniform
subsidy is a compromise that is too weak for relatively biased agents and too strong for unbiased agents.
This motivates nudges as a policy instrument. If the bias derives from imperfect information or
inattention, providing salient information can help misinformed and inattentive consumers without
affecting the already informed and attentive types. If the bias derives from present bias, offering
commitment contracts can similarly help biased consumers make the privately-optimal decision without
distorting choices by time consistent types. In this model, the benefit of nudges is thus not the (important)
philosophical idea that they interfere less with choice. Instead, this model highlights that nudges can be
preferred from an efficiency perspective to the extent that they target unbiased consumers.
Allcott, Knittel, and Taubinsky (2015) argue that many energy efficiency subsidies could be
poorly targeted because well-informed “environmentalist” types are more likely to be aware of subsidy
availability and also more likely to be marginal when subsidizing niche goods such as hybrid cars and
energy efficient lightbulbs. On the other hand, direct mail programs such as home energy reports are often
selectively targeted to heavier users who might be unaware of their heavy usage and who might benefit
more from information.

While nudges are by definition better targeted than uniform subsidies and standards, using nudges
alone is not optimal unless the nudge removes all systematic bias. For example, while energy use
information labels such as appliance “yellow tags” and fuel economy labels are the natural first step to
addressing imperfect information and inattention, many consumers do not see and internalize this
information: 40 percent of Americans report that they “did not think about fuel costs at all” during their
most recent auto purchase (Allcott 2011). Thus, the fact that information is available does not mean that
the policymaker should not consider CAFE standards or other policies to address imperfect information or
other distortions.
Principle 3: Minimize losses from regulators’ imperfect information
Environmental economists often argue for flexible policies such as carbon prices instead of
command-and-control regulations because regulators typically lack the information to impose
economically efficient firm-specific mandates. A similar logic applies to behaviorally-motivated
regulation: we should prefer policies that exploit what regulators know and minimize the losses from
what they do not know.
The engineering approach to determining the optimal CAFE standard is highly informationally
demanding: the 2012-2016 light-duty standards required 2142 pages of regulatory impact statements,
technical support documents, and responses to comments, much of which was devoted to modeling
automakers’ technology adoption decisions. Even from the most competent and well-motivated officials,
there is inevitably a risk of error here, although we do not see a better way to evaluate the regulation in its
current form.
Principle 4: Adopt the policy that maximizes net benefits
In our model, any subsidy that is not correctly calibrated to equal the average marginal bias
reduces welfare relative to the optimally-calibrated subsidy. Analogously, there is a range of possible
levels of stringency for energy efficiency requirements, and regulators should adopt the level with the
highest net benefits (including internalities). This principle emphasizes the importance of measuring
internalities, which is the issue we take up below.

Measuring the Average Marginal Bias
Principled refinements of the welfare-relevant domain
Welfare analysis in the standard model assumes that the market demand curve (DM in our model)
reflects individuals’ true utility (v). The behavioral model relaxes this assumption. The challenge is to
determine in a principled way which choices reflect true preferences and which reflect mistakes. Drawing
on the recent economics literature, we propose four principles for applied work:

1. Use well-informed choices.
2. Use considered choices. Here, “considered” means choices where the individual evaluates all
relevant facets of a product or activity.
3. Use active choices. Such choices reflect the agent’s own values and tastes, whereas passive
choices (such as failing to opt in or opt out of a default setting) may not.
4. If individuals are present-biased, use long-run instead of present-biased (impulsive) choices.
In the language of Bernheim and Rangel (2009), choices that satisfy these four criteria would
constitute the “welfare-relevant domain,” while choices that fail any of these criteria can plausibly be
defined as “suspect” on welfare grounds. If suspect choices differ from the choices in the welfare-relevant
domain, they would not be used for welfare analysis. In this sense, paternalistic regulation can be limited
to situations in which individuals’ choices are demonstrably inconsistent, and when it can be argued in a
principled way that choices in one setting do not promote people’s welfare or reflect true preferences.
These refinements mean that there are cases when this framework does not justify paternalistic
regulation. For example, the framework does not support paternalism in cases when people make
considered and active choices after gathering all relevant information, but their interpretation of the
evidence differs from the regulator.
Measuring bias
We follow Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012) and others in defining three
empirical approaches to measuring bias:
1. Comparing demand responses. Consumers should be equally responsive to variations in purchase
prices and to variations in other product costs. For example, quantity demanded should decrease
by the same amount if a good’s purchase price increases by $1 or if other costs such as shipping
and handling, sales taxes, or present discounted energy costs increase by $1.
2. Measuring effects of nudges. If a nudge is something that only removes bias, then the change in
demand caused by a nudge is a measure of bias. Allcott and Taubinsky (2015), Chetty, Looney,
and Kroft (2009), and others use this approach, providing information to a randomly-selected
treatment group to measure the bias caused by imperfect information or inattention. The
challenge is finding an intervention that only removes bias but has no other effects. For example,
one might be worried that an “information” intervention does not just remove bias, but also subtly
persuades consumers to take a different action.
3. Comparing elicited beliefs to factual data.
One potential alternative to using revealed preference is to use engineering or accounting models
to measure true utility. At least in the context of energy efficiency, however, some engineering models do

not accurately predict true utility in some contexts. Fowlie, Greenstone, and Wolfram (2014), Joskow and
Marron (1992), and others have shown that engineering models overstate actual energy savings in
particular settings. Anderson and Newell (2004) and others argue that costs not included in engineering
models reduce takeup of energy efficiency relative to models’ predictions.

Applying Recent Estimates of Internalities to Future CAFE Regulatory Impact Analyses
The recent papers by Allcott and Wozny (2014), Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013), and
Sallee, West, and Fan (2015) use the “comparing demand responses” approach to measure whether
consumers fully value gasoline costs relative to vehicle purchase prices. The exact empirical strategies
differ, but the basic approach is to compare how the relative prices of low- vs. high-fuel economy used
vehicles change as gas prices change. Intuitively, as gas prices increase, the price of a Prius should
increase relative to the price of a Hummer, because the higher fuel economy rating of the Prius is more
valuable. An exact relationship between gas prices and used vehicle prices can be predicted under
assumptions about future gas price expectations, vehicle lifetimes and miles traveled, and other factors. If
vehicle prices move as predicted with gas prices, we have reason to think that consumers are not biased in
their evaluations of the benefits of fuel economy.
The main estimates in Allcott and Wozny (2014) suggest that consumers value 76 percent of
discounted future gas prices, i.e. a moderate bias relative to full (100 percent) valuation. Busse, Knittel,
and Zettelmeyer (2013) and Sallee, West, and Fan (2015) find results more consistent with full valuation,
i.e. zero average bias. All three papers agree that used vehicle prices are highly responsive to gasoline
prices and that the average bias is at most moderate. This finding is important given the simulation model
of Fischer, Harrington, and Parry (2006), which argues that “the efficiency rationale for raising fuel
economy standards appears to be weak unless carbon and oil dependency externalities are far greater than
mainstream economic estimates, or consumers perceive only about a third of the fuel savings benefits
from improved fuel economy.” Other simulation models find similar qualitative results.
The empirical literature is continuing to develop. However, there is a discrepancy between the
engineering model results, which suggest very large internalities, and these foregoing empirical estimates,
which do not. The engineering model may overstate net benefits, or the empirical estimates may not
correctly measure internalities, or there may be some additional market failure other than internalities that
the empirical estimates do not capture, perhaps related to vehicle supply or innovation spillovers. Future
CAFE RIAs might productively engage with the developing literature and with this possibility.

Conclusion

A large body of existing research suggests that imperfect information and internalities are real
and significant in some markets, so it is appropriate to consider them in regulatory impact analyses. In
these cases, our simple model (and many more formal models in the literature) show how policy
intervention can increase welfare, whether by restricting choices, changing prices, or by “nudging”
individuals toward privately-optimal decisions. In this paper, we review an approach to paternalistic
regulation that relies on consumers’ own preferences as revealed through well-informed, considered,
active, and pre-planned choices.
This approach suggests potential policy improvements in energy efficiency and other domains:
taxing instead of banning choices that generate internalities, targeting policies directly toward market
distortions, using regulations that rely on less regulator knowledge, and correctly calibrating the
stringency of a tax, subsidy, or standard. Recent evidence raises issues about the magnitudes of
internalities in the context of fuel economy. Given the many billions of dollars of social welfare at stake,
it is clear that further research is needed to understand these issues.

Bibliography
Allcott, Hunt (2011). “Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs.” American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 101, No. 3 (May), pages 98-104.
Allcott, Hunt, Christopher Knittel, and Dmitry Taubinsky (2015). ”Tagging and Targeting of Energy
Efficiency Subsidies.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.
Allcott, Hunt, and Dmitry Taubinsky (2015). “Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experimental
Evidence from the Lightbulb Market.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny (2014). “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol 96., No. 10 (December), pages 779-795.
Anderson, Soren T., and Richard G. Newell (2004). “Information Programs for Technology Adoption:
The Case of Energy-Efficiency Audits.” Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 26, No. 1, pages 27–50.
Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2013). “Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence
from New and Used Car Purchases.” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, No. 1 (February), pages
220-256.
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick (2009). “Optimal
Defaults and Active Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, pages 1639-1674.
DellaVigna, Stefano (2009). “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 47, No. 2 (June), pages 315-372.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft (2009). “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 4 (September), pages 1145-1177.
Diamond, Peter (1973). “Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pricing.” Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Autumn), pages 526-538.
DOE (U.S. Department of Energy) (2009). “Technical Support Document: Impacts on the Nation of the
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.”
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/appliance_standards/pdfs/en_masse_tsd_march_2009.pdf

Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry (2007). “Do Market Failures Justify Tightening
Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards?” The Energy Journal, Vol. 28, No. 4, pages 1-30.
Fowlie, Meredith, Michael Greenstone, and Catherine Wolfram (2014). “Do Energy Efficiency
Investments Deliver? Evidence from the Weatherization Assistance Program.” Working Paper
(September).
Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan (2006). “...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)Equivalence
in Field Experiments on eBay.” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, Vol. 6.
Joskow, Paul, and Donald Marron. 1992. “What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from Utility
Conservation Programs.” Energy Journal, Vol. 13, No. 4, pages 41–74.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin (1997). “Back to Bentham? Explorations of
Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol., No. (May), pages 375-405.
Kling, Jeffrey, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel (2012).
“Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. Vol. 127, No. 1, pages 199-235.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William Congdon (2012). “A Reduced-Form Approach
to Behavioral Public Finance.” Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 4, pages 17.1-17.30.
NHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) (2012). “Final Regulatory Impact Analysis:
Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY 2017-MY 2025 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks.” Office of
Regulatory Analysis and Evaluation, National Center for Statistics and Analysis (March).
Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan (2015). “Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel Economy?
Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations.” Working Paper, University of Chicago
(January).

