NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GHOST-HOUSE BUSTERS:
THE ELECTORAL RESPONSE TO A LARGE ANTI TAX EVASION PROGRAM
Lorenzo Casaburi
Ugo Troiano
Working Paper 21185
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21185
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We are indebted to the Agenzia del Territorio that provided the administrative data used in this paper.
We wish to thank Alberto Alesina, Joseph Altonji, Josh Angrist, Sam Asher, Robert Barro, Raj Chetty,
David Cutler, Pascaline Dupas, Ed Glaeser, Elhanan Helpman, Jim Hines, Larry Katz, Michael Kremer,
Asim Kwhaja, Jacob Leshno, Massimo Maoret, Sendhil Mullainathan, Aurelie Ouss, Manisha Padi,
Rohini Pande, Torsten Persson, Dina Pomeranz, Adam Ray, Tristan Reed, Giovanni Reina, Laszlo
Sandor, Andrei Shleifer, Monica Singhal, Joel Slemrod, Andrea Stella, Seth Stephens-Davidowitz,
David Stromberg, Tavneet Suri, David Yanagizawa-Drott, and seminar audiences at Berkeley, EEA
Meetings, Harvard, MIT, NTA Meetings, RES Meetings, Stanford, and the University of Michigan.
We thank Traviss Cassidy and Morris Hamilton for excellent research assistance. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Lorenzo Casaburi and Ugo Troiano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Ghost-House Busters: The Electoral Response to a Large Anti Tax Evasion Program
Lorenzo Casaburi and Ugo Troiano
NBER Working Paper No. 21185
May 2015
JEL No. D72,H26
ABSTRACT
The incentives of political agents to enforce tax collection are key determinants of the levels of compliance.
We study the electoral response to the Ghost Buildings program, a nationwide anti-tax evasion policy
in Italy that used innovative monitoring technologies to target buildings hidden from tax authorities.
The program induced monetary and non-monetary benefits for non-evaders. A one standard deviation
increase in town-level program intensity leads to a 4.8 percent increase in local incumbent reelection
rates. In addition, these political returns are higher in areas with lower tax evasion tolerance and with
higher efficiency of public good provision, implying complementarity among enforcement policies,
the underlying tax culture, and the quality of the government.
Lorenzo Casaburi
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research
Stanford University
casaburi@stanford.edu
Ugo Troiano
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
troiano@umich.edu

1

Introduction
A government’s ability to enforce tax collection efficiently is one of the fundamental com-

ponents of state capacity and, in turn, has historically been an important driver of economic
development. Tax evasion generates significant losses and distortions in government revenues.1 The literature (e.g., Slemrod (2007); Besley and Persson (2013)) describes three
main determinants of tax compliance: enforcement technology, political incentives, and cultural norms. This paper illustrates the interaction among these three factors. We estimate
the electoral returns – the change in reelection likelihood – that local policymakers obtain
from a nationwide anti-tax evasion policy in Italy based on an innovation in tax compliance
monitoring technology. In addition, we study how these electoral returns depend on underlying social preferences for tax compliance and on local government efficiency in the provision
of public goods. To the best of our knowledge, this paper provides the first empirical evidence
concerning voters’ responses to anti-tax evasion policies.
Measures to reduce tax evasion generate a conflict between voters. The measures hurt
tax evaders, typically a minority of voters, while the majority of the population is likely to
benefit from additional government expenditures, lower tax rates, or even directly from the
punishment of former shirkers. For instance, a recent survey administered by Bank of Italy
finds that approximately 76 percent of the respondents believed that fighting tax evasion
should be among the foremost priorities for Italian public policy (Cannari and D’Alessio,
2006). However, the magnitude of the individual costs tax evaders incur from enforcement
is potentially higher than the individual benefit non-evaders derive from it. Anti-tax evasion
policies are thus canonical examples of policies that are asymmetric in their concentration
of costs and benefits (Tullock (1959); Olson (1965)). Due to this asymmetry, fighting tax
evasion may either benefit or harm politicians who seek reelection. The sign of this impact
is ex ante ambiguous and, therefore, an empirical question.
In 2007, the Italian government instituted a nationwide anti-tax evasion policy, the Ghost
1

Slemrod (2007) states that, according to existing evidence: “the overall net noncompliance rate for all
U.S. federal taxes and the individual income tax seems to stand at about 14 percent”. Estimates from other
developed countries deliver similar figures (for Italy, see Marino and Zizza (2008)). In developing countries,
where the share of the informal economy is typically larger, the figures are much higher (Gordon and Li
(2009)). La Porta and Shleifer (2008) focus on the relationship between economic development and the size
of the informal economy.

1

Buildings program. The program identified ghost buildings – properties not included in the
land registry and thus hidden from tax authorities – by overlaying aerial photographs and
digital land registry maps. The intervention detected more than two million parcels (the
unit of the land registry) with ghost buildings.2 A large registration program targeting the
identified ghost buildings followed the completion of the mapping exercise. While the central
government began the program and coordinated registration activities, municipal administrations circulated information about the program, collaborated with follow-up inspections,
and enforced payment of overdue local taxes. Media reports highlight both the importance
of local administrations in the registration process and that local governments took credit
for the enforcement that followed the mapping exercise.
The program led to a substantial wave of building registrations. Administrative data
reveal that around 40 percent of the ghost buildings were registered by the end of 2011.
Total tax revenues increased by 472 million euros in that year as a result of the program,
with a large share of these extra revenues coming from local (i.e. town) taxes. The intensity
of the additional tax enforcement varied significantly across towns. In towns with a higher
prevalence of detected ghost buildings, the program was more likely to affect the amount of
building registration. We use a measure of Ghost Building Intensity, the ratio of the number
of land registry parcels with ghost buildings identified by the program to the total number
of land registry parcels in the town, to proxy for the scope of the program. Ceteris paribus,
there is a higher opportunity to reduce tax evasion in towns with a larger fraction of ghost
buildings detected by the program.
The data show that the increase in enforcement is stronger in towns with higher ghost
building intensity. Using a difference-in-differences approach, we test the impact of the antievasion policy on the reelection of local incumbents by exploiting the cross-municipality variation in this intensity. Our strategy controls for time-invariant town characteristics through
the use of town fixed effects. It identifies the causal effect of the policy scope to increase
enforcement on electoral outcomes under standard assumptions that we verify in the data.
The results show sizable political responses. In local elections occurring after the beginning
of the program, an increase of one standard deviation in the ghost building intensity raises
2

Parcels are defined at the town level. According to the legal definition (Reggio Decreto n.1952, 1931),
they can vary in size, but they capture portions of land (or buildings) that belong to the same owner, are of
similar quality, and have the same usage.

2

the likelihood of reelection of the local incumbent relative to pre-program elections by approximately 2.2 percentage points, approximately 4.8 percent of the average reelection rate
(45.4 percent). Higher town-level ghost building intensity also lowers several measures of
competitiveness in local elections. In particular, it reduces the number of candidates running
for election, increases the margin of victory for the winner, and reduces the likelihood of a
runoff.
Guiding our empirical models are several retrospective voting frameworks of political
agency (Barro (1973); Ferejohn (1986); Besley (2007)), which we adapt to study tax evasion.
Through these frameworks, we identify the mechanisms that can induce a change in voter
choices following a change in tax enforcement. Additional analysis of the actual building registrations induced by the program complements the reduced-form analysis described above.
For a given town-level program scope, a higher registration rate of ghost buildings has a
positive effect on the likelihood of reelection of the incumbent during the program.
We provide evidence for two channels that could drive the observed electoral response.
First, using survey data on the self-reported tolerance for tax evasion among voters, we
show that the program positive impact on incumbent reelection is significantly higher in
areas with lower tolerance for tax evasion. Second, towns where the government is more
efficient in delivering public goods show a larger electoral response to the program. We also
verify that towns with higher ghost building intensity experienced a differential increase in
local government expenditures following the program inception. Finally, we discuss potential
alternative interpretations of the impact of the program on the incumbents reelection. In
the first, the program changes voter behavior by providing information on the existing stock
of ghost buildings. In the second, it gives the incumbent an electoral rent by giving her the
option to not register identified ghost buildings. In the third, it changes the likelihood that
the incumbent mayor is elected to a higher level position. We use our results and features of
the institutional setting to rule out these competing explanations.
Our approach can be applied to different settings to study the political feasibility of
upgrading tax administrations around the world using new electronic data, cross-checking
technologies, and other monitoring devices.3 Additionally, our analysis points at a com3

For instance, other countries, such as Greece and Rwanda, have recently implemented policies using
similar technologies.

3

plementarity between technological innovations in tax enforcement and political incentives.
When exposed to a reduction in monitoring costs, politicians can exploit the new technologies
and experience political gains. These findings have a direct bearing on the political feasibility
of upgrading tax administrations around the world using new electronic data, cross-checking
technologies, and other monitoring devices (Bird and Zolt (2008)). In addition, our study
provides evidence that the underlying tax culture shapes the political incentives for tax enforcement and the political returns to these innovations (Torgler (2007); Rothstein (2000)).
Finally, access to the program town-level nationwide administrative data allows us to
provide evidence on two additional fronts. First, we study the correlates of tax evasion at the
town level. We find that geographical features such as town size are important determinants
of tax evasion, consistent with Saiz (2010), and that social capital is negatively correlated
with tax evasion (Putnam (2001)). Second, we document that mayors’ characteristics, such
as education, gender, and age, do affect the extent to which the Ghost Buildings program
increased tax enforcement (consistent with Alesina (1988); Besley and Coate (1997); Besley,
Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2011)).
This paper relates to several strands of literature. First, a recent set of studies uses
microdata to shed light on enforcement technologies such as third-party reporting (Slemrod,
Blumenthal, and Christian (2001), Saez (2010), Kleven et al. (2011), Chetty, Friedman, and
Saez (2012)), paper trails (Pomeranz (2012); Kumler, Verhoogen, and Frı́as (2011)), crosschecking (Carrillo, Pomeranz, and Singhal (2012)), targeted auditing strategies (Almunia
and Lopez-Rodriguez (2012); Aparicio (2012)) and third-party monitoring of customs duty
collection (Yang (2008a, 2008b)).4 Second, this paper is related to the political agency
literature (Barro (1973); Ferejohn (1986); Besley (2007)). Retrospective voting models have
received considerable empirical support, in the context of fiscal stabilization, for example,
which is the setting of this study (Brender, 2003; Brender and Drazen (2008); Alesina,
Carloni, and Lecce (2011)).
By studying how technology-driven enforcement policies affect policymakers, we build a
bridge between the political agency and the tax evasion literature. In addition, by delving
into the relationship between the incentives of political agents and tax evasion, our paper is
4

For a review of the literature, see Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998) and Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(2002).

4

related to the work of Artavanis, Morse, and Tsoutsoura (2012), who find that tax evasion is
higher in industries supported by parliamentarians. Finally, our results provide support to
existing literature that highlights the roles of culture and social norms as determinants of tax
evasion, either via cross-country analysis (Torgler (2003); Slemrod (2003)), lab experiments
(Spicer and Becker (1980); Alm, Jackson, and McKee (1992)) or field experiments (Hallsworth
et al. (2014), Luttmer and Singhal (2014)).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Ghost Buildings program. Section 3 presents several conceptual frameworks that rationalize the impact
of a change in tax enforcement on voters’ electoral choices. Section 4 describes the data
and presents descriptive evidence. Section 5 lays out our empirical strategy to estimate the
electoral response to the policy. Section 6 presents the results. Section 7 concludes.

2

The Ghost Buildings Program
The value of the buildings registered in the land registry enters the tax base for several

national and local taxes, including ICI/IMU (the local property tax), IRPEF (the personal
income tax, which is both national and local), and the local waste management tax. Italian
legislation requires owners to register new buildings at the local office of the Agenzia del
Territorio, the agency managing the land registry, within thirty days after their completion.5
In 2006, the national government approved new anti-tax evasion legislation, authorizing
the beginning of the Ghost Buildings program for the following year. The program was aimed
at detecting buildings not registered on the land registry maps.6 Italy’s national politics were
unstable during the years in which the program was implemented: Silvio Berlusconi (rightwing) was the Prime Minister in the first half of 2006, Romano Prodi (left-wing) was the
Prime Minister from the second half of 2006 to 2008, and Silvio Berlusconi was again Prime
5

See Legge 9 Marzo 2006 n.80 - Art. 34-quinquies. All buildings in Italy require a building permit before
construction can begin, and obtaining a building permit makes the new building part of the City Plan. The
process of obtaining building permits is administered independently from the registration in the land registry
maps. Buildings not in the City Plan are required to be demolished.
6
See Legge 24 novembre 2006, n. 286 subsequently modified by Legge 30 Luglio 2010, n. 122. The
Ghost Buildings Program had no shaming component associated to it, and the identity of the owners of
Ghost Buildings was not revealed. The detection exercise did not cover one of the semi-autonomous regions,
Trentino Alto-Adige, because land registry maps are autonomously administered in that region. The region
contains less than two percent of the total population of Italy.

5

Minister between 2008 and 2011. Therefore, the attribution of the policy to one specific
national party is not obvious.
The Agenzia del Territorio coordinated the effort. The agency first juxtaposed the land
and building registry maps to obtain the Official Building Map. It subsequently compiled
high-resolution (50 cm) aerial photographs of the entire country to identify the ghost buildings. Appendix Figures A.1A-A.1C summarize the identification steps. First, the aerial
photograph of a particular location was created. Then, the pictures were matched with the
official building map for the corresponding area. Finally, the ghost buildings were identified.7
Ghost buildings include commercial, industrial, and residential stand-alone buildings, as well
as substantial extensions of previously registered buildings that should have been reported
to the land registry.
Through this process, the Agenzia del Territorio identified approximately two million land
registry parcels containing unregistered buildings. Beginning in August 2007, the Agenzia
del Territorio started publishing parcel-level data on unregistered properties in the Gazzetta
Ufficiale, the official bulletin promulgating Italian laws and decrees, to induce registrations
of the ghost buildings. Within three years, it coded detailed information on the number of
ghost buildings in the universe of Italian municipalities targeted by the program. The order
of publication relied on the availability of digitized land registry maps at the time when the
program started. The Agenzia del Territorio had 60 percent of the land registry maps of
the Italian territory in digitized form before the Ghost Buildings program was approved.
After 2006, the Agenzia del Territorio began digitizing the remaining land registry maps,
proceeding by province (i.e., they simultaneously coded different municipalities in the same
province). It completed the identification exercise by the end of 2010.8
According to the initial legislation, owners could register the detected ghost building with
the land registry by April 30, 2011.9 Widespread media campaigns and local administrations’
efforts contributed to achieve high registration rates. In particular, local administrators
7

According to the Law Decreto Ministero delle Finanze 2 gennaio 1998, n.28.Art. 3, the following buildings do not constitute part of the statutory tax base of their owners and thus are not subject to registration
requirements: (i) buildings that are incomplete; (ii) buildings that are particularly degraded; (iii) solar
collectors; (iv) greenhouses; and (v) henhouses or other buildings reserved for animals.
8
Publication in the Gazzetta Ufficiale occurred in the following waves: August 2007, October 2007, December 2007, December 2008, December 2009, December 2010.
9
This was the result of two previous deadlines of ninety days and seven months since the publication in
the Gazzetta Ufficiale.

6

a) disseminated information about targeted parcels; b) collaborated on follow-up building
inspections; c) proceeded with the collection of overdue local taxes up to five years before
the program began; and d) verified the conformity of ghost buildings to the city plan and
local zoning restrictions.10 In addition, there is extensive evidence from the media that local
governments often attempted to take credit for the registration process. In Section 3, we
highlight this is an important element for understanding the voter responses we document in
this paper.
Owners of ghost buildings who registered prior to the April 2011 deadline were required
to pay overdue taxes dating back to 2007, or to the construction date for post-2007 cases,
and to pay penalties for delayed payments. After April 2011, the Agenzia del Territorio, with
the support of local administrations and contractors, proceeded with follow-up inspections
to impute the tax base for the remaining unregistered buildings.11 Additional penalties and
a fee for the extra inspection were charged to the owners of buildings for which the Agenzia
del Territorio imputed the tax base after April 2011. We describe the impact of the program
on the level of tax evasion in Section 4.

3

Tax Enforcement and Retrospective Voting: Conceptual Frameworks
This section presents several conceptual frameworks that rationalize the impact of a

change in tax enforcement on voters’ electoral choices. Through verbal presentation of
these models, we show that the program can affect voter behavior through its impact on
tax enforcement by changing the voter inference about the politician type and by reducing
uncertainty about it. We also highlight the role of voter information in shaping the electoral
response. Analytical details are provided in Appendix A.
The frameworks are based on the modeling of retrospective voting (Barro (1973); Ferejohn
(1986)) and tax evasion (Allingham and Sandmo (1972)). The main intuition of retrospective
voting models is that citizens decide whether to reelect the incumbent based on their welfare
10

Registration in the land registry does not imply that the building is waived from zoning restrictions.
To further increase incentives for the local administrations, an additional bonus was introduced in 2011
for each registered ghost building. See also Decreto Legge 79/2010, art. 10, 11.
11

7

in the most recent political term.12
The various conceptual frameworks share several features. In all models we adopt a standard probabilistic voting approach (Lindbeck and Weibull (1987)). Voters are heterogeneous
in their ability to evade. This ability could be a function of the psychological and physical
costs of evading. We consider a simple case with two fixed types of voters: evaders and nonevaders. Evaders pay taxes only if enforcement occurs, while non-evaders always pay taxes.13
Enforcement depends both on the politician (type and effort) and on a noise. Voters do
not observe the two components and are uncertain over the politician type, as in Banks and
Sundaram (1998). They use previous realizations to form expectations about the politician,
in the spirit of Holmstrom (1982).
Voters derive utility from disposable income and from the overall level of enforcement,
for instance, through the increased provision of public goods and deficit reduction. This
implies that enforcement has two effects on evaders’ utility, which go in opposite directions.
First, enforcement decreases the disposable income for evaders. Second, cracking down on
tax evasion increases the size of the government, which benefits all citizens, including evaders.
Non-evaders also obtain an additional non-monetary benefit from enforcement. One example
is the case where, because of fairness concerns, non-evaders derive direct utility from the
enforcement of evaders’ tax payments, independent of their monetary returns.14 As a result of
these channels, an increase in enforcement will have an ambiguous impact on voter welfare and
voting behavior. In addition, the net benefits of an increase in government will intuitively be
larger when government efficiency in public good provision and the intensity of non-monetary
benefits from the additional enforcement are higher.
We now turn to the specific features of each framework. In the first conceptual framework, the Ghost Buildings program is modeled as a positive shock to enforcement. Voters
observe the increase in building registrations but have limited information about the specific
“production function” of enforcement (i.e., information collected by the central government,
12

For empirical applications based on the retrospective voting model framework see: Brender (2003); Besley
and Pratt (2006); Brender and Drazen (2008); Ferraz and Finan (2008); Alesina, Carloni, and Lecce (2011);
Nannicini, Stella, Tabellini and Troiano (2012); Drago, Nannicini and Sobbrio (2014).
13
For simplicity, we ignore the extra fines evaders pay when audited and, thus, the optimal individual
evasion level they choose.
14
For experimental evidence on this channel, see Carpenter et al. (2009); Casari and Luini (2009); Ouss
and Peysakhovich (2012).

8

the efforts of local administrations, and complementarity between the two sources). This in
turn increases the belief they hold about the enforcement propensity of the local incumbent
type. Models with rational but poorly informed voters have received growing attention in the
literature (Wolfers, 2009; Cole, Healy, and Werker, 2013; Manacorda, Miguel, and Vigorito,
2011; Pande, 2011). Poor voter information is particularly relevant for the Ghost Buildings
program. It was likely difficult for voters to make inferences about who exactly was ramping up enforcement. Local administrations’ efforts complemented the initial identification
process. In addition, evidence from media reports and town bulletins suggest that mayors
often took credit for the enforcement following the program, and in some cases, even for the
initial stages of building identification through aerial pictures.15 Consistent with the logic
described in the previous paragraph, the change in beliefs about the incumbent enforcement
type generates an ambiguous effect on her reelection likelihood, heterogeneous in government
efficiency and in the non-monetary benefits from enforcement for non-evaders.
In the second conceptual framework, which is heavily based on the model of political
agency in Besley (2007), the Ghost Buildings program reduces the cost of enforcement for
the local incumbent. Unlike the previous model, voters have perfect information about
this change. In this model, politicians have heterogeneous preferences over enforcement.
Enforcement is costly for politicians, and politicians gain an ego-rent from re-election. The
cost reduction caused by the program enables more pro-enforcement types (i.e., those who
derive direct utility from increasing enforcement) to reveal their type through their now
cheaper enforcement choice. The effect of an average increase in the enforcement level under
the incumbent has again ambiguous predictions on election outcomes. The heterogeneities
described above continue to hold.
Finally, in the third framework, we model the Ghost Buildings program as a change
that, while leaving unchanged the average beliefs voters hold about the incumbent, reduces
their dispersion. The main intuition is that the program allows the incumbent mayor to
better reveal their true type, as mayors who are in office when the program starts have the
opportunity to be observed both in the state of the world with the program and in the one
without the program. In the presence of voters with risk-averse preferences, this will lead
15

Some examples include Barca (2008), Bernardini (2011), Cavallaro (2011), Corriere della Città (2012),
Dell’Oste and Trovati (2011), Gazzetta del Mezzogiorno (2012).

9

to an increase in reelection rates. In addition, under standard additional assumptions, it is
possible to derive again the heterogeneities by government efficiency and by the level of nonmonetary benefits non-evaders obtain from enforcement. In the empirical analysis, we do not
aim at differentiating these models. Rather, the insight that in these the net voter response
to an enforcement policy is theoretically ambiguous motivates our empirical investigation.

4

Data and Descriptive Evidence

4.1

Data

The main database for the analysis includes information on the number of parcels containing ghost buildings in each town. The aerial photographs detected more than two million
such parcels. We target the population of 7,720 of the 8,092 Italian towns for which we can
define the measure of ghost building intensity. Additionally, we obtain data on registered
ghost buildings up to the deadline of April 30, 2011. These allow us to define the ghost building registration rate as the percentage of ghost building parcels that were registered by the
April 2011 deadline. To analyze the electoral response to ghost building registration, we also
construct a measure of registration imputable to the incumbent administration. Specifically,
we multiply the registration rate by the ratio between a) the time elapsed between program
start date and election date and b) the time elapsed between program start date and April
2011.
We complement this information with data from the Italian Department of the Interior
(Ministero degli Interni) on the universe of municipal elections from 1993 to 2011.16 In
Figure 1, we plot the number of elections per year. Towns vote in different years according
to predetermined waves. We distinguish between elections before and after the beginning
of the Ghost Buildings program. There are almost 5,200 municipalities for which we have
data on an election that occurred after program inception (approximately 67 percent of the
total number of towns targeted by the program). Two institutional reforms that occurred in
16

The Italian municipal government (Comune) is composed of a mayor (Sindaco), an executive committee
(Giunta) appointed by the mayor, and an elected city council (Consiglio Comunale) responsible for authorizing
the annual budget proposed by the mayor. The mayor and the executive committee, whose members’
appointments can be terminated by the mayor at will, propose changes in policies, such as reductions in the
tax rates or expenditures. Subsequently, the city council votes on the proposed modifications.

10

the time span of our sample were relevant. First, in 1993, the starting year for our election
sample, Italian municipal politics were overhauled: a new electoral law changed the mayoral
electoral system from party to individual ballot. Municipalities below 15,000 inhabitants
adopt a single round system, while a runoff system is in place above this threshold.17 The
1993 reform also introduced a two-term limit. Second, in 2000, the length of the mayoral
term was extended from four to five years.18
In addition to the core data, we collect geographic and socio-economic data at the municipality level from the Italian National Statistical Office. Finally, we use two additional data
sources to test the channels driving the electoral response: town-level government expenditures (from the Ministero degli Interni ) and a region-level standardized score to the question
“Do you justify tax cheating?” from the European Values Study for each of the 19 Italian
regions included in the program. Table 1 presents summary statistics for the variables used
in the paper. Panel A presents the main variables related to the Ghost Buildings program.
Panels B and C include town-level geographical and socio-economic covariates, respectively.
These are measured prior to the inception of the Ghost Buildings program, mostly in the
2001 Population Census. Panel D summarizes the characteristics of the mayor in office at
the time of the program inception in a particular town.19 In Panel E, we summarize the local
election panel variables. Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 provide a detailed description of data
sources and variable definitions.
17

Bordignon, Nannicini, and Tabellini (2013) show that under runoff elections, the number of political
candidates is larger, but the influence of extremist voters on equilibrium policy is smaller.
18
In limited cases, the term can last less than is provided by the law and elections can take place earlier.
Those limited cases include the resignation of the mayor, the resignation of the majority of the council or a
no-confidence vote in the council. Early termination is relatively infrequent in Italian local politics. In the
post-program period, only approximately 7 percent of the towns have an election in a year different than the
fifth one after the previous and for only 2.5 percent of the towns is the difference between the two larger than
one year. Consistent with the previous points, we verify that our results are not affected when we drop the
sample of towns with an election year in the post-program period that is different from the one scheduled by
the law.
19
Only about half of mayors are matched to national parties, and the other parties are difficult to categorize
within a left-right spectrum. We therefore choose not to focus on this variable in our analysis. We note that
adding political party dummies to the controls in the regressions (for those mayors for which we have this
information) does not affect the results we present later in the paper.

11

4.2

The Correlates of Tax Evasion

We use data from the Ghost Buildings program to study the correlates of tax evasion
at the town level. Figure 2 presents our measure of ghost building intensity across Italian
towns. Notably, ghost buildings are more prevalent in Southern Italy, and less widespread
in the North.20 Table 2 presents the correlates of ghost building intensity (per 1,000 land
registry parcels). In Column (1), we first study whether geographical factors (altitude, area
of the town, number of land registry parcels) are correlated with tax evasion. In Column
(2), we add socio-economic controls (population, income per capita, social capital, number
of firms, urbanization rate). Finally, in Column (3), we show that our results are unaffected
by the inclusion of regional fixed effects.21
We find that several geographic characteristics are strongly associated with tax evasion.
In particular, controlling for other variables, tax evasion is higher in geographically larger
municipalities. Plausibly, in cities with wide geographical extension, there are greater opportunities to hide unregistered buildings as the enforcement of building registration is more
difficult and resource-intensive. However, we cannot decisively interpret this evidence as
causal. Previous literature has shown, for example, that borders are endogenously determined (see, among others, Alesina and Spolaore (1997), Alesina, Baqir and Hoxby (2004),
Alesina, Easterly, and Matuszeski (2011)). Finally, as expected, tax evasion is negatively
associated with both social capital and income. In particular, the finding on social capital is
consistent with Putnam (2001), who finds that the percentage of tax evasion, as measured by
the Internal Revenue Service, is strongly related to differences in social capital at the state
level.
20

The Agenzia del Territorio conducted its detection activities homogeneously throughout the country.
Thus, heterogeneity in the number of detected unregistered buildings captures differences in actual levels
of non-registration at the time of the aerial photographing, as opposed to differential intensity in detection
activity.
21
For 3.5 percent of the towns in our sample we are missing at least one town-level control. In our regressions
throughout the paper, for each control we include a binary indicator which is equal to one if the control is
missing. In addition, we replace missing values with an arbitrary unique value. The results are unchanged
when we undo this and simply drop observations with missing values for the control variables.

12

4.3

The Ghost Building Registration Outcomes

In this section, we provide details on the wave of registration of ghost buildings induced
by the program. Administrative data reveal that 40 percent of the ghost buildings were
registered by the end of 2011. The Agenzia del Territorio estimates that in 2011 total tax
revenues increased by 472 million euros as a result of the program (Agenzia del Territorio
and Dipartmento delle Finanze (2012)).22
Local administrations receive a large share of the additional tax revenues generated by
the program, and we estimate that approximately 65 percent of those revenues are generated
by local taxes. We then run a back-of-the-envelope calculation using figures on the number
of land parcels with ghost buildings, the registration rates, and the total additional tax
revenues from the program. A one standard deviation increase in ghost buildings targeted
by the program will increase local tax revenues by approximately 3 percent of the median
value. Using the same information, we calculate that, on average, the owner of a registered
ghost building will face an additional yearly tax burden of approximately 528 Euros.
In section 6.2, when discussing the potential channels driving an electoral response, we also
document that the program had a commensurate impact on local government expenditures.
A potential additional margin of adjustment in response to the higher level of compliance
could potentially be a reduction in tax rates. However, we note that tax rates exhibit very
little variation after the program, mainly because of a law that introduced tax rate freezes
(Legge 22 Dicembre 2008, n. 203). Specifically, we find that only 1 percent of the Italian
towns move the property tax rate in any given year after 2008 and around 0.5 percent of towns
move the municipal income tax rate in the same period. Consistent with this explanation,
we do not find evidence of responses of tax rates to the program.
We then look at the ghost building registration rate. Figure 3 documents substantial
dispersion across towns: the coefficient of variation in the registration rates takes a high
value of 0.75.23 Table 3 documents the impact of the characteristics of the mayor at the
time of the program inception on this outcome. For a given level of the other covariates, the
registration rate is higher when mayors are male, younger, more educated, or were born in the
same city in which they serve as mayor. The correlation between gender and policies in Italian
22
23

This figure does not include payments for overdue taxes from previous years.
In 5.8 percent of the towns with a positive number of ghost buildings, there was no registration.

13

municipality is broadly consistent with the results of Gagliarducci and Paserman (2012), who
find that female policymakers usually face greater difficulty in implementing policies while in
office. To the extent that education can be considered a proxy for politicians’ quality (see, for
example, Besley, Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2011)), this set of results also supports the
view that better policymakers fight tax evasion more. We highlight the correlation between
the mayor’s birthplace and tax evasion enforcement. One possible explanation is that mayors
born in the city care more about their birthplace, for instance because relatives and friends
could be harmed by low resources available to the municipality. Another one could be that
they have access to additional information that can facilitate tax evasion enforcement.
We acknowledge that this evidence relies on cross-sectional correlation analysis and thus
should be interpreted with caution. However, we also notice that the results are robust to the
inclusion of geographical controls, in Column (2) and then to the further inclusion of socioeconomic controls, in Column (3). With these caveats in mind, the findings of this section
suggest that the mayors’ characteristics did have a role in shaping registration activities
across towns.
Finally, we show that the number of ghost buildings detected by the program is a good
predictor of the number of ghost buildings that were registered in response to the policy.
Figure 4 displays the relationship between the number of land parcels with ghost buildings
eventually registered by the April 2011 deadline and the number of parcels that were identified
as containing ghost buildings, both as a share of the total number of land registry parcels. In
the graph, the x-axis variable is partitioned into percentiles. The scatter plot shows a clear
increasing relationship. In a linear regression analysis, an increase of one standard deviation
in the detected intensity of ghost buildings raises the intensity of registered ghost buildings at
April 2011 by approximately 0.75 standard deviations (p < 0.01). To summarize, the program
scope at the town-level strongly predicts the program actual impact on tax enforcement. This
premise motivates the strategy that we adopt to estimate the impact of the Ghost Buildings
program on electoral outcomes, which we introduce in the next section.

14

5

Empirical Strategy

5.1

The Electoral Response to the Ghost Buildings Program

In this section, we outline our approach to estimate the voter response to the Ghost
Buildings program. Our empirical strategy exploits variation across towns in the program
scope to increase tax enforcement. We implement a difference-in-differences approach based
on town-level ghost building intensity.
In Section 4.3, we documented that mayors’ characteristics, such as age, education, and
gender, predict the registration rate of the detected ghost buildings. However, the actual
levels of registration could depend on voter preferences and responsiveness to the program.
Thus, a naive analysis examining the relationship between actual ghost building registrations
and reelection outcomes will suffer from standard omitted variable bias. This motivates our
focus on ex ante program scope to measure the impact of enforcement.
The rationale for our identification approach is that the program scope at the town level
predicts the exogenous increase in enforcement induced by the Ghost Buildings program, as
shown in Figure 4. Towns with a higher share of parcels containing detected ghost buildings
also have, on average, a higher share of parcels with registered ghost buildings, as measured
in April 2011. In a recent contribution, Mian and Sufi (2012) adopted a similar empirical
approach to study the effects of the fiscal stimulus in the United States.
Importantly the intensity of ghost buildings is not a valid instrument for actual registration intensity. The program can affect incumbent reelection probability through other
channels besides registration. For instance, it may give mayors an opportunity to extract
rents from low program enforcement or by providing voters with information regarding past
enforcement. In section 6.3, we discuss these alternative interpretations and show that they
cannot drive our results. However, it could still be the case that these alternative mechanisms
partially affected the voter response, which would violate the standard exclusion restriction
required for an instrumental variable approach.24
24

As a check, we confirm that, in our prefereed specification (Table 4, Column (7)), the coefficient on the
share of parcels with registered ghost buildings out of the total number of parcels when instrumented by
ghost building intensity is 6.21, significant at the 1 percent level.

15

Our baseline specification is therefore:
Rimet = β0 + β1 P ostie · Ghost Building Intensity i + ηm · P ostie + φi + φt + imet

(1)

The dependent variable Rimet is a dummy that indicates whether the incumbent of town i in
macro-area m is re-elected in election e in year t.25 Observations where the incumbent cannot
be reelected because of a binding term limit are excluded from the regression sample. The
dummy Post is equal to one when election e occurs after the beginning of the Ghost Buildings
program in the town. The coefficients ηm capture post-program period fixed effects that are
specific to the four Italian macro-areas m where town i is located.26 We also include town
fixed effects, φi , and election year fixed effects, φt . Town fixed effects would capture any timeinvariant difference across cities that may be correlated with ghost building intensity. Finally,
Ghost Building Intensityi is the intensity of ghost buildings in town i.27 The coefficient
of interest, β1 , thus captures the differential impact of the Ghost Buildings program on
incumbent reelection by ghost building intensity. Throughout the paper, we cluster standard
errors at the provincial level to allow for spatial correlation in the error term. It should also
be noted that, because of the existence of a two-term limit, our identification relies on mayors
in their first term.
We adopt a similar regression model to study the impact of the program on other electoral
competitiveness outcomes. We focus on four variables: i) the number of candidates running
for mayor; ii) a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent runs for election a second
time; iii) the difference in the percentage of votes between the first and the second candidate;
and iv) a binary indicator equal to one if a runoff takes place, which occurs in towns with
more than 15,000 inhabitants when none of the candidates obtain an absolute majority in
the first-round.28
One potential challenge to our identification strategy may arise from the town-specific
25

The variable equals zero both if a mayor eligible for reelection does not run again or if she runs again
and is not elected.
26
Macro-areas are North, Center, South, Islands.
27
Given that booms and busts vary over time, they are not captured by town fixed effects, and they may
be omitted from the model. We verify that all of our results are robust when we control for economic growth.
Results are available upon request.
28
For the analysis of the difference in percentage votes between the first and second candidate, we always
use first-round results, even for elections when a runoff occurs.

16

timing of publications of the unauthorized buildings lists. On the one hand, if local administrators had influence over publication dates, unpopular mayors in cities with high evasion
rates might lobby to delay publication. On the other hand, the central government might
push to start the program earlier in those towns with a lower level of tax enforcement. In
both these cases, our estimates of the impact of the Ghost Buildings program on reelection
likelihood may capture a selection effect. We address this concern in several ways. First, as
discussed in Section 2, we note that the timing of the publication was primarily determined at
the provincial level by the availability of digital land registry maps and was highly clustered
by province.29 Only approximately 7 percent of the post-program elections have values for
the post-program indicator different from the one they would have had based on the modal
date of publication in the province.30
To address these discrepancies, we implement an instrumental variable approach. We
code elections based on whether they occur before or after the modal date of publication
of the unauthorized building lists in the province. We then instrument the actual P ost
dummy with this binary indicator at the provincial level. The rationale for this choice is
that the provincial level modal inception year may be correlated with historic characteristics
of towns in the province (captured by our town fixed effects), but is unlikely to be driven
by specific mayor characteristics. On the other hand, these may be driving the discrepancies
between the town and the provincial program inception year. We adopt this strategy for
our main specifications.31 In addition, in Appendix Table A.4, we present robustness checks
using alternative instruments for the post-program indicator using the regional and national
modal program inception years. The results are robust to these checks.32
As is standard in difference-in-differences estimation, the identification of the coefficient
of interest relies on two assumptions. The first is the absence of contemporary events that
29

Appendix Figure A.2 emphasizes the high level of provincial clustering in the publication years.
It should also be noted that election times are not clustered at the provincial level and therefore there is
a great deal of variation in election years across towns in the same province. We conduct an ANOVA analysis
of elections dates in the last five years of the data (since towns vote every five years). We find that less than
9 percent of the variance is explained by the provincial fixed effects.
31
The towns targeted by the program belonged to 101 provinces.
32
We also note that our identification does not rely on comparison across towns with different publication
years. In addition, we perform two additional checks related to the timing of program inception. First, we
control for the interaction between the program inception year and the post program variable. Second, we
check that there is no evidence of differential pre-trends in prior reelection rates across towns with different
program inception years. Results are available on request.
30

17

differentially affected towns with a higher ghost building intensity. We are not aware of other
policies targeting this form of tax evasion that occurred concurrently with the Ghost Buildings
program. However, it is still possible that other events, which differ in intensity by other
variables correlated with ghost building intensity, occurred at the same time. We address
this concern by presenting alternative specifications where we include interactions between a
comprehensive set of geographical, socio-economic, and political controls, all measured before
the beginning of the program, and the post-program binary indicator. The second assumption
is the presence of parallel trends in the outcome variable. We assess this assumption using
several tests and placebo exercises.

5.2

Tax Enforcement and Heterogeneity Analysis

The reduced form approach presented thus far tests whether a higher program scope to
increase tax enforcement at the town level affects incumbent reelection likelihood in the postprogram period. We complement this baseline regression with further analysis to understand
the channels behind this impact. First, we show that it is the tax enforcement induced by
the program that drives the electoral response, as opposed to other potential interpretations.
For this purpose, we use actual ghost building registration data. In Section 4, we emphasized
several important measurement limitations of these data that warrant caution. With these
caveats in mind, we test whether, for a given intensity of ghost buildings, a higher ghost
building registration rate induced by the program has a positive effect on incumbent reelection
likelihood:
Rimet = γ0 + γ1 P ostie · Ghost Building Intensity i

(2)

+ γ2 P ostie · Registration Ratei + ζm · P ostie + µi + µt + υimet
As discussed above, an obvious threat to the identification of γ2 in Equation 2 arises
from the fact that the registration effort is potentially correlated with many town-level confounders. We first check the robustness of the results to the inclusion of mayoral controls. In
addition, the timing of the program provides a strategy that can alleviate this concern. Even
if the program began in the same year in most of the towns, we can exploit the variation
generated by the fact that Italian municipalities hold elections in different years. A longer
time period between the beginning of the program and the election date naturally leads to
18

more registration activities. This generates variation across towns in the registration rate
achieved prior to the local election date that is plausibly uncorrelated with mayor quality. We
use this instrumental variable strategy to examine the impact of a change in the registration
rate on incumbent reelection likelihood.33
Second, we shed light on the channels through which the program could affect voters’ political preferences. Consistent with the theoretical framework, we investigate the interaction
among the political returns from the enforcement policy, tax culture – the stigma associated
with evading taxes – and local government efficiency in delivering public goods. We use data
from the European Values Study, the European component of the World Values Survey, to
study the role of tax culture. Specifically, we use the answers to the question: “Do you
justify cheating on tax?” Slemrod (2003) uses a similar variable to study the relationship between tax culture and social capital. We are not aware of other variables that can plausibly
capture tax culture available at the sub-national level in Italy. In this dataset, geographical
identification of respondents is available only at the regional level (19 regions). We thus
compute and standardize region-level means. The following regression model tests whether
the electoral response to the Ghost Buildings program varies by tax evasion tolerance:
Rimet = δ0 + δ1 P ostie · Ghost Building Intensity i + δ2 P ostie · T ax Evasion T olerancei
+ δ3 · P ostie ∗ GBi · T ax Evasion T olerancei + ξr · P ostie + λi + λt + νimet ,
(3)
where δ3 is the coefficient of interest.
We use the speed of public good provision as a proxy for the quality of public good delivery
at the municipal level. This indicator is measured as the ratio of paid outlays in the municipal
financial report over the total outlays committed in the budget. The rationale is that the
provision of public goods is more effective in places where the actual allocation delivered to
citizens is closer to the amount allocated in the budget. This proxy has already been used to
measure the quality of public goods delivery (Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013) and Grembi,
Nannicini and Troiano (2013)). We are not aware of other proxies that can plausibly capture
the efficiency of the universe of municipal governments in Italy. We compute the speed
33
Consistent with the discussion in Section 5.1, we use the modal inception year at the provincial level to
compute the instrument.

19

of public good provision as the average across two pre-treatment years.34 The regression
model to capture heterogeneity by this variable is similar to the one presented in Equation
3. Finally, we also assess the impact of the program on town-level public expenditures. To
test whether the program scope to increase tax enforcement affected these expenditures, we
adopt a specification similar to the one presented in Equation 1, using the natural logarithm
of the local government expenditures as the dependent variable.

6

Results

6.1

Baseline Results

In this section, we investigate the electoral consequences of the Ghost Buildings program.
Figure 5 provides a visual analysis of the relationship between ghost building intensity and
changes in the incumbent reelection likelihood – our main outcome variable – after the
beginning of the program. On the x-axis, the ghost building intensity is partitioned into
percentiles. The scatterplot displays a clear increasing relationship.35
Table 4 formalizes this analysis above and presents the results of the difference-in-differences
estimation discussed in Section 5. Column (1) reports the basic OLS specification (“Reduced
Form”) using the provincial post-program indicator. The coefficient remains stable with the
addition of town fixed effects (Column (2)) and election year fixed effects (Column (3)). Including a rich set of town-level covariates interacted with the post-program dummy does not
change the results (Column (4)).36 Starting in Column (5), we instrument the post-program
indicator with the provincial post-program indicator. The coefficient is stable across the
different specifications. Again, the results are robust to the inclusion of year fixed effects,
town fixed effects, and interaction among town controls and the post-program indicator, in
Columns (6)-(8), respectively.37
In Column (7), the baseline specification for the rest of the analysis, the reported coefficient on the interaction between ghost building intensity and the post-program indicator is
34

The results, available on request, are similar with alternative definitions.
Appendix Figure A.3 presents a placebo version of Figure 5.
36
Our results are similar when using natural logarithms instead of levels for some of the controls.
37
Appendix Table A.3 presents several additional robustness checks. We show that the results are robust to
the inclusion of additional town controls (interacted with the post-program indicator), trimming procedures,
alternative sample definitions, and normalization measures.
35

20

1.042, significant at 1 percent. This magnitude implies that a one standard deviation increase
in the town-level program scope to increase enforcement, as measured by the ghost building
intensity, raises the likelihood of the incumbent’s reelection by approximately 2.2 percentage
points in post-program elections, relative to pre-program ones (from a sample mean of 45.4
percent). A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the effect of a one standard deviation increase in Ghost Buildings program scope on incumbent reelection probability is on
the order of magnitude of 6 percent of the incumbency effect in U.S. House elections (Lee
(2008)).
In Figure 6, we check whether towns with different levels of evasion were on different
trends in the probability of incumbent reelection before the treatment. We report point
estimates and confidence intervals on ghost building intensity for each of the elections preand post-program. The figure shows that, before the Ghost Buildings program started, the
probability of reelection of the incumbent was independent of tax evasion. However, after the
beginning of the program there is a statistically and economically significant impact. Thus,
the coefficient pattern in Figure 6 suggests that the common trend assumption holds in our
setting. One potential concern is that because of the term limit rule, we only include towns
with first-term mayors. However, if the results were purely explained by composition, one
would expect large jumps in reelection rates even in pre-program elections. The lack of such
cyclical changes in our pre-trends graph attenuates the concerns arising from the fact that
the composition of towns change. Additionally, it is encouraging that our effect is robust to
the inclusion of a rich set of controls interacted with the post-program dummy: if the sample
composition were driving the observed effects, we would expect the inclusion of the town
covariates to substantially reduce the estimates.
In addition, we conduct a placebo check based on the fact that the program was not
implemented in the Trentino Alto-Adige region. We first impute the value of the ghost
building intensity by using the results in Table 2. We then perform a Triple Difference
Estimator (DDD), where we augment our research design with the difference between the
reelection rate of Trentino Alto-Adige before and after the treatment. The main coefficient
of interest in this research design is statistically significant and statistically indistinguishable
from our main effect. We report the results in Appendix Table A.6.
In Table 5, we adopt an analogous regression strategy to study the impact of the program
21

on other measures of election competitiveness as described in Section 5. For each of these
variables, we report the specifications used in Columns (7) and (8) of Table 4. An increase
in ghost building intensity reduces the competitiveness of local elections. Specifically, a one
standard deviation increase in ghost building intensity reduces the number of candidates by
1.8 percent of the sample mean. In addition, it increases the likelihood that the incumbent
runs again by 4.1 percent, though this effect is smaller and no longer significant when including other controls (Column 4). A one standard-deviation increase in ghost building intensity
also increases the margin of victory by 3.4 percent and reduces the likelihood of a runoff by
18 percent (this variable is only defined in towns with population above 15 thousands).38
The combination of the above results is consistent with the idea that both the incumbent
mayor and other potential candidates correctly anticipate a stronger incumbent advantage
as a result of the program.39 This in equilibrium shapes the actual election competiveness
and the incumbent reelection prospects.40

6.2

Tax Enforcement, Tax Culture and Efficiency of Local Governments

This section elaborates on some of the potential channels through which the anti-tax
evasion program could increase voter support for the incumbent. Table 6 presents the results
from the estimation of Equation 2. This step aims at showing that the increase in tax
enforcement induced by the program – the ghost buildings registration – drove the electoral
response.
In Column (1), we present the correlation between the ghost building registration rate and
38

Appendix Figure A.4 shows that the parallel trend assumption also holds for the other political outcome
variables described above.
39
Following suggestions from two Referees, we also looked at voter turnout and found no significant impact
of the program on this outcome variable.
40
The set of our results thus implies that a share of the reelection effect can be explained by the (endogenous)
decision to rerun. Since the choice to run is endogenous, the impact of the program on the likelihood of
incumbent victory conditional on re-running is not identifiable. Identification would require an excluded
variable affecting the choice to re-run but not the likelihood of winning the election. It should also be noted
that the baseline means of the reelected and rerun variables are different, and that not every mayor that
decides to rerun ends up winning the election. A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation, assuming that the
probability of winning conditional on re-running for the incumbent is at the sample mean of 79.4 percent,
suggests that at most 67 percent of our reelection effect can be explained by the re-running effect, despite
reasonably similar coefficients.

22

the likelihood of incumbent reelection. We find that, controlling for ghost building intensity,
a one standard deviation increase in ghost building registration rate (0.18) raises reelection
likelihood by 3.1 percentage points. In Column (2), we show that adding the interaction
between town- and mayor-level controls and the post-program indicator does not change the
results. In Column (3), we show that in a cross-city regression, the number of years elapsed
from the program start date are a strong predictor of the city-level registration rate. This
can be interpreted as a first stage for our instrumental variable approach.
In Columns (4) and (5), we use the years elapsed since the program start date as an
instrument for the registration rate imputable to the incumbent administration.41 In the IV
specification, a one standard deviation increase in the registration rate raises the reelection
likelihood by 11.3 percentage points in post-program elections. Finally, in Column (5) we
show that the IV estimate is unchanged when adding the interaction between town level
controls and the post-program indicator.42
Even if our instrument is uncorrelated with any idiosyncratic city-specific characteristics,
we are unable to rule out the possibility that having the program for longer time has an
independent effect on its impact on the probability of reelection, which would invalidate
the IV strategy. While we acknowledge this possibility, we still believe that our instrument
performs well in addressing the main endogeneity concern for the registration efforts of the
mayors (which may depend on the mayor’s ability or incentives).
We then provide empirical evidence on the role of tax culture and local government
efficiency in shaping the political returns to enforcement. Table 7 presents the results from
the estimation of Equation 3. The coefficient of interest, δ3 , captures the impact on the
electoral response to the program of a standard-deviation increase in the variables measuring
either the tolerance for tax evasion or the municipal speed of public goods provision. In
Column (1), we show that a one standard deviation increase in the score measuring tolerance
for tax evasion reduces the point estimate of the impact of ghost buildings on reelection by .64
(significant at the ten percent level). Column (2) shows that the magnitude of the coefficient
41

In this IV specification we do not control for year fixed effects. Three quarters of the post-program
elections come from cities that started the program in 2007. Thus, we lose statistical significance when
running this specification, although it is reassuring that the coefficient of interest remains positive and large.
Results are available upon request.
42
The results on the registration rate regressions are robust to the checks presented in Table A.4. Results
are available upon request.

23

is stable, or if anything, increases (in absolute value) when adding the triple interactions with
macro-area dummies.43
Turning to local government efficiency, in Column (3) we find that a one standard deviation increase in the speed of public good provision increases the point estimate of the impact
of ghost buildings on reelection by 0.63 and that this coefficient is statistically significant at
the ten percent level. We then confirm that this interaction effect does not simply capture
geographical variation in the responsiveness across different parts of Italy by adding triple
interactions across the post-program indicator, the ghost building intensity, and the macro
area dummies. The sign and economic significance of the coefficient is robust (Column (4)),
although estimated less precisely (p-value=.137). While the limited power in these estimates
should evoke some caution, the analysis presents evidence that voters’ responses depend on
underlying tax morale and government spending efficiency.
Finally, Table 8 presents the results of the estimation of the baseline regression model in
Equation 1, using the log of town-level government expenditures.44 Column (1) presents the
reduced-form results, using the post-program indicator based on the provincial mode. The
point estimate is .436 (significant at 10 percent). The coefficient is stable when instrumenting
the post-program indicator with the provincial one and is slightly larger when including
interactions among town-level controls and the post-program indicator (Columns (2) and
(3)).
While the effect of the program is statistically significant, we also note that it is fairly
small. A one standard-deviation increase in ghost-building intensity increases expenditures
by approximately 1 percent. We believe that it is unlikely that this effect explains the
entirety of the incumbent reelection effect we documented earlier in the paper. Consistent
with the suggestive evidence provided by the heterogeneity in tax culture, we suggest that
non-monetary factors (e.g., the direct utility non-evaders derive from catching the shirkers)
must play an important role.
43

Standard errors are similar when performing region-level cluster bootstrapping following Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008).
44
As for the remainder of the paper, the regression model includes fixed effects, and we therefore obtain
identical results when using expenses per capita.

24

6.3

Alternative Explanations

Our results suggest that the increase in tax enforcement induced by the program drives
the results on voting support for the local incumbents. In this section, we show that this
channel more than offsets several alternative potential explanations about the impact of the
Ghost Buildings program.
First, the publication of the number of ghost buildings could generate information about
the incumbent. We believe this to be both unlikely and inconsistent with our findings. The
number of ghost buildings is a slow moving stock variable that is likely to have accumulated
over decades, rather than a reflection of only the most recent years. Most of the buildings
found by the Agenzia del Territorio were not newly constructed. The existence of a term
limit and the fact that the average time to complete a building in Italy is longer than most
other OECD countries suggest that most of these buildings were built before the incumbent’s
election. Second, we note that voters who could potentially receive information from the
publication are most likely the ones who were not evading before the program, as evaders
were already aware of their own evasion.
Keeping this premise in mind, we believe our results rule out this alternative explanation.
In one version of this alternative story, voters, after learning about low levels of evasion detected by the program, reward the current mayor for having properly enforced tax payment in
the past. This hypothesis predicts a negative impact of the detected ghost building intensity
on incumbent reelection in post-program elections, and as such it is obviously inconsistent
with our baseline results.
In another version of this alternative explanation, voters reward an incumbent mayor
for having allowed high levels of evasion in the past. First, this contradicts the intuition
that non-evaders, rather than those who previously evaded, are the ones who are potentially
acquiring new information. Second, this is unlikely because the purpose of the program, and
therefore the publication, was to shut down the evasion opportunity. Third, it is at odds
with the fact that the positive impact of program intensity on incumbent reelection is lower
in regions with higher tolerance for tax evasion. Fourth, it is also inconsistent with the result
that towns with higher registration levels are more likely, rather than less likely, to reelect
an incumbent mayor.
In a second potential alternative explanation, the program gives an incumbent an electoral
25

rent by allowing her to not register the targeted ghost buildings, for instance, by reporting
errors in the results generated by the mapping process.45 If this were the prevailing mechanism, we would expect the positive impact of the program to be stronger in regions with a
higher tolerance for tax evasion, but we find the opposite to be the case. In addition, such an
explanation is inconsistent with the result that a higher share of registered ghost buildings
at the time of a local election increases the reelection likelihood. Additionally, it should be
noted that the mayors and the city administration had no official role in the identification
process or in reporting errors: such a process was administered at the central level.
Third, one concern is that mayors from towns with low ghost building intensity may step
to higher level positions, as models of career concerns could predict. We note this is unlikely
to generate the large results we find in our data since the level of these transitions is generally
low. In addition, we collect data on the elected members of Provincial and Regional Councils and Italian and European Parliaments. We confirm that the Ghost Buildings program
intensity does not affect significantly the likelihood that an incumbent mayor holds any of
these seats within three years from the end of his appointment (Appendix Table A.5).46
To summarize, the empirical results provide strong evidence that it is the additional tax
enforcement induced by the program that drives the increase in the reelection prospects of
the incumbent, as opposed to these alternative explanations.

7

Conclusion
A rapidly growing literature shows that interventions that improve the technology of

tax enforcement – third-party reporting, cross-checking, or better auditing algorithms – can
substantially reduce tax evasion. Yet, political incentives to adopt these technologies are also
of crucial importance. Policymakers will delay or prevent enforcement policies if they are
bound to lose support because of them. In spite of this, little is known about the electoral
impact of fighting tax evasion. This paper provides evidence of a positive interaction between
technological improvements in tax-payer monitoring and political incentives. Specifically,
45
For example, the press agency of the mayor of a city in our sample, Capaccio Paestum, explicitly criticized
the excessive media attention to the program, indicating that the unregistered buildings in that city were
unregistered due to citizens’ needs (Comune di Capaccio Paestum, 2010).
46
We find similar results for other time horizons.

26

local incumbents obtain positive political returns – an increase in their reelection likelihood
– from the Ghost Buildings program, a nationwide anti-tax evasion policy in Italy that was
based on a new enforcement technology.
The underlying tax culture, broadly defined as the individual propensity and social norms
determining evasion for a given level of technology, is another important determinant of tax
compliance. It shapes the enforcement level a government can achieve for a given enforcement
technology. We show that tax culture affects the political returns to undertaking anti-tax
evasion policies. The increase in incumbent reelection probabilities in response to the Ghost
Buildings program is larger in areas with a lower self-reported tolerance for tax evasion.
Finally, we document that the political returns to enforcement policies are higher when the
government is more efficient in providing public goods.
These findings have two important policy implications. First, they provide a framework
for thinking about the political feasibility of policies that increase the visibility of tax evasion,
thus lowering monitoring costs and increasing policymakers’ incentives to improve enforcement. This has immediate relevance for special interest politics. Concentrated evader groups
might effectively lobby to keep evasion hidden from the public, but they are unlikely to be
able to punish an incumbent who enforces tax compliance after the evasion becomes broadly
visible.
Second, there is potential complementarity among anti-tax evasion policies, government
responsiveness, and social preferences for tax compliance. Governments that plan to implement novel enforcement policies should concurrently attempt to strengthen their capabilities,
for instance, by improving the speed at which they respond to citizen’s needs, or by increasing the social stigma associated with tax evasion. This complementarity will likely increase
the returns politicians obtain from anti-tax evasion policies and will thus make such policies
better aligned with political agents’ incentives.
We are aware that using an identification strategy based on a specific natural experiment
enhances the internal validity of our study but may come at the price of lower external validity,
concerning other countries or other taxes. Yet, we speculate that evidence of positive political
returns to anti-tax evasion policies in Italy, a country often cited as an example of poor tax
culture, could be a lower bound for other OECD countries. We believe an interesting goal
for future work would be to elucidate the potential non-linearity in the relationship between
27

the prevalence of tax evasion and political returns to enforcement policies. In addition, we
believe that complementarity between enforcement policies and social norms on evasion could
potentially be relevant for policy design in other regions of the world.
Another important dimension of external validity concerns enforcement policies targeting
other types of evasion. One of the merits of the Ghost Buildings program is that it detected
the entire stock of evasion. In contrast, the effectiveness of policies targeting other taxconcealing activities might vary according to the ability of the specific evader to hide, which
might, in turn, affect how the public would respond. We hope future work will shed light on
the political returns to other enforcement policies around the world.

28

References

Agenzia del Territorio and Dipartimento delle Finanze (2012). “Regolarizzazione degli Immobili Fantasma.” Comunicato Stampa Congiunto.
Alesina, A. (1988). “Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-Party System with Rational Voters.” American Economic Review, 78, pp.796-806.
Alesina, A., R. Baqir and C. Hoxby (2004). “Political jurisdictions in heterogeneous communities.” The Journal of Political Economy, 112(2):348-396.
Alesina, A., D. Carloni, and G. Lecce (2011). “The Electoral Consequence of Large Fiscal
Adjustments.” Working paper.
Alesina, A., W. Easterly and J. Matuszeski (2011). “Artificial States.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 9(2): 246-277.
Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (1997). “On the number and size of nations.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112(4):1027-1056.
Allingham, M. G. and A. Sandmo (1972). “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis.”
Journal of Public Economics 1, 323-338.
Alm, J., B. R. Jackson, and M. McKee (1992). “Estimating the Determinants of Taxpayer
Compliance with Experimental Data.” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
March, 39(4): 107-114.
Almunia, M. and D. Lopez-Rodriguez (2012). “The Efficiency Costs of Tax Enforcement:
Evidence from a Panel of Spanish Firms.” University of California Berkeley, working
paper.
Andreoni, J, B. Erard and J. Feinstein (1998). “Tax Compliance.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 36(2):818-860.
Aparicio, G. (2012). “Monitoring and its Interaction with Punishment in Tax Enforcement:
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Georgetown University, working
paper.
Artavanis, N., A. Morse, and M. Tsoutsoura (2012). “Tax Evasion Across Industries: Soft
Credit Evidence from Greece.” Chicago University Booth School of Business, working
paper.
Banks J. and R. Sundaram (1998). “Optimal Retention in Agency Problems.” Journal of
Economic Theory, 82(2): 293-323.

29

Barca, M. (2008). “I primi cittadini della montagna commentano i dati apparsi sul sito
dell’Agenzia del territorio sugli immobili non denunciati.” L’Informazione Provincia
Montagna, March 21st.
Barro, R. (1973). “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice, 14,
1942.
Bernardini, D. (2011). “Il Comune va a caccia delle case fantasma.”
March 18th.

La Nazione (2011),

Besley (2007), “Principled Agents,” Oxford University Press
Besley, T., and S. Coate (1997). “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy.”The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, pp.85-114.
Besley, T., G.C. Montalvo, and M. Reynal-Quenol (2011). “Do Educated Leaders Matter?”
Economic Journal, 121(554), F205-227..
Besley, T. and T. Persson (2013), “Taxation and Development”, prepared for A. Auerbach,
R. Chetty, M. Feldstein, E. Saez Handbook of Public Economics
Besley, T. and A. Pratt (2006). “Handcuffing the Grabbing Hand?: Media Capture and
Government Accountability.” American Economic Review, 96(3). 720-736.
Bird, R. and M. Zolt (2008). “Technology and Taxation in Developing Countries: From
Hand to Mouse.” National Tax Journal, Vol. LXI, No. 4, Part 2.
Bordignon, M., Nannicini, T., and G. Tabellini (2013). “Moderating Political Extremism:
Single Round vs. Runoff Elections under Plurality Rule. IZA Discussion Paper 7561.
Brender, A. (2003). “The Effect of Fiscal Performance on Local Government Election Results
in Israel: 1989-1998.” Journal of Public Economics, 87 (9): 2187-2205.
Brender, A. and A. Drazen (2008). “How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth Affect
Reelection Prospects? Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries.” American Economic
Review, 98(5): 2203-20.
Cameron, C., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2008). “Bootstrapped-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414427.
Cannari, L., and G. D’Alessio (2006), “The Opinion of Italians on Tax Evasion” , Bank of
Italy Temi di Discussione 618
Carpenter, J., S. Bowles, H. Gintis, and S.-H. Hwang (2009). “Strong Reciprocity and Team
Production: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.

30

Carrillo, P., D. Pomeranz, and M. Singhal (2012). “Tax Me If You Can: Information CrossChecks and Evasion Substitution.” Working paper.
Casari, M. and Luini, L. (2009). “Group Cooperation under Alternative Punishment Institutions: An Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 71(2).
273-282.
Cavallaro, F. (2011). “Sindaci Pronti alla Lotta all’Evasione.” Il Sole 24 Ore. February 16th.
Chetty, R., J. Friedman and E. Saez (2011). “Using Neighborhood Effects to Uncover the
Impacts of Tax Policy: The Effect of the EITC on Earnings.” Working paper.
Cole, S., A. Healy, and E. Werker (2012). “Do Voters Demand Responsive Governments?
Evidence from Indian Disaster Relief.”Journal of Development Economics, no. 97 (2012):
167-181.
Comune di Capaccio Paestum (2010). “Comunicato Stampa, n. 134/10”, July 29th.
Corriere della Città (2012). “Crisi? Parla il sindaco De Fusco.” March 28th.
Dell’Oste, C. and G. Trovati (2011). “Il Tesoro delle Case Fantasma.” Il Sole 24 Ore, January
31st.
Drago, F., T. Nannicini, and F. Sobbrio (2014) “Meet the Press: How Voters and Politicians Respond to Newspaper Entry and Exit. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, forthcoming.
Ferejohn, J. (1986). “Incumbent performance and electoral control.” Public Choice, 50: 5-26.
Ferraz, C., and F. Finan (2008) “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2):
703-745.
Gagliarducci, S. and D. Paserman (2012). “Gender Interactions within Hierarchies: Evidence
form the Political Arena.” Review of Economic Studies, 79(3). 1021-1052.
Gagliarducci, S. and T. Nannicini (2013). “Do Better Paid Politicians Perform Better? Disentangling Incentives from Selection” , Journal of the European Economic Association,
forthcoming
Gazzetta del Mezzogiorno (2012). “ Caccia aperta ai furbetti proprietari di case-fantasma.
Il Comune vuole censire quelle abitazioni che sfuggono alle tasse.” January 11th.
Gordon, R. H. and W. Li. (2009). “Tax Structure in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles
and a Possible Explanation.” Journal of Public Economics, 93:7-8 (855-866).
Grembi, V., T. Nannicini and U. Troiano (2013). “Policy Responses to Fiscal Restraints. A
Difference-in-Discontinuities Design”, Working paper
31

Hallsworth, M., J.A. List, R. D.Metcalfe, and I. Vlaev, (2014). “The behavioralist as tax
collector: Using natural field experiments to enhance tax compliance” National Bureau
of Economic Research, working paper no. 20007.
Holmstrom, B. (1982). “Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective.” In Essays
in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck. Helsinki: Swedish School
of Economics; reprinted in Review of Economic Studies 66 (1999): 169-182.
Kleven H., M. Knudsen, C. Kreiner, S. Pedersen , and E. Saez (2011). “Unwilling or Unable
to Cheat? Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark.” Econometrica, 79(3). 2011, 651-692.
Kumler, T., E. Verhoogen and J. Frı́as (2011). “Enlisting Workers in Monitoring Firms:Payroll
Tax Compliance in Mexico.” Working paper.
La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer (2008). “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 47, no. 1: 123-135.
Lee, D. (2001). “The Electoral Advantage to Incumbency and Voters’ Valutation of Polticians’ Experience: a Regression Discontinuity Analysis of Elections to the U.S. House.”
NBER Working Paper #8441.
Lindbeck, A., and J. Weibull (1987). “Balanced-Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of
Political Competition.” Public Choice, 52: 273-297.
Luttmer, E.F.P and M. Singhal (2014), “Tax Morale.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28(4). 2014. 149-168.
Marino, M. and R. Zizza (2008). “The personal income tax evasion in Italy.” Bank of Italy,
working paper.
Mian A. and A. Sufi (2012). “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 Cash
for Clunkers Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Manacorda, M., E. Miguel and A. Vigorito (2011). “Government Transfers and Political
Support.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3). 128.
Nannicini, T., A. Stella, G. Tabellini, and U. Troiano (2012). “Social Capital and Political
Accountability.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
Olson, M. (1965). “The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.”
Harvard University Press.
Ouss A. and A. Peysakhovich. (2012). “When Punishment Doesn’t Pay: The ’Cold Glow’
Heuristic and Decisions to Punish.” Harvard University, working paper.
Pande, R. (2011). “Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in LowIncome Democracies.”Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 3: 215-237.
32

Pomeranz D. (2012). “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement
in the Value Added Tax.” Harvard Business School, working paper.
Putnam, R. (2001). “Social Capital: Measurement and Consequences.” ISUMA - Canadian
Journal of Policy Research, 2, 1, 41-51.
Rothstein, B. (2000). “Trust, Social Dilemmas and Collective Memories.” Journal of Theoretical Politics, vol. 12, 477-501.
Saez, E. (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2, pp. 180-212.
Saiz, A. (2010). “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, vol. 125(3). pages 1253-1296.
Slemrod, J. (2003). “Trust in Public Finance.” In S. Cnossen and H.-W. Sinn (eds.) Public
Finance and Public Policy in the New Century, 49-88. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Slemrod, J. (2007). “Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 21(1): 25-48.
Slemrod, J., M. Blumenthal, and C. Christian (2001). “Taxpayer Response to an Increased
Probability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota.” Journal
of Public Economics 79(3): 455- 483.
Slemrod, J. and S. Yitzhaki (2002). “Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration.” Handbook
of Public Economics, in: A. J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (ed.). Handbook of Public
Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 22, pages 1423-1470.
Spicer, M. W., and L. A. Becker (1980). “Fiscal Inequity and Tax Evasion: An Experimental
Approach.” National Tax Journal, June, 33(2):171-175.
Torgler, B. (2003). “Tax Morale, Rule-Governed Behaviour, and Trust.” Constitutional
Political Economy, June, 14(2): 119-140.
Torgler, B. (2007). Tax Morale and Tax Compliance: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,
Cheltenham U.K.: Edward Elgar.
Tullock, G. (1959). “Some problems of majority voting.” Journal of Political Economy, 67:
571-579.
Wolfers, J. (2009). “Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections.” University of Pennsylvania, working paper.
Yang, D. (2008a). “Integrity for Hire: An Analysis of a Widespread Customs Reform.”
Journal of Law and economics, 51(1), 25-58.
Yang, D. (2008b). “Can enforcement backfire? Crime displacement in the context of customs
reform in the Philippines,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90:1- 14
33

Figures

Pre−Program Election

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

0

1,000

Number of Elections
2,000 3,000 4,000

5,000

Figure 1: Number of Elections per Year

Post−Program Election

Notes: The figure shows, for each calendar year, the number of elections held before and after the inception
of the Ghost Buildings program.

34

Figure 2: Ghost Building Intensity (per 1,000 land registry parcels)

0

187

Notes: In this figure, Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the number of land registry parcels with ghost
buildings per thousand of land registry parcels. White areas identify towns with missing data.

35

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

Figure 3: Ghost Building Registration Rate

0

.2

.4
.6
Ghost Building Registation Rate

.8

1

Notes: The histogram shows the distribution of the ghost building registration rate at April 30, 2011, defined
as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings that get registered by this date
and the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings identified by the program.

0

Registered Ghost Building Intensity
.005
.01
.015

.02

Figure 4: Registered Ghost Building Intensity

0

.02

.04
.06
Ghost Building Intensity

.08

.1

Notes: The scatter plots the relation between the fraction of land parcels with ghost buildings that get
registered by April 2011 (Registered Ghost Building Intensity) and the fraction of land parcels with ghost
buildings identified by the program (Ghost Building Intensity). The x-axis is partitioned into percentiles.
The x-axis of each dot is the median value of the ghost building intensity in the percentile. The y-axis is the
average value of the registered ghost building intensity in the percentile. We cut the top 1% of the x-axis
values from the graph. The line plots the predicted values from a linear regression model.

36

Change in Reelection Rates Pre to Post Program
−.3
−.2
−.1
0
.1
.2

Figure 5: Difference in reelection rates pre- to post- Ghost Buildings program

0

.02

.04
.06
Ghost Building Intensity

.08

.1

Notes: The scatter plots the relation between the change in the average (year-demeaned) reelection rate
between the pre-program and the post-program periods and the Ghost Building Intensity. The x-axis is
partitioned into percentiles. The x-axis of each dot is the median value of the ghost building intensity in the
percentile. The y-axis is the average value of the change in the reelection rate in the percentile. We cut the
top 1% of the x-axis values from the graph. The sample includes elections in which the incumbent does not
face a binding term-limit. The line plots the predicted values from a linear regression model.

Coefficient on Ghost Building Intensity
−1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00

Figure 6: Ghost Building Intensity Coefficient by Election Pre/Post Program

4

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to the Ghost Building Program
Coefficient

95% Confidence Interval

Notes: The graph reports the coefficients on the ghost building intensity for each election before and after
the beginning of the Ghost Buildings program. On the x-axis, elections are ranked based on their occurrence
relative to the program. The regression includes town and year fixed effects. The sample includes elections in
which the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. For each election rank, we report the point estimate
and the 95% confidence interval. The election before the program (“-1”) is the omitted category, for which
confidence interval is obtained as the mean of the confidence interval width in election -2 and election +1.
The modal number of years between elections is five years between 1993 and 2001, and four afterwards.

37

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean Std. Dev.
Panel A: Ghost Building Town Variables
Ghost Building Intensity
0.027
0.021
Registered Ghost Building Intensity (Apr 2011)
0.006
0.006
Ghost Building Registration Rate (Apr 2011)
0.243
0.181
Panel B: Geographic Town Variables
Town Area Size (sq km)
37.044
50.096
Altitude (mt)
510.584
461.487
Land Registry Parcels (1,000)
10.776
13.278
Panel C: Socio-Economic Town Variables
Population (1,000)
7.225
40.23
Disposable Income per capita (1,000 Euros)
13.449
3.042
Urbanization Index
1.619
0.684
Non-Profit Associations/1,000 pop
5.293
3.912
Number of Firms per capita
0.076
0.027
Panel D: Mayor Variables
Mayor Age
49.03
9.5
Mayor Education
3.29
0.69
Mayor Born Same City (0/1)
0.47
0.49
Mayor Term Number
1.3
0.46
Mayor Woman (0/1)
0.1
0.3
Panel E: Election Panel Variables
Term Limit Indicator (0/1)
0.201
0.401
Election Rank Relative to Publication
-2.017
1.57
Post Program Election (0/1)
0.143
0.351
Years Elapsed since Program Inception (= 0 if ≤ 0) 0.299
0.802
Incumbent Reelection (0/1)
0.454
0.498
N. Candidates
2.761
1.301
Incumbent Rerun (0/1)
0.572
0.495
Victory Margin
25.999
26.942
Runoff (0/1)
0.525
0.499

Min.

Max.

N

0
0
0

0.187
0.051
1

7720
7720
7720

0.2
0
0.001

1307.71
3072.5
514.372

7720
7720
7720

0.033
5.013
1
0.212
0.018

2546.804
44.949
3
81.218
0.344

7720
7720
7720
7720
7720

21
1
0
1
0

83
5
1
2
1

7720
7720
7720
7720
7720

0
-8
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

1
1
1
4
1
17
1
100
1

32422
25893
25893
25893
25893
24585
25525
23933
2285

Notes: Socio-Economic Town Variables are collected before the Ghost Buildings program inception.
Mayor Variables refer to characteristics of the incumbent mayor at the time of program inception. Summary
statistics for the Election Panel Variables are reported for the subsample of elections with no binding
term limit, except for Term Limit Indicator. In all the tables, we replace missing values for the town-level
controls with regional means, so to retain a constant sample size. The range of missing values across variables
spans from 0 to 3.8%. The results are unchanged if, for each covariate, we add a dummy equal to one for
a missing value, instead. A detailed description and source of each variable is provided in Appendix Tables
A.1 and A.2.

38

Table 2: The Determinants of Ghost Building Intensity (per 1,000 land parcels)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Town Area Size (sq km)
0.102∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗
0.098∗∗∗
(0.021)
(0.015)
(0.012)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Altitude (mt)
-0.015
-0.009
-0.011∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Land Registry Parcels (1,000)
-0.236
-0.328
-0.270∗∗∗
(0.065)
(0.070)
(0.047)
Population (1,000)
0.020
0.004
(0.016)
(0.011)
Disposable Income per capita (1,000 Euros)
-2.598∗∗∗ -1.224∗∗∗
(0.363)
(0.292)
Urbanization Index
5.940∗∗∗
4.404∗∗∗
(1.837)
(1.652)
∗∗∗
Non-Profit Associations/1,000 pop
-0.463
-0.207∗∗∗
(0.147)
(0.074)
∗∗∗
Number of Firms per capita
56.244
89.888∗∗∗
(20.100) (17.828)
Region FE
X
Observations
7720
7720
7720
Notes: The dependent variable is the town-level ghost building intensity per thousand of parcels, defined
as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of land
registry parcels, multiplied by one thousand. The mean of the dependent variable is 26.69. Standard errors
are clustered at provincial level. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
Table 3: The Determinants of the Ghost Building Registration Rate

Mayor Age
Mayor Education
Mayor Born Same City (0/1)
Mayor Term Number
Mayor Woman (0/1)
Geographic Controls
Socio-Economic Controls
Observations

(1)
-0.066∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.802∗∗∗
(0.286)
1.054∗∗
(0.424)
-0.201
(0.355)
-0.915
(0.637)

(2)
-0.067∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.702∗∗
(0.271)
1.128∗∗∗
(0.425)
-0.083
(0.341)
-1.223∗
(0.625)
X

7720

7720

(3)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.806∗∗∗
(0.239)
0.946∗∗
(0.411)
-0.082
(0.351)
-1.185∗
(0.608)
X
X
7720

Notes: The dependent variable is the town-level ghost building registration rate (multiplied by 100),
defined as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings that get registered by
April 2011 and the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings identified at the beginning of the
program, multiplied by 100. The mean of the dependent variable is 24.32. Refer to Table 1 for a description
of the Geographic and Socio-Economic Controls. All the regressions include regional fixed effects and yearof-program-inception fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.

39

Table 4: Ghost Building Intensity and Incumbent Reelection: Baseline Results

Reduced Form

2SLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.083∗∗∗
(0.343)

1.061∗∗∗
(0.358)
X

0.953∗∗∗
(0.360)
X
X

25893

25893

0.958∗∗∗
(0.347)
X
X
X
25893

Ghost Building Intensity*Post
Ghost Building Intensity*Province Post
Town FE
Election Year FE
Town Controls*Post
Observations

25893

(5)
1.097∗∗∗
(0.358)

25893

(6)
1.114∗∗∗
(0.373)

(7)
1.042∗∗∗
(0.378)

(8)
1.074∗∗∗
(0.366)

X

X
X

25893

25893

X
X
X
25893

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected
(mean 0.454). Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program
inception. Province Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings
program modal inception year in the province. In the columns grouped under the header “2SLS”, Post is
instrumented with Post Province. Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the ratio between the number
of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of land registry parcels. All the columns
include an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and either Province Post (Columns (1)-(4)) or Post
(Columns (5)-(8)). Columns (1) and (5) include the Ghost Building Intensity level. Town Controls*Post
include town-level controls interacted with the Post dummy. Refer to Table 1 for a list of these variables.
The regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which the incumbent does not face
a binding term-limit. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

40

Table 5: Ghost Building Intensity and Election Competitiveness
N. Candidates
Ghost Building Intensity*Post Program
Dependent Variable Mean
Town Controls*Post
Observations

(1)
-2.383∗∗
(1.057)
2.761
24441

(2)
-3.157∗∗∗
(1.152)
2.761
X
24441

Incumbent Rerun
(3)
1.115∗∗
(0.457)
0.572
25483

(4)
0.600
(0.436)
0.572
X
25483

Victory Margin
(5)
42.063
(25.984)
25.999
23562

(6)
41.935∗
(23.602)
25.999
X
23562

Runoff
(7)
-4.502∗∗∗
(1.383)
0.525
2216

(8)
-4.271∗∗∗
(1.282)
0.525
X
2216

Notes: N. Candidates is the number of candidates running for election. Incumbent Rerun is a binary indicator equal to one when the current incumbent
runs for reelection. Victory Margin is the percentage point difference between the first and the second candidate in the elections (we use first-round percentages
even for towns with a runoff). Runoff is a binary indicator, defined only for towns with more than 15,000 inhabitants, equal to one if the election requires a
runoff. This occurs if the first candidate in the first round receives less than 50% of the votes. Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs
after the Ghost Buildings program inception. In all the columns, Post is instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs
after the modal program inception year in the province. Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with
ghost buildings and the total number of land registry parcels. All the regressions include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and an interaction between
macro-areas fixed effects and Post. Town Controls*Post include town-level controls interacted with the Post dummy. Refer to Table 1 for a list of these
variables. The regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. Standard errors
are clustered at provincial level. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

41

Table 6: Ghost Building Registration and Incumbent Reelection

Ghost Building Registration Rate*Post

(1)
OLS
0.173∗∗
(0.072)

(2)
OLS
0.147∗∗
(0.069)

Town Controls*Post
Observations

(4)
2SLS
0.625∗∗∗
(0.196)

(5)
2SLS
0.674∗∗∗
(0.195)

1.561∗∗∗
(0.391)

1.889∗∗∗
(0.448)
X
25893

0.076∗∗∗
(0.009)

Years Elapsed since Program Inception
Ghost Building Intensity*Post

(3)
1st Stage

1.276∗∗∗
(0.383)
25893

1.380∗∗∗
(0.399)
X
25893

7720

25893

Notes: Columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) present election-panel regressions where the dependent variable is
a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected (mean 0.454). Post is a binary indicator
equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program inception. In all the columns, Post is
instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the modal program
inception year in the province. Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the ratio between the number of
land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of land registry parcels. Registration
Rate refers to the registration rate at April 2011 in columns (1) and (2) and to the instrumented imputed
registration rate at the time of the election in columns (4) and (5). The regressions include town fixed
effects, an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post and, in the OLS specifications, year fixed
effects. The regression sample for these columns includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which the
incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. Extra Controls*Post include town-level controls interacted
with the Post dummy. Refer to Table 1 for a list of these variables.
Column (3), First Stage, presents cross-town regressions where the dependent variable is the ghost building
registration rate at April 2011. The variable Years Elapsed since Program Inception measures the
years elapsed between the program inception year and 2011. The regression includes the levels of the above
controls, the level of the ghost building intensity and macro-areas fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at provincial level. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

42

Table 7: Ghost Building Intensity and Incumbent Reelection:
Heterogeneity Analysis

Ghost Building Intensity*Post
...*Justify Tax Cheating

(1)
1.063∗∗∗
(0.380)
-0.639∗
(0.364)

(2)
1.311∗∗
(0.668)
-0.734∗
(0.404)

...*Speed of Public Good Provision
GBI*Macro Area*Post
Observations

No
25893

Yes
25893

(3)
1.174∗∗∗
(0.391)

(4)
1.229∗
(0.682)

0.627∗
(0.380)
No
25893

0.592
(0.397)
Yes
25893

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected
(mean 0.454). Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program
inception. In all the columns, Post is instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the
election occurs after the modal program inception year in the province. Ghost Building Intensity is
defined as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number
of land registry parcels. GBI*Macro Area*Post is the triple interaction among macro-areas fixed effect,
ghost building intensity and Post. All the regressions include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects,
interactions between macro-areas fixed effects and Post, and an interaction between the relevant heterogeneity
variable for the column and Post. The regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in
which the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level.
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

Table 8: Local Government Expenditures
OLS
(1)
Ghost Buildings Intensity * Post
Ghost Building Intensity*Post Province
Town Controls*Post
Observations

0.441∗
(0.253)
No
74664

2SLS
(2)
0.497∗
(0.263)

(3)
0.621∗∗∗
(0.206)

No
74664

Yes
74664

Notes: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of municipal government expenditures. Post
is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program inception. In
columns (2) and (3), Post is instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election
occurs after the modal program inception year in the province. Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the
ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of land registry
parcels. Town Controls*Post include town level controls interacted with the Post dummy. Refer to Table
1 for a list of these variables. All the regressions include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and an
interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. *
p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

43

A

Appendix (For Online Publication)

Theory Appendix
This section derives analytically the comparative statics of the three frameworks described in Section 3.

Model 1: Poor Voter Information
The economy is populated by a unit mass of voters and by politicians. Voters are heterogeneous in their
ability to evade. For example, this ability could be a function of evasion costs (economic and psychological).
We consider a simple case with two fixed types of voters: evaders and non-evaders. Evaders pay taxes only
if enforcement occurs, while non-evaders always pay taxes.47 The population share of evaders is λ. The
enforcement of tax collection for each evader occurs with probability p. Enforcement draws are independent
across evaders, and thus p is the share of evaders for which enforcement occurs. This is assumed to be a
function of the politician type (a) and of an idiosyncratic component (υ), whose distributions are G(a) and
G(υ), respectively. Voters do not observe the two components and are uncertain over the politician type, as
in Banks and Sundaram (1998). They use previous realizations to form expectations â and p̂, in the spirit of
Holmstrom (1982).
We assume an exogenous income level, normalized to 1, and tax rate, τ , constant across the population.
Voters derive utility from disposable income and from the overall level of enforcement, for instance, through
the increased provision of public goods and deficit reduction. This implies that enforcement has two effects
on evaders’ utility, which go in opposite directions. First, enforcement decreases the disposable income for
evaders; however, cracking down on tax evasion increases the size of the government, which benefits all
citizens, including evaders.48 The expected utility for evaders, VE is defined as:
VE (p̂) = p̂(U (1 − τ )) + (1 − p̂)U (1) + p̂WE (λ, g),

(A.1)

where we highlight that VE depends on the expected level of enforcement, p̂. In Equation A.1, U (·) is the
monetary utility from disposable income and WE (·) is the utility from tax collection enforcement.49 WE is
increasing in λ, the share of evaders in the population, and g, government efficiency in using tax revenues to
produce public goods.
We allow non-evaders to obtain an additional non-monetary benefit from enforcement. One example
is the case where, because of fairness concerns, non-evaders derive direct utility from the enforcement of
evaders’ tax payments, independently from their monetary returns.50 Thus, the expected utility function for
the non-evaders is:
VN (p̂) = p̂WN (λ, g, b) + U (1 − τ )
(A.2)
In addition to λ and g, VN is also increasin in b, a shifter that affects the non-monetary benefits from increases
in enforcement. For instance, b captures the extent to which voters are averse to tax evasion (“tax culture”).
In the model, we abstract from the utility arising from government services financed by the tax payments of
the non-evaders because that does not depend on p̂, the core variable of interest for our argument.
We now consider the voters’ choice between an incumbent and a contender. We adopt a standard
probabilistic voting approach (Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987). In the text below, â and p̂ denote the voters’
beliefs about the incumbent type and the enforcement level, respectively. On the other hand, a and p
capture the expectations about the contender. In deciding whether to reelect the incumbent, the two groups
of voters compare the utility under the expected incumbent’s type with an average opponent. Voter i in group
j = {E, N } will reelect the incumbent if Vj (p̂) > Vj (p)+ij +δ. The parameter ij is an individual ideological
bias with respect to the contender, distributed uniformly over [− 2φ1 j , 2φ1 j ].51 The parameter δ measures the
47

For simplicity, we ignore the extra fines evaders pay when audited and, thus, the optimal individual
evasion level they choose.
48
While we do not model this explicitly, it is possible that non-evaders can incur costs from higher tax
enforcement. For instance, previously evading firms may now charge higher prices to non-evading consumers
because of their increased costs.
49
To simplify the presentation, we assume that the utility from enforcement is proportional to the expected
level of enforcement.
50
For experimental evidence on this channel, see Carpenter et al. (2009); Casari and Luini (2009); Ouss
and Peysakhovich (2012).
51
The parameters φE and φN should be interpreted as proxies for the responsiveness of voters in each

44

average popularity of the contender in the population and is distributed uniformly over U [− 12 , 12 ]. Under the
above assumptions, the ex-ante incumbent reelection probability (i.e., before the realization of δ) is:
π = (p̂ − p) [λφE (−U (1) + U (1 − τ ) + WE ) + (1 − λ)φN WN ]

(A.3)

The following equation presents the electoral impact of an increase in the expected enforcement level under
the incumbent, p̂:

∂π
= λφE − U (1) + U (1 − τ ) + WE + (1 − λ)φN WN
(A.4)
∂ p̂
The first term on the right hand side represents the net electoral gains coming from evaders voting. These
will be negative whenever the utility cost of the expected loss in disposable income, U (1) − U (1 − τ ), more
than offsets the benefits from enforcement, WE . The second term on the right hand side is the electoral gain
from non-evaders (always positive). This duality is consistent with the discussion in Section 1: an increase
in the perception of the enforcement type of the incumbent has ambiguous effects. The change generates a
conflict across voters and the model parameters determine which channel prevails. We label the entire right
hand side V . In addition, the model delivers intuitive comparative statics on the heterogeneity of the electoral
impact arising from an increase in expected enforcement under the incumbent. Both government efficiency
in public good provision and the intensity of non-monetary benefits from the additional enforcement matter
play a role. Specifically:
∂WE
∂WN
∂2π
= λφE
+ (1 − λ)φN
(A.5)
∂ p̂∂g
∂g
∂g
and

∂2π
∂WN
= (1 − λ)φN
,
∂ p̂∂b
∂b

(A.6)

which are both positive. To summarize, the simple model predicts that an exogenous increase in the perceived
level of enforcement under the incumbent:
i) has an ambiguous impact on the likelihood that the incumbent is reelected.
This impact:
ii) is larger when government is more efficient in the provision of public goods;
iii) is larger when there are greater non-monetary returns from enforcement.
The Ghost Buildings program allows us to shed light on these predictions. The program, initiated by
the central government, can be considered as a positive shock to enforcement. We argue that voters observe
the increase in building registrations but have limited information about the specific “production function”
of enforcement (i.e., information collected by the central government, the efforts of local administrations,
and complementarity between the two sources). This in turn increases the belief voters hold about the
local incumbent type, â (and thus on p̂), and, according to the model, generates an ambiguous effect on the
incumbent reelection probability.52

Model 2: Enforcement Cost Reduction
In this model, which relies heavily on the model of political agency presented in Besley (2007), politicians
have heterogenous preferences over enforcement. There are two models, t={1,2}.The level of enforcement
chosen by the politician in office is et ∈ {0, 1}. There are two types of politicians: i) type A, who gets a
benefit from doing enforcement, bt ∼ U [0, 1];53 ii) type B, who does not get any benefit from enforcement.
The probability that a given politician is of type A is π. Both politicians pay a cost ct when doing enforcement
in period t, and receive a benefit E from reelection. We model the Ghost Buildings Program as a reduction
in the cost c1 of doing enforcement. For simplicity, we assume the Ghost Buildings Program does not affect
c2 , which equals a constant k.
The timing of the model is the following: in the first stage, nature draws the type of the incument and
the benefit from the enforcement that type A derives in the current term. In the second stage, the incumbent
group to tax evasion enforcement. For example, they might reflect the fact that a group’s political power can
change depending on its size or ability to self-organize (Olson(1965)).
52
We thus assume that the voter belief about the mayor enforcement-type is increasing in the observed
level of enforcement. We do not, however, delve into the specifics of the process of changing voter beliefs.
53
Therefore, the expected benefit from enforcement for type A is E(bt ) = 12 .

45

chooses its enforcement decision e1 ∈ {0, 1}. In the third stage, the voters observe the enforcement decision
and vote. In the fourth stage, if the elected mayor is of type A, she draws b2 , the benefit from the enforcement
in the second period. In the fifth and last stage, the elected mayor chooses e2 ∈ {0, 1}. We first define:
1
1
λ ≡P r(e1 = 1|i = A) = P r[b − c + w1 (E + β( − k) > w0 (E + β( − k)]
2
2
1
= 1 − [c + (w0 − w1 )(E + β( − k))]
2

(A.7)

In the above equation, wj is the ex ante tumbent is reelected when choosing e1 = j. Let’s note that
p ≡ E[e2 = 1|IncumbentLoses] = πP r(b2 > c) = π(1 − k)

(A.8)

π(1 − λ)(1 − k)
1 − π + π(1 − λ)

(A.9)

p0 ≡ E[e2 = 1|IncumbentW ins; e1 = 0] =
and

p1 ≡ E[e2 = 1|IncumbentW ins; e1 = 1] = 1 − k

(A.10)

Under the a probabilistic voting model similar to the one in the previous model, one can show that:
w0 =

1
1
π(1 − k)λ(π − 1)
+ (p0 − p̄)V = + [
]V
2
2
1 − π + π(1 − λ)

(A.11)

and

1
1
+ (p1 − p̄)V = + [(1 − k)(1 − π)]V,
(A.12)
2
2
where V ≡ [λφE (−U (1) + U (1 − τ ) + WE ) + (1 − λ)φN WN ]. The probability that the incumbent is reelected
is:
w = P r(e1 = 0)w0 + P r(e1 = 1)w1 = (1 − πλ)w0 + πλw1
(A.13)
w1 =

We are interested in the sign of:
∂w
∂w0
∂λ
=
(1 − πλ) + π(w1 − w0 )
∂c
∂c
∂c
Through the implicit function theorem, we obtain:
1
∂λ
(1 − π)π
−1
=[
2 (1 − k)V (E + β( 2 − k) − 1]
∂c
(1 − πλ)

(A.14)

(A.15)

(1−π)π(E+β( 1 −k)(1−k)

2
The previous expression is negative if V < V̂ ≡ (
)−1 We assume this condition
(1−πλ)2
holds. Intuitively, a reduction in the enforcement cost raises the level of enforcement. Figure 4 in the paper
suggests that this is indeed the case in our data.

Plugging Equation (A.15) into Equation (A.14), it can be shown that:
∂w
(1 − k)(1 − π)πk ∂λ
=
V
,
∂c
1 − πλ
∂c

(A.16)

which has the opposite sign of V . By increasing the likelihood that the incumbent chooses e1 = 1 in
response to a reduction in c, the program increases the likelihood of incumbent reelection if the index of
aggregate preferences for tax enforcement derived from the probabilistic voting model, V , is positive. The
opposite is true if V < 0.
Finally, we study how the impact of a change in c on w depends on the value of V
∂2w
V (1 − k)(1 − π)πk ∂ 2 λ
∂λ (1 − k)(1 − π)πk
∂λ
=
+
(1 − πλ + V π
)
∂c∂V
1 − πλ
∂c∂V
∂c
(1 − πλ)2
∂V
2

2

(A.17)

∂λ
∂ λ
∂ w
It can be shown that, with V < V̂ , ∂V
> 0 and ∂c∂V
< 0, thus ∂c∂V
< 0. Therefore, the Ghost Buildings
program, which leads to a reduction in c, has a stronger positive impact on the likelihood of reelection of the
incumbent in towns with higher government efficiency and higher tax culture (since V is increasing in these
two variables).

46

Model 3: Voter Risk Aversion
The basic setup is similar to the one in the first model, but we modify slightly the utility functions
from Equations (A.1) and (A.2. However, p is now interpreted as the fraction of income that the evaders
need to pay in local taxes if caught. This depends on the mayor’s type and a noise. We thus interpret the
program as reducing the uncertainty about the mayor’s type, although not affecting its mean because rational
voters perfectly discount the impact of a nationally imposed program, that should not affect the local tax
enforcement. For simplicity we abstract from any issues related to considerations related to tax revenues and
enforcement at the national level.
The utility for non evaders from politician j ∈ {i, o} is now:
VEj = U (1 − pj ) + WE (pj λ, g)

(A.18)

∂WE
∂pj

>0
Similarly, the utility for non-evaders is
VNj = U (1 − τ ) + WN (pj λ, g, b)

(A.19)

N
where ∂W
∂pj > 0
We assume that the functions U (.), WE (., .) and WN (., ., .) are all increasing and concave.54 It should
be noted that pλ can be interpreted in this framework as the total revenue the government extracts from
the evaders by the mayor. We assume p ∈ (0, 1). There are two time periods. At the beginning of the first
period, the voters hold a common prior belief over the distribution of the local enforcement depending on
the mayor p, G(.), with mean µ and variance σ 2 . At the end of period one, the national government initiates
the Ghost Buildings Program, which reduces the uncertainty of the voters regarding the incumbent, without
changing the mean of the incumbent’s type. Voters observe the enforcement in period two and vote at the
end of this period.
The Ghost Buildings Program allows the voters to observe the enforcement levels under the incumbent in
two states: the one without the program in place and the one with the program in place. This opportunity to
observe multiple states increases precision of their signal about the incumbent’s enforcement type. Therefore,
0
voters have a posterior distribution G’(.) with mean µ0 = µ and variance σ 2 < σ 2 .

Following the notation of the previous model, prior to the program the incumbent’s expected probability
of reelection is given by:
π=

1
1
+ [λφE E(VEI − VEO ) + (1 − λ)φN E(VNI − VNO )]
2 φ̄

(A.20)

where φ̄ = λφE + (1 − λ)φN . After the initiation of the program the incumbent’s expected reelection
probability is:
π0 =

1
1
+ [λφE E 0 (VEI − VEO ) + (1 − λ)φN E 0 (VNI − VNO )]
2 φ̄

(A.21)

It should be noted that the program does not affect the expected utility resulting from the opponent’s
policies, because the program does not reveal any information about what the opponent would have done
under the program. This implies that the difference in the incumbent reelection likelihood before and after
the program is:
π0 − π =

1
[λφE (E 0 (VEI ) − E(VEI )) + (1 − λ)φN (E 0 (VNI ) − E(VNI ))] > 0
φ̄

(A.22)

From our assumptions, both VE and VN are increasing and concave in p, this implies that the program causes an increase in the incumbent’s reelection probability because the new distribution second-order
stochastically dominates the old one because of the concavity of the voters’ utility function: E 0 [WEi ] > E[WEi ]
and E 0 [WNi ] > E[WNi ]. Since (A.22) is increasing in E[WEi ] and E[WNi ], this raises the likelihood of reelection.
54

The assumptions above imply that U (1 − p) is decreasing and concave in p, and that WE (pλ, .) and
WN (pλ, ., .) are each increasing and concave in p. This in turn implies that VE and VN are both concave in
p.

47

2

(pλ,g)
∂ H
Let H(pλ, g) = ∂WE∂g
. We assume: (i) ∂H
∂p > 0 and (ii) ∂p2 < 0. The interpretation of these assumptions
is that the marginal utility of government efficiency is increasing in the revenue collected, but at a decreasing
rate. Under these assumptions,
∂(π 0 − π)
>0
(A.23)
∂g

An analogous argument can be used to obtain that

∂(π 0 −π)
∂b

> 0.

48

Appendix Figures
Figure A.1: The Ghost Building Identification Process

   

     

   

Source: Agenzia del Territorio

49

Figure A.2: Ghost Buildings Program Inception Year

Notes: The figure shows the year of inception of the Ghost Buildings program (i.e., the year of publication
of the list of ghost buildings) in each town. White areas identify towns with missing data.

50

Change in Reelection Rates Pre to Post Program
−.1
0
.1
.2
.3

Figure A.3: Difference in reelection rates pre- to post- Placebo Ghost Buildings program

0

.02

.04
.06
Ghost Building Intensity

.08

.1

Notes: The scatter plots the relation between the change in the average (year-demeaned) reelection rate
between the pre-placebo-program and the post-placebo-program periods and the Ghost Building Intensity
(i.e., the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of
land registry parcels). The placebo subsample of observations used for this graph only includes election that
occurred before the actual program inception. In each town, the year of the placebo program start is defined
as nine years before the actual publication. This roughly divides the graph sample in two equally sized
groups of pre-placebo and post-placebo elections. The x-axis is partitioned into percentiles. The x-axis of
each dot is the median value of the ghost building intensity in the percentile. The y-axis is the average value
of the change in the reelection rate in the percentile. We cut the top 1% of the x-axis values from the graph.
The sample includes elections in which the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. The line plots the
predicted values from a linear regression model.

51

Figure A.4: Ghost Building Intensity Coefficient by Election Pre/Post Program
2 − N. Candidates

−5

0

5

−1 0 1 2 3

10

1 − Incumbent Reelection

−4

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to Program

−4

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to Program

4 − Victory Margin

−2−1 0 1 2 3

−50 0 50 100

3 − Incumbent Rerun

−4

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to Program

−4

6 − Log Town Govt Expenditures
−2 −1 0 1 2

−10 −5

0

5

5 − Runoff

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to Program

−4

−3
−2
−1
1
Election Rank Relative to Program

−8 −7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 1 2
Year Relative to the Program

3

4

5

Notes: Graphs 1 to 5 report the coefficients on the ghost building intensity for each election before
and after the beginning of the Ghost Buildings program. The modal number of years between elections is
five years between 1993 and 2001, and four afterwards. On the x-axis, elections are ranked based on their
occurrence relative to the program. The sample includes elections in which the incumbent does not face
a binding term-limit. Graph 6 reports the coefficients on the ghost building intensity for each calendar
year before and after the beginning of the Ghost Buildings program. The dependent variable is in natural
logarithm. On the x-axis, years are ranked based on their occurrence relative to the program. We drop
the year of program inception due to its ambiguous treatment status. In all the graphs, the regression
includes town and year fixed effects. We report the point estimate and the 95% confidence interval. The last
election/year before the program (“-1”) is the omitted category. The coefficient on ghost building intensity
for this group is normalized to zero. Confidence interval width for this election is obtained as the mean of
the confidence interval width in election/year -2 and election/year +1.

52

25893
24401

23713

15897

14632

1998

1999

18157

18463

0

Coefficient on Ghost Building Intensity*Post
.5
1
1.5

2

Figure A.5: Robustness to changes in election sample time span

1993

1994

1995
1996
1997
Start Year of Election Sample

Notes: The figure presents robustness of the results on incumbent reelection to changes in sample years.
The y-axis shows the coefficient (and 95% confidence intervals) on the interaction between ghost building
intensity and the post-program indicator as estimated in our baseline specification (Table 4, Column 7). The
x-axis is the start year of the alternative election samples we use (the final year is 2011 for all the samples).
The first sample, 1993-2011, is the baseline sample. The marker label shows the number of observations in
each sample.

53

Appendix Tables
Table A.1: Variable description and sources
Definition and measure
Ghost Building Intensity
Ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings
and the total number of parcels.
Registration Rate
Percentage of ghost building parcels that get registered by the April 2011

Sample
Program
inception

Source
ATD

2011

ATD

Total expenditures

Total local expenditures
Per-resident

2000-2011

Town Area Size

Area Size of the town,
in square km

2001

IMI
Financial reports,
Quadro 3
SAIM

Altitude

Altitude
Altitude of the city, in meters

2001

SAIM

Population

Population
Population, in thousand of inhabitants

2001

Census

Disposable Income
per capita

Disposable income per capita at the
municipal level, in thousand of euros

2005

SAIM

Urbanization Index

Index is equal to one if density is less than 100 people per sq. km; it is
equal to two if density is between 100 and 500 people per sq. km;
it is equal to three if density is above 500 people per sq.km.
Non profit association
per thousand of inhabitants

2001

SAIM

2001

SAIM

Number of Firms
per capita

Number of firms per capita
thousand of inhabitants

2001

SAIM

Justify Tax
Cheating

Answers to the question “Do you Justify Tax Cheating?”, originally coded
on a scale 1 (never justifiable) to 10 (always justifiable). Normalized variable.

1981-2008

EVS

Speed of Public
Good Provision

Speed of current expenditures
Ratio between paid over committed current expenditures

2005-2006

IMI

Variable
Ghost Building
Intensity
Registration Rate

54
Non-Profit Associations

Notes: ATD stands for Agenzia del Territorio Database. IMI stands for Italian Ministry of the Interior. SAIM stands for Statistical Atlas of Italian Municipalities.
EVS stands for European Values Survey.

Table A.2: Political Variables description and sources
Variable
Mayor Age

Definition and measure
Age of the mayor
Age of the mayor, in number of years

Sample
Program
inception

Source
IMI

Mayor Education

Education of the mayor
Categories: Primary Education, High school education, University degree,
Postgraduate professional schooling, GED equivalent schooling, Vocational schooling
Place of birth of the mayor
Dummy variable equal to 1 if mayor is born in the same city

Program
inception

IMI

Program
inception

IMI

Mayor Term Number

Tenure of the mayor
Number of the mayoral’s term, in number of years

Program
inception

IMI

Mayor Woman

Gender of the mayor
Dummy variable equal to 1 if the mayor is a woman

Program
inception

IMI

Term Limit Indicator

Mayor is not eligible for reelection
Equal to 1 if mayor has a binding term limit

1993-2011

IMI

Incumbent Reelection

Incumbent mayor is reelected
Equal to 1 if mayor is reelected

1993-2011

IMI

Incumbent Rerun

Incumbent mayor decides to run for office again
Equal to 1 if mayor re-runs

1993-2011

IMI

N. Candidates

Number of candidates
Number of candidates

1993-2011

IMI

Victory Margin

Margin of victory
Margin of victory of the incumbent mayor

1993-2011

IMI

Runoff

Election has a runoff
Runoff

1993-2011

IMI

Mayor Born Same City

55

Notes: IMI stands for Italian Ministry of the Interior.

Table A.3: Ghost Building Intensity and Incumbent Reelection: Robustness

(1)
Baseline
Ghost Building Intensity*Post
Observations

1.042∗∗∗
(0.378)
25893

(2)
Region
Interactions
1.162∗∗∗
(0.386)
25893

(3)
Region+Control
Interactions
1.322∗∗∗
(0.460)
25893

(4)
Town w/
post-election
0.932∗∗
(0.368)
17566

(5)
Trim top 1%
Intensity
1.255∗∗
(0.493)
25618

(6)
Alternative
Normalization
0.119∗
(0.067)
25893

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected (mean 0.454). Post is a binary indicator equal to
one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program inception. In all the columns, Post is instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to
one if the election occurs after the modal program inception year in the province. All the regressions include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and
an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post. In the specification Region Interactions, we add interactions between the post-program indicator
and regional fixed effects. In the specification Region and Controls Interactions, we add interactions between the post-program indicator and regional fixed
effects and between the post-program indicator and town-controls (refer to Table 1 for a list of these variables). In the specification Town w/post-election
we only retain in our sample the towns with one post-program election. In the specification Trim top 1% Intensity, we drop towns in the first percentile of
ghost building intensity (0.0928). Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels with ghost buildings and the
total number of land registry parcels. except in Column (8) — Alternative Normalization — where it is defined as the ratio between the number of land
registry parcels with ghost buildings and the total number of buildings. All the regressions include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects. Columns (1)
and (4)-(6) include an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post. The regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which
the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

56

Table A.4: Ghost Building Intensity and Incumbent Reelection: Robustness on Post Instrumentation

Ghost Building Intensity*Post
Observations

Province

Region

Italy

(1)
1.042∗∗∗
(0.378)
25893

(2)
0.931∗
(0.533)
25893

(3)
1.345∗∗
(0.563)
25893

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected
(mean 0.454). Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program
inception. In column 1, Post is instrumented by Province Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election
occurs after the modal program inception year in the province. In column 2, Post is instrumented by Region
Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the modal program inception year in the
region. In column 3, Post is instrumented by Italy Post, a binary indicator equal to one if the election
occurs after 2007, the modal program inception year at the national level. All the regressions include town
fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post. The
regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which the incumbent does not face a
binding term-limit. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

Table A.5: Incumbent Holding Other Positions

Ghost Building Intensity*Post
Mean Dep Var
Town Controls*Post
Observations

(1)
-0.042
(0.222)
0.064
25893

(2)
-0.086
(0.251)
0.064
X
25893

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator defined for each town election that is equal to one
if the incument mayor in that election holds a position within three years from the election at the Provincial
Councils, Regional Councils, Italian Parliament, or European Parliaments. All the regressions include town
fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and an interaction between macro-areas fixed effects and Post. The
regression sample includes all the elections between 1993 and 2011 in which the incumbent does not face a
binding term-limit. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

57

Table A.6: Ghost Building Intensity and Incumbent Reelection: Trentino Check

Incumbent Reelected
Ghost Building Intensity*Post Program*Rest of Italy (γ)
Ghost Building Intensity*Post Program (δ)
Town Controls*Post
Observations
P-value (γ + δ)

(1)
3.139∗
(1.849)
-2.120
(1.813)
26977
0.007

(2)
2.746∗∗
(1.348)
-1.721
(1.408)
X
26977
0.008

Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator equal to one if the incumbent mayor is reelected
(mean 0.46). Rest of Italy is a binary indicator equal to one in observations that are not in the Trentino
Alto-Adige region, and to zero otherwise. Post is a binary indicator equal to one if the election occurs after
the Ghost Buildings program inception. In all the columns it is instrumented with Province Post, a binary
indicator equal to one if the election occurs after the Ghost Buildings program modal inception year in the
province. Ghost Building Intensity is defined as the ratio between the number of land registry parcels
with ghost buildings and the total number of land registry parcels. For Trentino Alto-Adige, the measure of
ghost building intensity is obtained by imputing the value of the ghost building intensity by using the results
in Table 2. All the columns include town fixed effects, election-year fixed effects and an interaction between
macro-areas fixed effects and Post. Town Controls*Post include town-level controls interacted with the
Post dummy. Refer to Table 1 for a list of these variables. The regression sample includes all the elections
between 1993 and 2011 in which the incumbent does not face a binding term-limit, both in the Rest of Italy
and in Trentino Alto-Adige. Standard errors are clustered at provincial level. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

58

