                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE MARKET VALUE OF R&D IN WEAK INNOVATION REGIMES:
                          EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                         Sunil Kanwar
                                        Bronwyn H. Hall

                                      Working Paper 21196
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21196


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2015, Revised January 2018




We are grateful to several anonymous referees for extremely useful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sunil Kanwar and Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Market Value of R&D in Weak Innovation Regimes: Evidence from India
Sunil Kanwar and Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 21196
May 2015, Revised January 2018
JEL No. G12,O16,O30

                                         ABSTRACT

We revisit the relationship between market value and innovation in the context of manufacturing
firms in a developing country, using data for Indian firms from 2001 through 2010. Surprisingly,
we find that financial markets value the R&D investment of Indian firms the same or higher than
it values such investment in developed economies such as the US and European countries,
suggesting some degree of underinvestment. The paper explores the use of a proxy for the option
value of R&D and finds that this can account for a very small part of the R&D valuation (about
10 per cent). We also find that the market value R&D relationship does not vary significantly
across industry groups, although these results are rather imprecise.


Sunil Kanwar
Delhi School of Economics
University of Delhi
Delhi 110 007
India
sunil_kanwar@econdse.org

Bronwyn H. Hall
University of California at Berkeley
123 Tamalpais Road
Berkeley, CA 94708
and NBER
bhhall@nber.org
1. Introduction

Innovation is often considered to be the prime motive force behind economic growth. Firms
spend large amounts of scare resources on innovative activities, and it is therefore desirable to
know whether financial markets value innovating firms differently from non‐innovating ones.
Of course, innovative activity tends to be highly risky by its very nature, and may take time to
yield returns. Hence the interest in examining market value, which should reflect the present
discounted value of the expected profits that all such investments are likely to generate
(Griliches 1981; Hayashi 1982). While there is persuasive empirical evidence that stock markets
in advanced economies do value innovative activity by firms, can we expect the same in the
context of less developed economies? A major reason for doubt is the fact that the predominant
share of intellectual capital appears to be generated in a handful of developed economies,
whether measured in terms of the inputs into innovation (such as research and development
expenditure4) or in terms of the outputs of innovation (such as patents, WIPO 2014).

Nevertheless, the literature does recognize the existence of innovative activity in a few
developing countries, even though this may manifest itself primarily in the form of process
patents, or utility models, or even smaller innovations (Bogliacino et al. 2012). Although these
innovations may be small in the larger scheme of things, they appear to have value insofar as
they contribute to increasing firm productivity and profitability. Moreover, innovation may be
directed towards imitation and diffusion in some cases, which may be just as important in
generating profits and hence market value. In view of these arguments, questions about the
stock market’s responsiveness become as relevant in the developing country context as they
have historically been in the context of developed economies. Thus, are more innovative firms
valued more highly than less innovative ones, ceteris paribus? Is the market valuation
responsive to the success or qualitative aspects of innovation spending? Does the relationship
between firm market value and innovative activity vary across industries, and if so, how? Is the
variation in the market value–innovation relationship across industries, if any, related to
variations in economic performance across these industries? In this study we explore these
questions in the context of manufacturing industries in the emerging economy of India.

The prior literature on the market valuation of the intangible assets of the firm has been
informative on a number of counts. Griliches (1981), using US data, reports that a dollar



4See Wikipedia, which suggests that just 5 countries (US, Japan, Germany, France, UK and South Korea)
accounted for about 55 per cent of R&D worldwide in 2010:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_research_and_development_spending



                                                 2
increase in R&D raises market value of the firm by about $2 in the long run. Bloom and Van
Reenen (2002) confirm these findings with UK data, finding that patents have a significant
(immediate) impact on firm market value, such that doubling the citation‐weighted patent stock
raises firm value (per unit of physical capital) by about 43%. Hall (1993a) highlights the fact
that the relationship is not stable over time, while Hall, Jaffe and Trajtenberg (2005) report a
smaller increase of about 25% with a doubling of the (normalized) stock of knowledge capital.

Further studies show that the stock market valuation differs considerably across UK industries
(Greenhalgh and Rogers 2006), that during some periods the market may well value intangible
assets more than a firm’s tangible assets (Hall 1993), and that the average value of patents fell
whereas that of trademarks rose for a sample of Australian firms during the 1989‐2002 period
(Griffiths and Webster 2006). An exception to these studies appears to be that of Hall and Oriani
(2006) who report only a weak relationship for the market valuation of intangible assets in
Italy. Hall (2005) emphasizes the fact that the relationship between market value and R&D (or
other proxies for innovation) is that of a hedonic equilibrium rather than a causal relationship,
and that interpretation of the valuation coefficient depends heavily on the assumed
depreciation rate for R&D assets.5

It is striking, however, that the predominant bulk of the empirical evidence relates to the US,
with a small fraction for some European economies such as the UK and Italy (see Czarnitzki et
al. 2006 for a recent survey). Do similar results apply to less developed countries where firms
are engaged in some innovative activity and the stock market is reasonably well functioning? In
view of the recent trend for multinationals to locate some of their innovative activity in certain
developing countries, these are questions that might be of interest to developed country entities
as well.

This study contributes to this literature by adding evidence for firms in the emerging economy
of India, for which there has only been one prior such study (Chadha and Oriani 2010). We use
data for a more recent time period than theirs, during which GDP growth averaged 7.5% per
annum and the economy displayed numerous signs of higher productivity (Topalova and
Khandelwal 2005; and the references therein), and innovativeness (The Economist 2010). This
performance inevitably leads to the question whether the higher productivity and
innovativeness have been reflected in the domestic stock market movements during this period.
We also have data for both the Bombay and National Stock Exchanges, rather than data from the
Bombay exchange only, as in the earlier study. In addition, we employ a nonlinear model, rather
than a linear model based on suppositions unsupported by the data. We explore the use of a


5   See also Rosen (1974) and Ekeland et al. (2004) for the theory of price determination in hedonic models.

                                                      3
measure based on unexpected profitability as a proxy for the efficacy of the R&D stock, to
augment specifications used in the received literature. Furthermore, we also include a measure
of risk to explore the option value of R&D.

Our data cover a sample of 380 Indian firms in the manufacturing sector during the period
2001‐2010. We find that both R&D and advertising capital are valued in these firms, with the
marginal value of R&D slightly higher than its share, and the marginal value of advertising
slightly lower. In the context of a relatively weak innovation milieu, where most firms have only
‘small’ or incremental innovations, this finding suggests that R&D investments are nevertheless
as productive as in developed economies. The financial market values the R&D investment of
Indian firms (with a knowledge capital coefficient of 1.76) higher than the markets in developed
economies such as the US, France, and Germany (with knowledge capital coefficients of 0.80,
0.41 and 0.36 respectively, according to a comparable study), suggesting considerable
underinvestment in knowledge capital by Indian firms. We also explore a proxy for the option
value of R&D and find a positive impact of market uncertainty on market value in agreement
with the theoretical literature, though this accounts for only a small part of the R&D valuation
(about 10 per cent). Finally, we find relatively little variation across industrial sectors in these
relationships; although the supplier‐dominated sector, a low‐tech manufacturing sector,
appears to differ from the others, it is a very small sector and the differences from the other
sectors are largely insignificant.

The detailed analysis is presented in the following sections. In the next section we give a brief
overview of the recent developments in the Indian economy, paying special attention to
innovative indicators and the stock market. Section 3 develops the relationship to be estimated.
Section 4 details the data set and explains the computation of the model variables. Section 5
discusses the detailed empirical results, as well as their economic significance. Section 6
examines the heterogeneity of the relationship across industry groups. Section 7 studies
whether this variation across industries is explained by variations in expected firm/industry
performance. Finally, section 8 briefly presents the conclusions.


2. The Indian context

Altenburg et al. (2007) argue that India has now become a major producer of products and
services for global markets, which is part of an overall shift in the distribution of industrial
activity away from OECD countries. They show that human capital, India’s most important input
into its innovation capability, has risen very substantially between 1995 and 2004, in several
dimensions – total graduates, engineering graduates, science graduates, etc. The number of
patents granted by the US Patent and Trademark Office to Indian applicants rose substantially

                                                 4
between 1995 and 2005, albeit from a small base, both in absolute terms as well as a proportion
of the total foreign patents. The UNCTAD Innovation Capability Index ranks India at 26 out of
125 nations. Thus, data based on innovation systems, global value chains and global
professional networks provide evidence of mounting innovation effort, which if sustained, is
likely to raise innovation capability rapidly, even though initially in non‐strategic areas.

Saxenian (2002), focusing on IT, attributes the buildup of innovation capability in India to the
‘New Argonauts’ or the highly mobile and technically‐skilled entrepreneurs, engineers and
scientists, who transport their knowledge and capital gained in the US to India. Athreye and
Kapur (2009), Chittoor and Ray (2007) and Goldstein (2008) report, that in recent years Indian
firms have increasingly internationalized via significant outward investment and overseas
mergers and acquisitions. Thus, FDI flows from India grew from near 0 in 1990 to about $14
billion in 2007, with the FDI stock rising from near 0 to about $30 billion over the same period.
These investments have spanned various sectors such as steel, pharmaceuticals, IT, and food
and beverages, with cross‐border acquisitions by Indian firms averaging $1.5 billion annually
over 2005‐07. These represent attempts to acquire strategic assets such as technology and
inputs, which would augment innovation capability. Several Indian firms supply sophisticated
inputs to international firms, a case in point being auto ancillary units where “global
automakers have been giving responsibilities for research, design, development, testing,
validation, and integration to vendors” in India (Singh et al. 2007).

Not only are the Indian firms growing in global importance, its stock market has also matured to
an extent where it may be expected to discern such changes. Lamm Jr. (2010), in his study of
Indian (and some other emerging market) equity returns, comments that “equity markets …
trading today is increasingly driven by fundamentals and more complete information than ever
before”. This is in consonance with the earlier findings of Mukhopadhyay and Sarkar (2003) for
the post‐1991 period. Tas et al. (2010) report a strong relationship between national stock
market indices in India (and some other emerging economies) and the price‐book, price‐
earnings and dividend‐yield ratios, just as in mature economies. Thus, a broad reading of the
research in this area gives the impression that although there is further need to improve various
aspects of Indian stock markets such as information disclosure norms, monitoring and
supervision mechanisms etc., these markets are increasingly driven by economic fundamentals.6
Thus one aim of our research is to examine whether the valuation of R&D and advertising
capital in these firms also follows the pattern observed in more developed financial markets.




6   Also see the material referred to in footnote 9 below.

                                                        5
3. The market value model

On the premise that the innovative activity of firms leads to the generation of ‘knowledge
capital’, we measure the private value of firm innovation in terms of the marginal effect of a unit
change in knowledge capital on the capitalized market value of a firm, following Griliches
(1981) and Hall (1993a). If stock markets are efficient and the firm is pursuing an optimal
investment strategy, in any given period the market values the assets owned by the firm
(physical capital, knowledge capital, and other intangible capital) as the present discounted
value of the expected returns to those assets. The notion of physical capital is well‐defined
(plant, equipment, inventories, etc.) and does not require further elaboration. Knowledge capital
refers to the stock of knowhow embodied in the ideas, innovations, and inventions that a firm
has title to, where this entitlement may be explicit as in the case of ownership of formal
intellectual property rights such as patents, design rights, or copyrights, or else implicit as with
trade secrets or other informal knowledge.

In principle, other intangible capital includes a wide range of firm‐specific assets such as its
customer or distribution networks, the firm‐specific human capital of its employees, and the
value of its brands and reputation. Unfortunately much of this is unmeasured and in some cases
unmeasurable. We focus here on one aspect, reputational capital, including the value of the
firm’s brands. Reputation can be thought of as a stock that grows and diminishes over time as a
result of the firm’s activities. However, it is difficult to measure, because it depends on a number
of diverse factors. Firm advertising is one important input into a firm’s reputation, but after‐
sales service, product quality, product development expenses and firm‐specific training (as in
Corrado et al. 2009), etc. also contribute towards its reputation. Often data on most of these
inputs are not available, and therefore it is more accurate to refer to it as advertising capital. In
this sense, advertising capital is an imperfect proxy for other intangible capital.

In addition to the magnitudes of these capital stocks, the market’s valuation of a firm would also
depend on the quality or efficiency of the capital stocks created by the various types of
investment; just as the market value of any commodity would depend both on its quantity as
well as its qualitative aspects. In this paper we refer to the efficiency with which these stocks
generate current profits as their “efficacy.” Although the efficacy of all three types of capital may
differ across firms and over time, one would expect this to be particularly true of the stock of
knowledge capital, in part because of the stochastic nature of the innovation process. For
instance, some R&D investment might result in very small innovations, whereas other R&D
investment might generate major breakthroughs. Even though the stock of knowledge capital
generated in both these cases may be of similar magnitude, the efficacy of the capital stock
would be much higher in the latter case.

                                                  6
Theory does not necessarily provide an explicit form for the market value equation except
under very restrictive assumptions (Wildasin 1984; Hayashi and Inoue 1991). We follow the
empirical literature and use a first order approximation that allows for returns to scale. Thus,
the market value of a firm (V) may be expressed as a function of its stocks of physical capital
(KP), knowledge capital (KK), and other intangible capital (KOI), as well as the efficacy of its
capital stocks ( ), according to the relation

                                                                                                    (1)

where p is the market premium of the firm’s stock value over its replacement cost of capital,        is
the shadow price of the knowledge capital,       is the shadow price of other intangible capital,    is
the shadow price of the quality of capital, and        is the scale factor in this valuation relation.
Although one could have considered three different efficacy variables corresponding to the
three different stocks of capital, we preferred to be circumspect in our modelling, knowing the
data limitations. Taking logarithms and subtracting ln KP from both sides, this relationship may
be rewritten as

ln           ln           ln                           ln                                           (2)

or

ln           ln           ln      ln 1                                                              (3)

where        ≡         1. The market premium p would be one in equilibrium (if all capital
measurements are correct and there is some kind of steady state). However, usually it will differ
from one because of overall macroeconomic shocks and other things that cause market
volatility. It also may differ across firms if there are left‐out assets or differences in firm
qualities that are not captured by their capital stocks.

Allowing for firm and year effects to capture some of the variability in the market premium, the
estimating equation corresponding to the above specification is the following:

ln                ln           ln 1                                                                 (4)

where        signifies firm‐specific ‘time constant’ factors such as (possibly) management skills or
tax rates,        references factors that affect the sample firms similarly but may vary over time
such as the ‘depth’ of stock markets, and       is the stochastic error term.




                                                   7
Given the twin simplifying claims that σ = 1,7 and that ln(1+x) ≈ x when        is ‘small’,8 as in some of
the literature reviewed earlier, the model in (4) yields the alternative estimating equation:

ln                                                                                                     (5)

To appreciate the difference between estimating equations (4) and (5), note that the implied
(partial) elasticities of firm market value with respect to knowledge capital (∂lnV/∂lnKK) are

      ⁄                                                                                                (6)

and βKK/KP, respectively. Thus, if in fact σ is found to be close to unity, one would expect
specification (5) to yield upwardly biased estimates of the change in the capitalized market
value of a firm as a result of a change in the stock of its knowledge capital. But if σ differs from
unity, the elasticity estimate from (5) could be upwardly or downwardly biased. Of course, from
the policy perspective total elasticities would serve better than partial elasticities, for they
would include not just the direct impact of a change in knowledge capital on market value, but
the indirect impacts as well. For instance, an increase in the stock of knowledge capital may lead
to a reduction in physical capital insofar as it raises the efficiency of use of physical capital. If
this indirect effect dominates the direct effect of the first round increase in knowledge capital,
the total impact may be a decline in market value. Alternatively, an increase in the stock of
knowledge capital may lead to an increase in the stock of advertising capital, and the total
impact would be a larger increase in market value than in the absence of the indirect effect.
Incorporating such indirect effects, however, would require a more elaborate model that allows
for interactions between the different types of capital stocks, and identification of this more
complex model would be difficult in our relatively small dataset.

To render estimating equations (4) and (5) estimable, we need to be able to measure knowledge
capital, other intangible capital, and the overall quality of capital. Although researchers have
attempted to capture knowledge capital both in terms of research and development investment
and in terms of patents and other intellectual property (Hall and MacGarvie 2010, Greenhalgh
and Rogers 2006, Hall et al. 2005, Bloom and Van Reenen 2002, Blundell et al. 1999, Cockburn
and Griliches 1988), the former has been shown by Hall et al. 2005 to be a better value
predictor. This is not surprising, because R&D is measured in currency units, whereas patents
(or trademarks and other measures) are typically counts of items whose underlying value can

7 In estimation we check this assumption by including log (       ) in the regression. The estimate of this
coefficient was always insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that this constraint is appropriate.
8The approximation       1          is exact when x = 0 and becomes increasingly poor as x increases in
value from zero, while remaining fairly good for | | 0.2. Our data include a number of observations
with knowledge or other capital that is much greater than physical capital, leading to values of x that are
much larger than unity, so the approximation will not be very good in those cases.

                                                    8
vary enormously (see Griliches et al. 1991 for a thorough discussion of this issue). We describe
the exact construction of our knowledge capital variable using R&D data in Section 3.1 below.
Corrado et al. (2009) list the components of other intangible investment as software
investment, product level development expense not captured by R&D, and investments in
economic competency such as firm‐specific training. We do not observe all of these investments,
but we do observe advertising expenditure, which is associated with the introduction of new
products and the development of brand‐related capital. We use this variable to construct a stock
of advertising capital, as described in Section 3.2 below. Further, as a first approximation we
represent the efficacy of the firm’s capital ( ) by the post‐tax profit of firms appropriately
modified, for more efficacious capital (or that associated with ‘meaningful’ innovations from the
production viewpoint) should increase profit more than less efficacious capital (or that
associated with no innovations or else innovations that are not practically useful). The method
we use to construct an input‐adjusted profit measure as a proxy for innovation efficacy is
explained in Section 3.3 below.


4. Data and Variables

The data we use are based on a large sample of firms drawn from the ‘Prowess’ database, sold
by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE 2012). They pertain to firms traded on the
Bombay and National Stock Exchanges of the country.9 Only firms for which data were available
for physical capital and R&D for the full ten‐year period 2001‐2010 were retained. This left us
with data on 380 firms for the period 2001‐2010, or 3800 observations.10 To minimize the
influence of outliers, observations with a market value to physical capital ratio exceeding 20 or
a debt to assets ratio exceeding 5 were dropped,11 which left us with a sample of 3551
observations relating to 380 firms, with an average of 9.4 years of data for each firm. Some of
these observations clearly indicated a break in the firm data (reorganization, bankruptcy,
possible major errors in reporting, etc.); when this occurred we defined a new firm going
forward, to avoid measurement error bias in the dynamic models. We also required at least
three years of data per firm, to ensure identification of the dynamic models, which removed a
few more observations. After this data cleaning, we are left with a sample of 3,494 observations


9   A brief description of the Indian stock exchanges can be found at Investopedia:
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/stocks/09/indian‐stock‐market.asp
10As section 4.1 explains, the knowledge capital variable was constructed using R&D data. Though we

started off with R&D data on 380 firms for the period 2000‐2010, the first observation was lost in
constructing the knowledge capital variable, leaving us with data for 2001‐2010.
11Varying  these thresholds did not change the results qualitatively – the signs and significance of the
variables of interest remained unchanged.

                                                       9
relating to 380 firms, an average of 9.2 years per firm.12 The firms were spread across 22
manufacturing industries (mostly) at the broad 2‐digit and (some at the) 3‐digit levels of the
National Industrial Classification (NIC). The list of industries and the number of firms in each is
shown in Appendix A.

The market value of firms was computed as the sum of equity and the book value of debt.13
Physical capital was measured as the book value of net fixed assets. Knowledge capital, other
intangible capital, and the quality measure were computed as described in the next three
sections.


4.1 Measuring knowledge capital

We construct the stock of knowledge capital from the flow of R&D expenditure using the usual
perpetual inventory relation (Hall 1990):

        1                                                                                             (7)

where KK is the stock of knowledge capital, RD is research and development investment, θ is the
rate of depreciation of knowledge capital, and t is the time subscript. To employ this relation, we
need to resolve a number of issues. First, it is difficult to determine an appropriate rate of
depreciation for knowledge capital, and we follow the literature in employing a rate of 15% per
annum. Later in the paper we use 30% per annum as a robustness check. Second, if there are
only one or two missing values in the R&D series for a firm, we interpolate these, since even a
single missing value for R&D for a firm will cause all the associated stocks to be missing. Third,
to derive the value of the stock in the ‘first’ period, we divide the R&D investment in that period
by the sum of the rate of depreciation of knowledge capital and the pre‐sample rate of growth of
R&D. We employ the sample period R&D data (along with the few pre‐sample observations that
are available for some firms) to compute a proxy for the pre‐sample rate of growth of R&D. This
proxy is the average of R&D growth rates within each of the 22 industries; the values are shown
in Appendix A. With the exception of a few outliers based on very small samples, they range
from 0.5% for metals to 2.7% for pharmaceuticals (compared to the 8% per annum that Hall
(1990) suggests for the U.S.). Having computed the value of the stock in the first period, we then




12The fact that we start with 380 firms and end up with 380 firms is purely coincidental. Splitting due to
gaps or outliers in the data gives us 400 firms, but dropping firms with fewer than 3 observations reduces
that to 380 firms.
13Using the methods suggested by Lewellen and Badrinath (1997), Hall and Kim (2000) showed that
variations in the measurement of capital and debt that adjust for past inflation make little difference to
the measured coefficients of R&D stock in the Tobin’s equation.

                                                   10
employ equation (7) to derive the complete series, using R&D data deflated by the industry
sales deflator.


4.2 Measuring other intangible capital

The stock of other intangible capital (KOI) is approximated in terms of the firms’ advertising
expenditure, using the perpetual inventory relation. However, since such capital is subject to
relatively rapid depreciation in comparison to knowledge capital, following Hall (1993) we take
depreciation to be 30% per annum,14 and employ the sample period rate of growth of
advertising expenditure to capitalize the first period of advertising expenditure. The latter is
found to range between ‐1.0% per annum and 2.7% per annum across the 22 industry groups.
Having derived the first period stock of advertising capital (using the same methodology as that
outlined in the previous sub‐section for knowledge capital), we then derive the advertising
capital series for each firm in the sample using the perpetual inventory equation and deflated
advertising data.

Because the advertising expenditure variable is zero for about 40 per cent of the observations,
in the regressions we also include a dummy for zero advertising, to check whether these firms
are somehow different from the others. The coefficient of this variable was invariably
insignificant, leading us to conclude that these firms look no different from those that did indeed
have zero advertising that was captured well by the zero stock measure of advertising capital.


4.3 Measuring the efficacy of intangible capital

Although R&D‐based measures of the stock of knowledge capital may reflect the importance of
the associated innovations better than patent‐based measures, there may still be need to control
for the efficacy of the R&D output; for a given amount of R&D expenditure by different firms
may not all be the same, if only because it may be spent in different ways. As a first pass, we
propose to capture the efficacy of capital ( ) by the post‐tax profit of firms in excess of that
predicted by its capital stocks. Because current profit is itself likely to be influenced by the
stocks of knowledge capital and other intangible capital of the firm, we regress the ratio of post‐
tax profit to physical capital on the ratios of knowledge capital and other intangible capital to
physical capital (as well as a full set of year dummies), and then take the residual from this

14 Bagwell’s (2007) review reports that Peles (1971), Palda (1964) and Telser (1962) suggest firm‐level

depreciation rates of advertising between 15% and 50% per annum for certain industries, whereas
Lambin (1976) suggests an average depreciation rate of about 50% for brand advertising, supporting our
use of an overall average of about 30%. We experimented with a rate of 60% and found that the other
results were largely unchanged, while the advertising capital coefficient rose to the level of the R&D
coefficient (results available on request). This suggests that advertising depreciation may indeed be quite
high.

                                                    11
regression as a proxy for the unobserved efficacy of capital.15 This measure also accounts to
some extent for (semi‐)permanent differences in managerial capabilities, human capital, and
intangible assets besides those created by R&D and advertising across firms, all of which
contribute to the efficacy of the firm’s capital stocks.


4.4 Sample statistics

Summary statistics for each of the variables are presented in Table 1. To facilitate the
comparison, we use the recent studies of Hall and Oriani (2006) for Europe, and Chadha and
Oriani (2009) for India. We find the so‐called Tobin’s average           (V/KP) to be 4.4 on average,
which is much larger than the magnitudes reported by Hall and Oriani for the UK, France,
Germany and Italy, and even larger than that for the US. It is also larger than the 2.4 found by
Chadha and Oriani for the earlier period in India, which doubtless reflects shifting expectations
about firm growth following the various economic liberalizations of the 1990s.

The ratio of knowledge capital to physical capital (       ⁄   ) is small, averaging 0.12, as one would
expect for a country where firms do not invest a great deal in R&D. It is no surprise then, that
this figure is only about one‐fourth or one‐third that for the US, Germany and France, although it
is about the same as that for the UK, and it is much larger than the 0.03 reported by Chadha and
Oriani for 1991‐2005.16 The mean ratio of advertising capital to physical capital (            ⁄    ) is
fairly high at 0.17, exceeding those for the US, UK, Germany, and Italy, although the category of
advertising capital is quite ill‐defined and can vary across different accounting systems, making
comparison difficult. The mean of the profit surprise to physical capital ratio ( ⁄        ) is zero by
construction, but it is slightly skewed to the left with a median of ‐0.03; as this is a novel
measure, we have no comparators.

That most of the variables in question have highly skewed distributions becomes evident from
considering their median values. At 3.2, the median value of Tobin’s average          is much smaller
than its mean. The median ratio of the stock of knowledge capital to physical capital is a mere
0.05, and that of the stock of advertising capital to physical capital even smaller at 0.0, largely
because many of the firms report no spending on advertising at all. The correlation matrix
suggests a positive association between market value and the intangible capital variables, while
discounting the possibility of any significant collinearity between the regressors.




15Real post‐tax profit is derived as post‐tax profit deflated by the (industry‐specific) wholesale price
index for output.
16Their sample contains 219 firms and is for a slightly earlier period, so that differences are to be
expected.

                                                  12
The final column in the table of means shows that with the exception of the efficacy variable and
possibly the dependent variable, all the variables exhibit much higher variance across firms
than within firms. This fact affects the identifiability of models based on within‐firm data, and
we will return to this issue after we present some of these results.


5. Empirical Results


5.1 Econometric issues

Several issues arise when estimating market value equations using panel data. The first is the
presumed presence of permanent (or slowly changing) differences across firms that may be
correlated with the regressors. The second is the fact that the capitals on the right hand side are
at best predetermined and may even be contemporaneously correlated with the disturbances.
The latter problem, although present in principle, is not an issue once it is recognized that the
market value relationship is a hedonic one that describes the current equilibrium of supply and
demand for claims on the underlying assets, and as such should be interpreted as a conditional
expectation of price given the associated assets of the firm. Thus, the contemporaneous capitals
will be uncorrelated with the disturbances by construction.

The seminal paper in hedonic price theory is Rosen (1974), which discusses the theoretical
basis for interpreting the observed equilibrium price function for differentiated products. He
shows that if buyers are identical but sellers differ in their characteristics, the observed prices
as a function of characteristics traces out the demand for those characteristics. Symmetrically, if
sellers are identical but buyers differ in their characteristics, observed prices trace out the
supply function for the characteristics. In our setting here, the characteristics are the assets of
the firm, the buyers are investors choosing firms that are made up of varying bundles of assets
and the sellers are the firms. If we assume that stock markets incorporate information
efficiently, then effectively all investors are alike in the data we observe, which implies that the
hedonic price function we observe for R&D capital is the demand function for such capital. This
argument is reinforced by the fact that the capitals are very slow to adjust, while the market
value is determined instantaneously in the stock market.

To return to firm effects, the usual solution to the problem of left‐out firm characteristics
offered in the literature is the use of estimation methods that control for permanent differences
across firms. However, these methods to some extent violate the spirit of the hedonic model,
whose identification is based on variations across firms in the bundles of assets they possess. A
second issue is the well‐known fact that within‐firm R&D and intangible investments tend to be
highly correlated over time, leading to even more highly correlated R&D capital and other


                                                13
intangible capitals, which leaves little variation in these variables to explain shifts in market
value after firm effects are removed. Even small amounts of measurement error can, therefore,
cause large downward biases in the estimated coefficients (Griliches and Hausman 1986). A
second problem is that fixed effects estimation itself is inconsistent in the presence of
predetermined right hand side variables, and the solution to both problems is to use GMM
estimation on a first‐differenced version of the model, with lagged values of the variables as
instruments (Arellano and Bond 1991, Blundell and Bond 2000). This ensures that non‐
correlation between the dependent variable and future values of the independent variables is
allowed, permanent firm effects are removed, and transitory measurement error is
instrumented.

Unfortunately, in the case of the market value equation (unlike production functions), it has
proved impossible in the past to find suitable instruments among the lagged variables in the
model. For all these reasons, and because including firm dummies is inappropriate when
estimating a pure hedonic model, our preferred estimates are those based on specifications
without firm dummies, even though we also present estimates including fixed and random firm
effects, in addition to some exploratory GMM estimates.


5.2 Nonlinear Specification

We first present the estimation results using equation (4), where the parameter estimates are
derived using nonlinear least squares. The results are reported in Table 2. All regressions allow
for year fixed effects, and report robust standard errors. Not surprisingly, the null hypothesis
that all slopes are simultaneously zero is strongly rejected for all regressions. Column (1) shows
that the (normalised) stock of knowledge capital (      ⁄   ) has a strongly significant positive
association with Tobin’s    (measured as     ⁄    ). Inclusion of the advertising capital variable
(   ⁄   ) in the column (2) regression, and the efficacy variable ( ⁄        ) in the column (3)
regression, weakens the results somewhat. In addition, both the added regressors are also
found to be strongly associated with market value, whereas the dummy for no advertising and
the scale parameter are insignificantly different from zero. Thus, we find constant returns to
scale in the basic market value relationship. The inclusion of the 22 industry dummies in
column (4) reduces the R&D coefficient by about one quarter, but leaves the advertising capital
coefficient largely unchanged.

This table also shows the estimated elasticities for R&D capital and advertising capital below the
coefficient estimates. Both these elasticities and their standard errors are computed using the
formula in equation (6) and the “delta” method, observation by observation, and then averaged
over all observations. Taking column (3) as an example, the elasticity of market value with


                                                 14
respect to R&D capital has a mean value of 0.13 with a standard error of 0.02, although the
median is much lower at 0.07 with a standard error of 0.01 (not shown). The implication of the
estimates in this table is that on average, doubling R&D is expected to increase value by about
11‐14 per cent, which is very roughly equivalent to the average R&D capital share, implying a
normal rate of return to R&D. In contrast, advertising capital has an average elasticity of about
0.05‐0.06, which is considerably less than the advertising share, although this interpretation is
clouded by the number of zeroes in this variable.

In column (5) of Table 2, we present results for a regression with all the variables lagged one
period, in order to assess the extent of bias due to transitory measurement error and
simultaneity. With the exception of the R&D coefficient, which declines by about 7 per cent, the
results are largely unchanged (compare column 3 with column 5). In column (6), we present
instrumental variable (IV) estimates with the lagged variables as instruments. The estimated
R&D coefficient is approximately the same as in column (3), but the advertising capital
coefficient is lower, and the efficacy variable coefficient is higher. We conclude that transitory
measurement error and endogeneity are more likely to affect advertising and efficacy than the
R&D capital variable.

In the bottom panel of the table we have reported the average of the within‐firm Durbin‐Watson
statistics. These are valid in this context, given the large sample size in the cross‐section
dimension. They suggest that substantial serial correlation remains in the disturbances even
after inclusion of the measure of profit surprise. We will explore this symptom of
misspecification later in the paper after we present the results of estimating the linear version
of the model.


5.3 Linear Specification

Table 3 presents the results of estimating the model in equation (5) for the same set of
specifications as in Table 2. Although the coefficient estimates are different because the
specification is different, the main features of the estimation are the same. The average elasticity
of market value with respect to advertising is roughly the same as in the nonlinear case,
whereas the elasticity with respect to R&D capital is somewhat lower, around 0.12 for the
instrumental variable estimates, as compared with 0.14 in the nonlinear case. There is still
substantial serial correlation in the residuals, and the standard error of the estimate is
approximately 0.56, implying that unexpected movements in market value have a standard
deviation of 56%. This last result is similar to estimates that have been obtained for other
countries.



                                                15
5.4 Estimation with firm effects

In Table 4 we present various estimates of the linear model that allow for firm effects. For these
and subsequent estimations we dropped the zero advertising dummy, as it was always
insignificant and it does not vary much within firm. The first column shows the estimates with
two‐digit industry effects only, for comparison. The next two columns are those for
conventional fixed and random effects models. Compared to those with industry effects only,
they show the downward bias in the coefficients that is customary when working with firm
panel data, higher for fixed effects than random effects, of course. This implies correlation
between any left out differences among firms and the included independent variables, but it
may also imply measurement error in the independent variables, whose impact is larger in the
within‐firm dimension.

Including firm effects also reduces the residual serial correlation, but it is still quite significant.
In an effort to model this feature of our data, in columns (4) and (5) we show estimates of a
dynamic panel model that includes the lagged dependent variable. Column (4) has the usual
fixed effects model, which is well‐known to be inconsistent in this case (Blundell and Bond
2001), while column (5) shows GMM‐SYS estimates, where the level equation is instrumented
with first differences of lagged variables and the first‐differenced version of the equation is
instrumented by lagged level variables. Clearly the fixed effects model does eliminate much of
the serial correlation. In principle, the GMM estimates would be consistent for our underlying
model, provided they pass two specification tests: non‐correlation of the lagged instruments
with their contemporaneous residuals (the AR(2) test in the table), and the over‐identification
test due to Sargan. Here we use Hansen’s robust variant of the test for over‐identification. It is
apparent that the Hansen test fails dramatically, and the residuals are slightly correlated at lag 2
(p‐value = 0.05).

In Appendix B, we explore various versions of the GMM system estimation in an attempt to find
a set of instruments that can pass the over‐identification test, but without success. The version
with the lowest Sargan test (adjusted for degrees of freedom) is the one we report in Table 4.
Long run R&D and advertising coefficients for this version of the model (the estimated
coefficient divided by one minus the lagged log dependent variable coefficient) are slightly
higher than those obtained with instrumental variable estimation (1.03 and 0.50). The scale
coefficient is once again insignificant, contrary to the fixed effects estimates where it was
strongly downward biased. Based on these explorations, our conclusions are twofold: first, in
general it is not possible to obtain consistent estimates of the market value equation using the
GMM panel methodology; and second, nevertheless, and taking all the results together,
transitory measurement error does not affect the cross‐section estimates very much although it

                                                  16
does tend to bias the within firm estimates downward (compare OLS and IV without firm
effects).


5.5 Economic significance

Analysis of the estimates can be done in several ways and we focus on the two most common: 1)
coefficient estimates or semi‐elasticities, and 2) the implied elasticities. Let us consider the
latter first. As we showed in section 2 of the paper, the elasticity of Tobin’s           ( ⁄     ) with
respect to the R&D capital intensity         ⁄       is given by    ⁄     in the linear model and by
       ⁄    ⁄ 1         ⁄            ⁄           ⁄     in the nonlinear case. The implication in both
cases is that the elasticity depends on the level of R&D capital relative to tangible capital. In the
nonlinear case, the equation allows for the fact that the total value of the capital is based
significantly on the intangibles as well as on the tangibles, so the denominator of the term
differs. In contrast, the linear model assumes that capitals other than tangible are small and do
not affect the total capital measure very much. Because these elasticities depend on the R&D
capital intensity, it is necessary to choose a summary statistic when presenting the results. We
have chosen to use the average elasticity in the sample. In the linear case, this is just the
elasticity evaluated at the average R&D capital intensity, but in the nonlinear case, it is the
average over the sample of equation (6). These average values, together with the average
standard errors, are shown in Tables 2 to 4, below the coefficient estimates for R&D capital and
advertising capital, respectively.

The elasticity estimates pertaining to knowledge capital are fairly consistent across the
alternative linear and nonlinear specifications, although somewhat lower in the linear model, as
is evident from Tables 2 and 3. Controlling for advertising capital and efficacy, the magnitude of
the average estimates ranges from 0.11 to 0.14, with the nonlinear IV estimate of 0.14. This
implies that a doubling of the knowledge capital stock (per unit of physical capital) would lead
to an increase in market value of approximately 14%, which is somewhat greater than the R&D
capital share in total capital (0.12).17 However, comparing these elasticities with those for other
countries would be problematic in the present context, because they would suffer from a ‘level
effect’ given that the average stock of knowledge capital (at which these elasticities are
computed) tends to vary significantly across countries.

In other words, comparisons ought to be made on the basis of coefficient estimates or semi‐
elasticities. How do these estimates of ours compare with those reported for the US and other
developed countries? Take equation (1) with the scale coefficient          equal to unity as the basic


17The corresponding advertising capital elasticity ranges from 0.04 to 0.06, although this variable is so
highly skewed and has so many zero values that the median elasticity is zero.

                                                     17
relation implied by the theory in Hayashi (1982) and Hayashi and Inoue (1991).18 In
equilibrium, and assuming correct measurement of the capitals, we expect two things to be true:
first, adding a dollar (or rupee) to any of the capitals should raise market value by one dollar (or
rupee); and second, overall Tobin’s       should be unity. The implication of these assumptions is
that , , and     should all be equal to unity. Of course, the market is never in equilibrium, and
our choice of capital measures is not perfect, but this is a useful baseline against which to
compare the estimates for different countries, as it can be informative about the market for
intangible assets and about the depreciation rates we use to construct them.

For US data, Hall et al. (2005) report R&D capital coefficients of 1.74 for the 1976‐1984 period,
and 0.55 for the 1985‐1992 period. Using a slightly different formulation with beginning of year
capitals and a larger dataset, Hall (2005) reports coefficients ranging between 0.4 and 0.8 for
the 1974‐2003 period, and Hall and Oriani (2006) report 0.8 for the 1989‐1998 period. The
conclusion reached in Hall (2005) is that the primary reason that these coefficients are biased
downwards from unity is that the depreciation rate used to construct R&D capital is too low in
some sectors, notably the information technology sectors where technical change has been
quite rapid due to Moore’s Law and the falling price of semiconductors over the period. The
relatively high coefficient for 1976‐1984 may be explained by some data problems during that
period, due to the phase‐in of R&D reporting, as well as disequilibrium in the market for these
assets (that is, lack of sufficient R&D investment).

Hall and Oriani (2006) also report estimates of the R&D capital coefficient for France, Germany,
Italy, and the UK for the 1989‐1998 period. These are quite variable, ranging from insignificant
for Italy to 1.92 for the UK (for France, Germany, and the US they are 0.41, 0.36, and 0.80
respectively). The UK estimate is the closest to that for Indian firms, which is 1.76 (standard
error 0.33) based on instrumented nonlinear least squares (column 6 of Table 2). Estimates of
this magnitude carry the strong implication that there may be underinvestment in R&D in these
countries, because increasing R&D would more than pay for itself in market value increases. The
result itself implies either that the 15% depreciation rate used to construct R&D capital was too
high (which is unlikely) or because the market requires a much higher rate of return to capital
for R&D‐intensive firms than for other firms, probably because of risk and uncertainty. The
question then is why the markets in these countries, the UK and India, but not in other
countries, behave in this way.




18 Many critics have pointed out that this functional form ignores the fact that there may be interaction
effects among the capitals, which is true. It is best considered as a first order approximation to a more
complex valuation formula. In practice, interaction effects tend to be extremely imprecisely measured.

                                                   18
If indeed there is underinvestment in R&D by Indian firms, that could be the result of several
different factors. One important factor could be the unwillingness to do so, given the risk
attaching to R&D projects (Day 2007); it is possible that such risk is more binding below some
size threshold (Coad and Rao 2010). Another factor could be the inability to do so, given lack of
adequate access to finance (Brown, Martinsson, and Petersen 2012), signaled by a high required
rate of return to R&D. A third factor might be inadequate competition in the relevant product
markets; such competition has a tendency to reduce profit rates, and innovation is seen as a
mechanism for escaping such competition (Griffith, Harrison and Simpson 2010). Finally, there
is some evidence that weak intellectual property protection, if only due to lax implementation,
may discourage innovation (Hudson and Minea 2013).

Although the focus of this paper is on R&D spending, we have also estimated the coefficient of
advertising capital, with the estimation based on a fairly high depreciation rate of 30%. A typical
estimate from the nonlinear model is approximately 0.8, which suggests undervaluation or a
more rapid depreciation rate than we used to construct the variable. We can compare this
estimate to some for the US. For example, Servaes and Tamayo (2013) estimate a Tobin’s
regression with advertising intensity (a flow measure) and a measure of corporate social
responsibility (CSR) for US firms during the 1991‐2005 period, obtaining an average coefficient
of about 5.5 (corrected for the average level of CSR). Converting this flow coefficient to a stock
coefficient of unity (the theoretical value) would require a depreciation rate of 18 per cent,
somewhat lower than what we used. Hirschey and Weygandt (1985), using data for 1977,
obtain depreciation (amortization) rates for advertising that are very similar to those for R&D.
On the other hand, Hall (1993b) uses a large sample of US firms for the period 1973‐1991 and
obtains an advertising coefficient that is one‐quarter to one‐third that for R&D, which suggests a
much higher depreciation rate. However, she also shows yearly estimates that increase steadily
to parity at the end of the period, consistent with the Servaes and Tamayo result.


6. Variation Across Sectors

One of the important determinants of variations in R&D intensity is variation across industrial
sectors in the importance of R&D spending that is internal to the firm. Thus, it is useful to look at
the market valuation of intangible assets at a more disaggregated level. We chose to classify our
sample firms into the four groups described by Pavitt (1984):19 (1) supplier dominated
industries, (2) production intensive (scale intensive) industries, (3) production intensive
specialised suppliers industries, and (4) science‐based industries. The precise classification is



19   See also Greenhalgh and Rogers (2006).

                                                 19
given in Table A1. The idea behind this typology is the contention that although firms vary in
their technological trajectories, there is still sufficient basis to group them in a meaningful
manner. For example, Pavitt (1984) identifies groups (2) and (4) as those primarily concerned
with in‐house R&D, whereas group (1) innovates by acquiring new process technology, and
group (3) is more dependent on customers for product design and development. In our data,
there is a somewhat different pattern: the R&D and advertising capital intensities for the four
groups are the following:



          Pavitt Sector               R&D to Physical Capital       Advertising to Physical Capital
                                              ratio                              ratio
Supplier‐dominated industries                  0.041                             0.094
Scale‐intensive industries                     0.093                             0.247
Specialised‐suppliers industries               0.153                             0.043
Science‐based industries                       0.161                             0.083



Evidently, the specialized suppliers in this sample are more R&D‐oriented than was
contemplated by the Pavitt classification. In addition, the scale intensive firms are also highly
advertising intensive, which turns out to be due primarily to the brand‐oriented personal care
industry. Otherwise, the ranking of sectors is as we might have expected.

Table 5 presents the nonlinear estimation results including R&D capital, advertising capital, and
the profit surprise. We discuss the results for each Pavitt sector in turn. Group (1) is relatively
small, with only 32 firms, most of which are in textiles. For this group, the R&D capital
coefficient is large and extremely imprecisely determined, whereas the advertising capital
coefficient is large and fairly significant. Apparently these low‐tech supplier‐dominated firms
are quite heterogeneous in their R&D behavior (e.g., Bata, a shoe manufacturer, has quite high
R&D, whereas most other firms in the sector have very little), and in its valuation. Because most
of their production is consumer‐oriented, advertising is quite important and valued.

The other 3 groups have significant and similar R&D capital coefficients, somewhat lower for
the specialized suppliers. The average elasticities of market value with respect to R&D capital
are in fact roughly equal to the R&D capital shares in the table above, which does not suggest
underinvestment. The advertising capital coefficients are more variable, with that for the
specialized suppliers insignificant. The others are fairly precise and the average elasticities are
roughly consistent with the advertising capital shares. The coefficient of the efficacy variable is
remarkably consistent across the sectors, which implies that valuation of success or failure at
achieving returns from the various firm assets is neutral across sectors.

                                                20
7. Risk and Uncertainty

More than one researcher has emphasized that the uncertainty associated with the outcome of
R&D programmes implies that the right way to value R&D is to use a real options approach that
recognizes the option value of continuing or shutting down the various projects (Bloom and Van
Reenen 2002, Oriani and Sobrero 2008). These two papers take different approaches: Bloom
and Van Reenen (2002) focus on the valuation of patents and the associated option value of
waiting to bring the product to market, whereas Oriani and Sobrero (2008) build a more
complex model of multiple real options, due to both market (demand) uncertainty and
technological uncertainty. Bloom and Van Reenen’s model predicts both that profit uncertainty
and its interaction with R&D or patent intensity will increase market valuation, because higher
volatility increases the likelihood that expected profit from investing in development will cross
the profitability threshold. However, their empirical results, based on UK firm data from 1986 to
1996, do not support this prediction, and they suggest that other causes of uncertainty, such as
increased costs of capital, may be the source of the negative coefficients.

Oriani and Sobrero identify three options arising from R&D: the growth option, the option to
switch, and the option to wait. The growth option is similar to that described by Bloom and Van
Reenen, and is positively affected by market uncertainty. The option to switch is affected only
by technological uncertainty, whereas the option to wait increases with both types of
uncertainty. Although all these options suggest positive valuation for volatility or uncertainty,
the basic net present value of profit flows from the firm’s activities is affected negatively by
uncertainty, due to the higher discount rates applied to evaluate it. They use this model to
predict a U‐shaped relationship between market uncertainty and market valuation of R&D, and
an inverse U‐shaped relationship between technological uncertainty and market valuation of
R&D. Their results, based on data for UK firms from 1989 to 1998, confirm these relationships.

These two papers used a range of methods to measure firm‐level volatility. Bloom and Van
Reenen (2002) used a firm‐specific measure of the variance of profits or the stock market
return, with similar results. Oriani and Sobrero (2008) measured market uncertainty using a
GARCH autoregressive model of industry output, and computed uncertainty as the absolute
value of the difference between actual and predicted industry output that year. Technological
uncertainty was measured using the technology cycle time developed by CHI Research (Narin
1999). Owing to data limitations, we have chosen to investigate the role of uncertainty using a
slightly different uncertainty measure, but one in the spirit of the market uncertainty measures
described above.

Our measure of uncertainty is based on a GARCH model whose estimates are reported in
Appendix Table B3. We model the logarithm of sales as a function of its lag and the year

                                                21
dummies, and then allow the variance of the disturbance in this model to evolve as a GARCH
process, where the coefficients depend on firm size (as measured by the log of net fixed assets).
We then average the estimates of the variance of this model over industry and year, and include
these in our basic market value model as a control for market uncertainty in that industry and
time period.

Let      denote the log of sales,   the log of net fixed assets (   ), and the industry to which the
firm belongs. Then our full GARCH model is:

                       ,                                                                           (8a)

     ~     0,                                                                                      (8b)

         exp                                  ̂,                       ,                           (8c)

where           are the year dummies, and           the industry dummies. We estimate this model by
maximum likelihood on the pooled panel. Note that unlike the usual GARCH model,
identification here rests on the cross‐section variation rather than on the time series variation,
as our panel is quite short.20 In practice, we found that the coefficients of          (log of net fixed
assets) were insignificantly different from zero in the ̂           and      terms (i.e., the second and
third terms on the right hand side of equation 8c), and so we dropped those coefficients. Our
preferred estimates were the following:

                1.00       ,


         exp        0.24       0.06 ̂ ,            1.08    ,                                           (9)

These estimates imply several things: (1) sales appears to evolve as a simple random walk; (2)
the variance of the sales process is highly serially correlated and growing, with the growth
dampened slightly by the actual draw on the disturbance variance in the previous period; (3)
the variance varies across industry (compare columns (4) and (5) in Table B2); and (4) the
variance is declining in firm size as measured by net fixed assets.

Given these estimates, we computed the industry‐year means of the variance             predicted by the
model and included them in our market value regression, both alone and interacted with the
R&D capital variable. The results, estimated by NLLS with robust standard errors clustered on
the firm, are presented in Table 6. The sample size is slightly different from that in Table 3 due
to the need to use lagged values in the model, so column (1) simply repeats the regression in
column (3) of Table 3. Column (2) shows that the industry average sales variance enters


20Brownlees (2013) suggests estimating such a model for financial institutions during 2007‐2009, where
the panel dimension is quite short.

                                                          22
positively in the market value equation, as predicted by the real options theory, albeit with a
large standard error. The average value of this variable is 0.02, with a standard deviation of
0.01. Therefore, this result implies that a one standard deviation increase in the industry
average sales variance is associated with about a 10 per cent increase in the market value of the
firms in that industry, other things equal, which seems both plausible and non‐negligible.
However, the standard error on this prediction is also large, on the order of 5.7 per cent, so the
exact magnitude of the result is somewhat uncertain.

This imprecision carries over to columns (3) and (4), where we investigate the shape of the
relationship and the interaction with R&D. Neither effect is significant, and the standard errors
are very large, so the estimates neither confirm nor rule out such a relationship. There is a slight
hint that firms with higher R&D intensity receive a somewhat lower premium from uncertainty,
which may indicate that they face higher discount rates or costs of capital, as suggested by both
Bloom and Van Reenen (2002) and Oriani and Sobrero (2008). Column (4) also shows that the
inclusion of the interaction effect reduces the raw R&D capital coefficient slightly but
insignificantly, consistent with an interpretation that the size of this coefficient is partly due to
the option value of R&D.


8. Conclusion

This paper revisits the relationship between market valuation and innovation in the context of
manufacturing firms in India, using recent data for the period 2001 to 2010. The goal was to
examine whether and how financial markets in a fairly sophisticated developing economy were
valuing innovation investments, and whether there appeared to be over‐ or under‐investment
in R&D in Indian manufacturing firms. We found that the stock market does value the R&D
capital created by these firms, and that the magnitude of the premium appears to be larger than
that reported by studies on developed economies, with the exception of some estimates for the
UK. There are several possible interpretations of this result. The first and most obvious is that
the depreciation rate used to construct R&D capital was too high (Hall 2005), leading to values
of the independent variable that were too low. But this is unlikely, because other studies have
found higher depreciation rates in most sectors in other countries.

A second explanation is that Indian firms underinvested in R&D for some reason, or that R&D
turned out to be more profitable ex post than was predicted ex ante, during this period. The high
valuation of R&D assets may simply be signaling that Indian firms should be undertaking more
because their prospects have improved, and because of the need to find suitable scientists and
engineers, etc., adjustment to the high rate of return via expanded investment is not
instantaneous. This is certainly a possibility worth exploring in future work. It is consistent with

                                                 23
what was observed in the United States during the period when R&D became salient to financial
investors because of changes in reporting requirements (1970s‐1980s). During these years in
the U.S., the marginal value of an R&D dollar to a publicly traded firm declined towards unity
and even below as more firms entered the R&D and/or R&D‐reporting activity. A third
possibility, for which we found weak support, is that R&D‐intensive firms are valued more
highly due to the option value of R&D programs. In assessing this possibility it is useful to recall
that our sample consists only of R&D firms, so that our finding of a positive association with a
risk measure could indeed be related to the fact that they perform R&D. India may be different,
but it seems unlikely to differ in that way.

Looking across sectors using the industry groupings due to Pavitt, we actually found relatively
little variation in the coefficients of the market valuation that was significant. The supplier‐
dominated sector, a low‐tech manufacturing sector, showed some differences, but it was a very
small sector and the differences from the other sectors were largely insignificant. The one
implication we can draw from this result is, that the allocation of R&D across sectors is not
obviously inefficient in India.




                                                24
                                         References

Altenburg, Tilman and Hubert Schmitz, 2008, Breakthrough? China’s and India’s Transition
       from Production to Innovation, World Development, 36(2), 325‐344.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen R. Bond, 1991, Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
       Carlo Evidence and An Application to Employment Equations, Review of Economic
       Studies 58 (2), 277‐297.
Athreye, Suma and Sandeep Kapur, 2009, Introduction: The Internationalization of Chinese and
       Indian Firms – Trends, Motivations and Strategy, Industrial and Corporate Change,
       18(2), 209‐221.
Bagwell, Kyle, 2007, The Economic Analysis of Advertising, Ch. 28 in Mark Armstrong and
       Robert H. Porter (eds.) Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3, North‐Holland,
       Amsterdam.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, 2002, Patents, Real Options and Firm Performance,
       Economic Journal, 112(478), C97‐C116.
Blundell, Richard and Stephen R. Bond, 2000, GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An
       Application to Production Functions, Econometric Reviews 19(3): 321‐340.
Blundell, Richard, Rachel Griffith, and John Van Reenen, 1999, Market Share, Market Value and
       Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms, Review of Economic Studies, 66(3),
       529–554.
Bogliacino, Francesca, Giulio Perani, Mario Pianta, Stefano Supino, 2012, Innovation and
       Development: The Evidence from Innovation Surveys, Latin American Business Review,
       13(3), 219‐261.
Brown, James R., Gustav Martinsson and Bruce C. Petersen, Do Financing Constraints Matter for
       R&D?, European Economic Review, 56(8), 1512‐1529.
Brownlees, Christian T., 2013, Cross Sectional Heterogeneity in GARCH Panels and Firm
       Characteristics: Evidence from the Financial Crisis, Available at SSRN
       http://ssrn.com/abstract=1695649 and http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1695649;
       accessed 26 January 2015.
Chadha, Alka, and Raffaele Oriani, 2010, R&D Market Value under Weak Intellectual Property
       Rights Protection: The Case of India, Scientometrics, 82(1), 59‐74.
Chittoor, Raveendra and Sougata Ray, 2007, Internationalization Paths of Indian Pharmaceutical
       Firms – A Strategic Group Analysis, Journal of International Management, 13(3), 338‐
       355.
Coad, Alex. and Rekha Rao, 2010, Firm Growth and R&D Expenditure, Economics of Innovation
       and New Technology, 19(2), 127‐145.

                                               25
Cockburn, Iain, and Zvi Griliches, 1988, Industry Effects and Appropriability Measures in the
       Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents, American Economic Review, 78(2), 419‐
       423.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2009, Intangible Capital and U. S. Economic
       Growth, Review of Income and Wealth 55(3), 661‐685.
CMIE, 2012, Prowess: Release 4.11, <www.prowess.cmie.com>
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Bronwyn H. Hall and Raffaele Oriani, 2006, Market Valuation of US and
       European Intellectual Property, in Derek Bosworth and Elizabeth Webster (eds) The
       Management Of Intellectual Property, Cheltenham and Brookfield: Edward Elgar.
Day, George, 2007, Is It Real? Can We Win? Is It Worth Doing?, Managing Risk and Reward in an
       Innovation Portfolio, Harvard Business Review, 85(12), 110‐125.
Ekeland, Ivar, James J. Heckman, and Lars Nesheim, 2004, Identification and Estimation of
       Hedonic Models, Journal of Political Economy 112 (1, pt.2), s60‐s109.
Goldstein, Andrea, 2008, Multinational Companies from Emerging Economies: Composition,
       Conceptualization & Direction in the Global Economy, Indian Journal of Industrial
       Relations, 45(1), 137‐147.
Greenhalgh, Christine, and Mark Rogers, 2006, The Value of Innovation: The Interaction of
       Competition, R&D and IP, Research Policy, 35(4), 562‐580.
Griffith, Rachel, Rupert Harrison, and Helen Simpson, 2010, Product Market Reform and
       Innovation in the EU, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112(2), 389‐415.
Griffiths, William, and Elizabeth Webster, 2006, Trends in the Value of Intellectual Property
       in Australia, in Derek Bosworth and Elizabeth Webster (eds.) The Management of
       Intellectual Property, Cheltenham and Brookfield, Edward Elgar.
Griliches, Zvi, 1981, Market Value, R&D, and Patents, Economics Letters, 7(2), 183‐187.
Griliches, Zvi, Bronwyn H. Hall and Ariel Pakes, 1991, R&D, Patents, and Market Value Revisited:
       Is There a Second (Technological Opportunity) Factor? Economics of Innovation and New
       Technology 1(3), 183‐202.
Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman, 1986, Errors in Variables in Panel Data, Journal of
       Econometrics, 31(1), 93‐118.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 2005, Measuring the Returns to R&D: The Depreciation Problem, Annales
       d'Economie et de Statistique, 79‐80 (Special Issue), 341‐381.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1993a, The Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D Investment During the
       1980’s. American Economic Review, 83(2), 259–264.
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1993b, The Value of Intangible Corporate Assets: An Empirical Study of the
       Components of Tobin's Q, UC Berkeley Dept. of Economics Working Paper No. 93‐207.
       Berkeley, CA: University of California at Berkeley.

                                                26
Hall, Bronwyn H., 1990, The Manufacturing System Master File: 1959‐1987, Working Paper
       no. 3366, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2000, Market Value and Patent
       Citations: A First Look, Working Paper 7741, National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Daehwan Kim, 2000, Valuing Intangible Assets: The Stock Market Value of
       R&D Revisited. UC Berkeley, Nuffield College, Harvard University, and NBER. Available
       at http://eml.berkeley.edu//~bhhall/papers/HallKim98 valuingR&D.pdf
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Megan MacGarvie, 2010, ‘he Private Value of Software Patents,
       Research Policy, 39(7), 994‐1009.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Raffaele Oriani, 2006, Does the Market Value R&D Investment by
       European Firms? Evidence from a Panel of Manufacturing Firms in France, Germany
       and Italy, International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24(5), 971‐993.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin's Marginal     and Average : A Neoclassical Interpretation,
       Econometrica, 50 (1), 213‐224
Hayashi, Fumio and Tohru Inoue, 1991, The Relation Between Firm Growth and Q with Multiple
       Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese Firms, Econometrica,
       59(3), 731‐753.
Hirschey, Mark and Jerry J. Weygandt, 1985, Amortization Policy for Advertising and Research
       and Development Expenditures, Journal of Accounting Research, 23(1), 326‐335.
Hudson, John and Alexandru Minea, 2013, Innovation, Intellectual Property Rights, and
       Economic Development: A Unified Empirical Investigation, World Development, 46(1),
       66–78.
Jaffe, Adam B., 1986, Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’
       Patents, Profits, and Market Value, American Economic Review, 76(5), 984–1001.
Lambin, Jean‐Jacques, 1976, Advertising, Competition and Market Conduct in Oligopoly over Time,
       North‐Holland, Amsterdam.
Lamm Jr., R. McFall, 2010, Equity Returns in Emerging Markets: Prospects for the BRICs, in Greg
       N. Gregoriou (ed.) Emerging Markets: Performance, Analysis and Innovation, Taylor and
       Francis, London.
Lanjouw, Jean O., 1998, The Introduction of Pharmaceutical Product Patents in India: "Heartless
       Exploitation of the Poor and Suffering"?, Working Paper No. 6366, National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Lewellen, Wilbur G. and S. G. Badrinath, 1997, On the measurement of Tobin's q. Journal of
       Financial Economics 44(1), 77‐122.



                                               27
Lei, Zhen, 2012, Chinese Patent System, presentation to the JRC‐IPTS 4th workshop on The
       Output of R&D Activities: Harnessing the Power of Patent Data, May 24‐25, Seville.
       Accessed 26 January 2015 at
       http://is.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pages/ISG/patents/documents/LeiChinaPatentSystem.pdf
Mukhopadhyay, Debabrata and Nityanand Sarkar, 2003, Stock Return and Macroeconomic
       Fundamentals in Model Specification Framework: Evidence From Indian Stock Market,
       Economic Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute (Kolkata), mimeo.
Narin, Francis, 1999, Tech‐line Background Paper. Accessed 26 January 2015 at
       http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.23.4124&rep=rep1&type=p
       df
Oriani, Raffaele and Maurizio Sobrero, 2008, Uncertainty and the Market Valuation of R&D
       Within a Real Options Logic, Strategic Management Journal, 29(4), 343‐361.
Palda, K.S., 1964, The Measurement of Cumulative Advertising Effects, Prentice‐Hall, Englewood
       Cliffs, NJ.
Pavitt, Keith, 1984, Sectoral Patterns of Technical Change: Towards a Taxonomy and a
       Theory, Research Policy, 13(6), 343‐373.
Peles, Y., 1971, Rates of Amortization of Advertising Expenditures, Journal of Political Economy,
       79(5), 1032‐1058.
Rosen, Sherwin, 1974, Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
       Competition, Journal of Political Economy, 82(1), 34‐55.
Saxenian, AnnaLee, 2002, Transnational Communities and the Evolution of Global Production
       Networks: The Cases of Taiwan, China and India, Industry and Innovation, 9(3), 183–202.
Servaes, Henri and Ane Tamayo, 2013, The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on Firm
       Value: The Role of Customer Awareness, Management Science, 59(5), 1045‐1061.
Singh, Rajesh K., Suresh K. Garg and S. G. Deshmukh, 2007, Strategy Development for
       Competitiveness: A Study on Indian Auto Component Sector, International Journal of
       Productivity and Performance Management, 56(4), 285‐304.
Tas, Oktay, Cumhur Ekinci, Kaya Tokmakcioglu, 2010, Indices and Price Book, Price Earnings,
       and Dividend Yield Ratios in Emerging Financial Markets, in Greg N. Gregoriou (ed.)
       Emerging Markets: Performance, Analysis and Innovation, Taylor and Francis, London.
Telser, Lester G., 1962, Advertising and Cigarettes, Journal of Political Economy, 70(5), 471‐499.
The Economist, 2010, The BRICs: The Trillion‐Dollar Club, 395(8678), April 17, 2010, 59‐
       61.
Toivanen, Otto, Paul L. Stoneman and Derek Bosworth, 2002, Innovation and the Market Value
       of UK Firms, 1989 – 1995, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 64(1), 39‐62.
Topalova, Petia and Amit Khandelwal, 2011, Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity:

                                                28
       The Case of India, Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 995‐1009.
Wildasin, D. E., 1984, The q Theory of Investment with Many Capital Goods, American Economic
       Review 74(1), 203‐10.
WIPO, 2014, World Intellectual Property Indicators, Accessed 26 January 2015 at
       http://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_941_2014.pdf




                                              29
                                                      Table 1
                          Sample statistics (3,494 observations on 380 firms, 2001-2010)

Variable                        Mean        Median        Standard      Minimum       Maximum      Share Variance
                                                         Deviation                                       Within††

 ⁄                                4.36         3.23           3.43           0.16         19.82            0.265
  ⁄                               0.12         0.05           0.20           0.00          2.72            0.159
  ⁄                               0.17         0.06           0.32           0.00          5.39            0.181
   ⁄                              0.13         0.00           0.42           0.00          7.38            0.078
 ⁄                                0.00        –0.03           0.31          –1.94          2.02            0.427
   (M rupees)                  1140.7†       1110.8           1.71           2.30     1,500,007            0.050
D(    = 0)                      42.4%                                                                      0.052

                                                             Correlation Matrix
                          ln     ⁄              ⁄             ⁄              ⁄              ⁄               ln

ln   ⁄                              1
   ⁄                            0.330             1
   ⁄                            0.338         0.906              1
    ⁄                           0.302         0.112          0.077              1
  ⁄                             0.391        –0.004         –0.140         –0.001              1
ln                             –0.024        –0.131         –0.045         –0.039          0.004                 1

Definitions:
   = Market value = Equity + Book Debt
    = Net fixed assets
    = Knowledge capital at 15% depreciation
    = Knowledge capital at 30% depreciation
     = Advertising capital at 30% depreciation
   = Efficacy of capital = Profit surprise
†
  Geometric mean
††
   Within-firm variance as a proportion of total variance (controlling for overall year means)




                                                       30
                                                  Table 2
                                           Nonlinear Regressions
                                        Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄     )

                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)                   (6)
Regressor                NLLS          NLLS          NLLS          NLLS          NLLS, lag RHS         NLIV

     ⁄                   2.275***      2.009***      1.790***      1.473***      1.661***              1.764***
                         (0.389)       (0.375)       (0.330)       (0.336)       (0.324)               (0.329)
                         [0.164] ***   [0.140] ***   [0.134] ***   [0.114] ***   [0.126] ***           [0.137] ***
                         (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.018)               (0.018)
     ⁄                                 0.988***      0.817***      0.974***      0.815***              0.640***
                                       (0.224)       (0.183)       (0.191)       (0.185)               (0.145)
                                       [0.058] ***   [0.052] ***   [0.059] ***   [0.051] ***           [0.044] ***
                                       (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)               (0.008)
D(          0)                         –0.028        –0.037        –0.004        –0.031                –0.083
                                       (0.057)       (0.053)       (0.056)       (0.055)               (0.053)
 ⁄                                                   0.508***      0.464***      0.527***              0.709***
                                                     (0.103)       (0.101)       (0.095)               (0.031)
ln                       0.020         0.020         0.012         0.015         0.013                 0.012
                         (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.014)               (0.016)

Industry dummies         No            No            No            Yes           No                    No
Year fixed effects       Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes                   Yes
                         0.199         0.267         0.318         0.383         0.286                 0.270
Standard Error           0.608         0.582         0.561         0.536         0.571                 0.579
Panel Durbin-Watson      0.266         0.285         0.316         0.345         0.360                 0.346
Observations             3494          3494          3494          3494          3114                  3114
Firms                    380           380           380           380           380                   380

Note: Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses below each coefficient
      Elasticity at the means in square brackets, with its standard error below it
      In column (5), all right hand side (RHS) variables are lagged one year
      In column (6), the instruments are the right hand side variables lagged one year
      *** **
         , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                       31
                                                    Table 3
                                               Linear Regressions
                                          Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄     )

                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)               (6)
Regressor                OLS            OLS            OLS             OLS           OLS, lag RHS      IV

     ⁄                   1.025***       0.939***       0.943***        0.790***      0.912***          0.964***
                         (0.136)        (0.129)        (0.116)         (0.118)       (0.118)           (0.120)
                         [0.128] ***    [0.117] ***    [0.117] ***     [0.098] ***   [0.114] ***       [0.118] ***
                         (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.014)         (0.015)       (0.015)           (0.015)
     ⁄                                  0.368***       0.368***        0.393***      0.392***          0.385***
                                        (0.062)        (0.051)         (0.055)       (0.055)           (0.053)
                                        [0.049] ***    [0.049] ***     [0.053] ***   [0.053] ***       [0.051] ***
                                        (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.007)       (0.007)           (0.007)
D(          0)                          –0.079         –0.079          –0.054        –0.076            0.039
                                        (0.051)        (0.047)         (0.047)       (0.049)           (0.050)
 ⁄                                                     0.704***        0.633***      0.686***          0.500***
                                                       (0.076)         (0.071)       (0.074)           (0.100)
ln                       0.006          0.007          0.007           0.010         0.009             0.011
                         (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.013)         (0.015)       (0.014)           (0.014)

Industry dummies         No             No             No              Yes           No                No
Year fixed effects       Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes
                         0.177          0.238          0.339           0.396         0.301             0.318
Standard Error           0.616          0.593          0.552           0.530         0.565             0.559
Panel Durbin-Watson      0.265          0.282          0.364           0.385         0.413             0.335
Observations             3494           3494           3494            3494          3114              3114
Firms                    380            380            380             380           380               380

Note: Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses
      Elasticity at the means in square brackets, with its standard error below it
      In column (5), all right hand side variables are lagged one year
      In column (6), the instruments are the right hand side variables lagged one year
      *** **
         , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                       32
                                                      Table 4
                                            Regressions with Firm Effects
                                            Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄ )

                                (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)
Regressor                       OLS with          OLS with        OLS with firm    OLS with firm     GMM-SYS with
                                industry          random          fixed effects    fixed effects     lag 2+
                                fixed effects     firm effects                                       instruments

Lagged dependent variable                                                          0.484***          0.706***
                                                                                   (0.023)           (0.036)
     ⁄                          0.785***          0.688***        0.428***         0.315***          0.302***
                                (0.117)           (0.117)         (0.140)          (0.087)           (0.071)
     ⁄                          0.413***          0.353***        0.250***         0.192***          0.146***
                                (0.054)           (0.048)         (0.064)          (0.054)           (0.028)
 ⁄                              0.631***          0.428***        0.352***         0.239***          0.251***
                                (0.071)           (0.053)         (0.051)          (0.045)           (0.056)
ln                              0.011             –0.047***       –0.158***        –0.182***         –0.005
                                (0.015)           (0.018)         (0.042)          (0.032)           (0.014)

Long run coefficient:   ⁄                                                          0.609***          1.026***
                                                                                   (0.172)           (0.221)
Long run coefficient:    ⁄                                                         0.372***          0.495***
                                                                                   (0.107)           (0.091)
Year fixed effects              Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes
Observations                    3494              3494            3494             3114              3096
Firms                           380               380             380              380               379
                                0.395             0.372           0.381            0.522
Standard Error Within           0.530             0.347           0.321            0.271
Share variance across firms     0.566             0.602           0.737            0.662
T-stat for AR(1) test           69.9***           29.0***         30.1***          1.8***
Hansen test (df)                                                                                     255.1 (206)**
AR(1) test (p-value)                                                                                 –10.7 (0.000)***
AR(2) test (p-value)                                                                                 2.0 (0.050)**

Note: Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses.
      Hausman test for correlated effects:    = 137.0 ( -value = 0.000).
     The instruments in column (5) are lags 2 and earlier (level and differenced) of the dependent and independent
     variables.
     *** **
        , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test.




                                                      33
                                                       Table 5
                                         Nonlinear Regressions by Pavitt Sector
                                            Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄ )

                         (1)                        (2)                    (3)                         (4)
                                                                   Pavitt Sector
Regressor                 Supplier-dominated        Scale-intensive        Specialized-supplier        Science-based

     ⁄                   4.24                       1.80***                1.28***                     1.73***
                         (3.45)                     (0.65)                 (0.38)                      (0.50)
                         [0.102]                    [0.093] ***            [0.152] ***                 [0.155] ***
                         (0.063)                    (0.025)                (0.034)                     (0.034)
     ⁄                   2.74***                    0.73***                0.83                        1.51**
                         (0.89)                     (0.18)                 (0.56)                      (0.64)
                         [0.097] ***                [0.077] ***            [0.030]                     [0.055] **
                         (0.022)                    (0.013)                (0.019)                     (0.016)
 ⁄                       0.41                       0.50***                0.48***                     0.48***
                         (0.46)                     (0.18)                 (0.13)                      (0.18)
ln                       0.08                       0.03                   –0.10***                    0.03
                         (0.06)                     (0.02)                 (0.04)                      (0.02)

Year fixed effects       Yes                        Yes                    Yes                         Yes
                         0.450                      0.352                  0.357                       0.289
Standard Error           0.464                      0.549                  0.541                       0.581
Panel Durbin-Watson      0.350                      0.329                  0.343                       0.294
Observations             316                        1,235                  690                         1,253
Firms                    32                         134                    78                          136

Note: NLLS regressions. Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses
      Elasticity at the means in square brackets, with its standard error below it
      *** **
         , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                          34
                                                       Table 6
                                   Market Value Regressions Allowing for Uncertainty
                                            Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄ )

Regressor                (1)                        (2)                    (3)                         (4)

     ⁄                   1.90***                    2.23***                1.95***                     2.64***
                         (0.34)                     (0.45)                 (0.49)                      (0.86)
      ⁄                  0.81***                    0.97***                0.85***                     1.01***
                         (0.18)                     (0.23)                 (0.22)                      (0.25)
 †
                                                    10.28*                 –0.89                       12.50*
                                                    (5.66)                 (11.82)                     (7.10)
                                                                           192.8
                                                                           (215.9)
     x(   ⁄   )                                                                                        –15.93
                                                                                                       (29.73)
 ⁄                       0.54***                    0.67***                0.59***                     0.69***
                         (0.11)                     (0.15)                 (0.15)                      (0.16)
ln                       0.013                      0.018                  0.017                       0.018
                         (0.014)                    (0.014)                (0.014)                     (0.014)

Year fixed effects       Yes                        Yes                    Yes                         Yes
                         0.308                      0.315                  0.316                       0.350
Standard Error           0.562                      0.559                  0.559                       0.559
Panel Durbin-Watson      0.324                      0.328                  0.328                       0.328
Observations             3114                       3114                   3114                        3114
Firms                    380                        380                    380                         380

Note: NLLS regressions. Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses
      † Industry sales variance estimated as shown in Appendix A, Table A3.
      *** **
         , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                          35
Appendix A: Industry Coverage

                                                       Table A1
                                        Observations by Industry and Pavitt sector

Pavitt sector                Industry                           Observations    Firms      Mean R&D    Mean ADV
                                                                                              growth      growth
(i) supplier-dominated       Gems and jewellery                            7           1       0.23%       4.81%
(i) supplier-dominated       Leather products                             30           3       3.21%       0.60%
(i) supplier-dominated       Rubber products                              20           2       0.91%      –0.88%
(i) supplier-dominated       Textiles and textile products               259          26       1.42%      –1.08%
(ii) scale-intensive         Domestic appliances                          60           7       1.29%       4.11%
(ii) scale-intensive         Automobiles                                 101          12       1.59%       0.96%
(ii) scale-intensive         Cement                                      140          14       1.33%       0.78%
(ii) scale-intensive         Food and agricultural products              352          39       0.89%       0.51%
(ii) scale-intensive         Glass and glassware                          25           3      –1.97%       7.93%
(ii) scale-intensive         Metals and metal products                   217          22       0.51%       1.03%
(ii) scale-intensive         Other consumer goods                         30           3      –2.80%      –0.17%
(ii) scale-intensive         Other construction products                 171          18       0.62%       2.71%
(ii) scale-intensive         Paper and paper products                    129          13       1.79%       0.08%
(ii) scale-intensive         Personal care                                10           3      –2.92%       1.46%
(iii) specialized supplier   Automobile ancillaries                      419          43       1.58%       1.18%
(iii) specialized supplier   Non-electrical machinery                    271          35       2.59%       1.94%
(iv) science-based           Chemicals                                   600          62       0.79%       0.08%
(iv) science-based           Electrical machinery                        129          15       2.36%       2.32%
(iv) science-based           Electronics                                  68           8       1.39%       0.83%
(iv) science-based           Petroleum products                           64           7      –0.36%       2.58%
(iv) science-based           Drugs and pharmaceuticals                   268          31       2.72%       1.76%
(iv) science-based           Plastic products                            124          13       1.21%       0.09%
Total                                                                   3494         380       1.32%       1.00%




                                                          36
            Appendix B: Robustness Checks and GARCH Estimation

            B.1 GMM Estimates

                                                               Table B1
                                                         GMM-SYS regressions
                                                      Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄     )

                        (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)                  (5)                (6)
                                                                        Estimation Method
Regressor               GMM-SYS            GMM-SYS             GMM-SYS           GMM-SYS              GMM-SYS            GMM-SYS
                        with lag 2+        with lag 3+         with lag 3/4      with lag 2+          with lag 3+        with lag 3/4
                        instruments        instruments         instruments       instruments          instruments        instruments

Lagged regressand                                                                  0.706***           0.694***           0.677***
                                                                                   (0.036)            (0.039)            (0.045)
     ⁄                  0.991***           0.711***            0.668***            0.302***           0.326***           0.238***
                        (0.174)            (0.130)             (0.144)             (0.071)            (0.094)            (0.110)
     ⁄                  0.336***           0.287***            0.287***            0.146***           0.169***           0.165***
                        (0.055)            (0.073)             (0.079)             (0.028)            (0.039)            (0.039)
 ⁄                      0.793***           0.802***            0.821***            0.251***           0.181***           0.203***
                        (0.115)            (0.149)             (0.153)             (0.056)            (0.073)            (0.085)
ln                      0.002              –0.024              0.018               –0.005             –0.011             0.001
                        (0.035)            (0.035)             (0.035)             (0.014)            (0.016)            (0.019)

Long run
coefficient:   ⁄                                                                   1.026***           1.067***           0.735***
                                                                                   (0.221)            (0.286)            (0.312)
Long run
coefficient:    ⁄                                                                  0.495***           0.553***           0.510***
                                                                                   (0.091)            (0.133)            (0.125)
Observations            3494               3494                3494                3096               3096               3096
Firms                   380                380                 380                 379                379                379
Hansen test (df)        279.3 (216)***     224.1 (184)***      165.1 (96)***       255.1 (206)***     220.2 (170)***     155.1 (95)***
AR(1) test (p-value)    –6.7 (0.000)***    –6.9 (0.000)***     –6.8 (0.000)***     –10.7 (0.000)***   –10.4 (0.000)***   –9.9 (0.000)***
AR(2) test (p-value)    –1.0 (0.328)       –0.9 (0.357)        –0.9 (0.365)        2.0 (0.050)**      1.9 (0.065)*       1.9 (0.065)*


Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses
     The instruments are lags (level and differenced) of the dependent and independent variables – in columns (1) and (4) they
     include lag 2 and earlier values, in columns (2) and (5) lag 3 and earlier values, and in columns (3) and (6) lags 3 and 4 only.
     *** **
        , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                                     37
B.2 GARCH Model for Sales

Table B2 presents the estimation results based on the GARCH model 8a‐8c, outlined in the main
text. Our preferred estimates here are those in column (5), which allow for industry and size
differences in the mean variance, but not in the lagged variances, for reasons discussed in the
main text above.



                                                   Table B2
                                            GARCH Model for log(Sales)

Parameter                (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)                (5)

                                                         Parameters of Equation 8(a)

                         0.999***           1.000***           1.002***             1.002***           1.001***
                         (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.001)              (0.001)            (0.001)

                                                         Parameters of Equation 8(c)

                         –3.070***          –2.980***          –5.030***            –4.600***
                         (0.190)            (0.150)            (0.480)              (0.580)
                         –0.064***          –0.078***          –0.321***            –0.384***          –0.235***
                         (0.026)            (0.021)            (0.072)              (0.086)            (0.076)
                         0.904***           0.636***           –0.050***            –0.049***          –0.056***
                         (0.348)            (0.075)            (0.003)              (0.003)            (0.003)
                         –0.040
                         (0.049)
                                                               1.063***             1.029***           1.075***
                                                               (0.008)              (0.034)            (0.008)
                                                                                    0.005
                                                                                    (0.004)

Year fixed effects       In equation (8a)   In equation (8a)   In equation (8a)     In equation (8a)   In equation (8a)
Industry fixed effects   No                 No                 No                   No                 In equation (8c)
Observations             2752               2752               2752                 2752               2752
Log-likelihood           466.9              466.5              1172.7               1173.2             1216.5

Equations (8a)-(8c) in the text are reproduced below for convenience:
                   ,
   ~   0,
     exp                              ̂,                                   ,
where is log(sales), is log( ), is the industry to which the                   firm belongs,    are the year dummies,
and are the industry dummies.




                                                        38
B.3 Varying the Depreciation Rate of Knowledge Capital

As a further robustness check, we compute an alternative measure of the stock of knowledge
capital, allowing for a 30% per annum rate of depreciation instead of the earlier 15% per
annum. This transformed regressor is denoted                     ⁄   . The results are reported in Table B3,
which duplicates Table 3 (the linear model). The results are exactly as expected – the only
coefficient that changes appreciably is that for R&D, which nearly doubles. Note that if R&D
grows at a constant rate              and depreciates at a constant rate            , R&D capital is simply
              ⁄        ,   which      implies    that        ⁄            0.30 /       0.15 ,    so    that     the
corresponding coefficients will be approximately in the inverse ratio of 2 = 0.30/0.15 if g is
small. Our conclusion is that a depreciation rate of 15 per cent is more appropriate, as it
corresponds to the expected value of the coefficient, which is unity, and is more useful for
comparison to prior work by others.



                                                   Table B3
                                               Linear Regressions
                                          Dependent Variable: ln ( ⁄      )

                           (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)                (6)
Regressor                  OLS           OLS            OLS             OLS          OLS, lag RHS       IV

     ⁄   †                 1.847***      1.733***       1.703***        1.418***     1.607***           1.785***
                           (0.203)       (0.191)        (0.163)         (0.177)      (0.175)            (0.182)
     ⁄                                   0.379***       0.380***        0.398***     0.402***           0.395***
                                         (0.061)        (0.050)         (0.056)      (0.055)            (0.052)
D(           0)                          –0.077         –0.077          –0.053       –0.074             0.039
                                         (0.050)        (0.047)         (0.048)      (0.049)            (0.052)
 ⁄                                                      0.691***        0.624***     0.673***           0.500***
                                                        (0.076)         (0.072)      (0.075)            (0.100)
ln                         0.004         0.005          0.005           0.008        0.007              0.009
                           (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.013)         (0.015)      (0.014)            (0.014)

Industry dummies           No            No             No              Yes          No                 No
Year fixed effects         Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes                Yes
                           0.184         0.249          0.346           0.399        0.304              0.325
Standard Error             0.614         0.589          0.550           0.529        0.564              0.556
Panel Durbin-Watson        0.269         0.288          0.366           0.385        0.415              0.340
Observations               3494          3494           3494            3494         3114               3114
Firms                      380           380            380             380          380                380

Note: †      = Knowledge capital at 30% depreciation
      Robust standard errors clustered on firm in parentheses
      Elasticity at the means in square brackets, with its standard error below it
      In column (5), all right hand side variables are lagged one year
      In column (6), the instruments are the right hand side variables lagged one year
      *** **
         , and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively, for a two-tail test




                                                        39
