                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TAX EVASION AND
                     CAPITAL GAINS TAXATION




                        James M. Poterba




                     Working Paper No. 2119




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 1987




I am grateful to Dennis Cox, Berdj Kenadjian, and Thomas Thompson
of the IRS Compliance Group for data assistance, and to Michael
Graetz, James Hines, and especially Lawrence Summers for helpful
discussions. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation and was completed while the author held a Batterymarch
Financial Fellowship. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2119
                                                       January 1987




               Tax Evasion and Capital Gains Taxation


                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper uses time-series data to investigate how changes in capital

gains tax rates affect taxpayer compliance. It finds that a one percent

increase in the margina1 tax rate reduces voluntary compliance by between one

half and one percent. These results confirm the findings of previous studies

based on individual household data. They also suggest that at least one quarter

of the observed capital gain realization response to changes in marginal tax

rates is due to changes in reporting behavior, rather than portfolio behavior.




                                                        James M. Poterba
                                                        Department of Economics
                                                        MIT, E52—350
                                                        50 Memorial Drive
                                                        Cambridge MA 02139
                                                        (617) 868—5017
     The Internal Revenue Service estimates that in 1985 tax evasion reduced

personal income tax receipts by $84 billion, or nearly twenty percent. Unpaid

income taxes were forty percent as large as the federal deficit. The respon-

siveness of tax compliance to changes in marginal tax rates has attracted signi-

ficant policy interest in the last two years, since the Tax Reform Act of 1986

lowers marginal tax rates for more than half of the taxpaying population. Three

recent studies have used micro data for the United States to investigate the

relationship between marginal tax rates and tax evasion. Two of these studies,

Charles Clotfelter (1983) and Craig Alexander and Jonathan Feinstein (1986),

find sizable marginal tax rate effects. A third study, by Joel Slemrod (1985),

finds no effect. This paper provides new evidence on how marginal tax rates

affect compliance levels by analyzing the time series movements in voluntary

reporting rates for one type of income, capital gains, between 1965 and 1982.

     Two factors make capital gains evasion during this time period a natural

experiment in tax compliance. First, the top marginal tax rate on long-term

capital gains varied from twenty to thirty-five percent. Second, capital gains

transactions were not subject to information reporting requirements so the

potential for evasion was much higher, and the probability of detection much

lower, than for other income sources such as wages. This is reflected in higher

voluntary reporting rates for wage and interest income, 94.9% and 88.1% respec-

tively, than for capital gains income. The compliance rate for capital gains

was only 64.3% prior to the recent changes in information reporting rules.

     The paper is divided into three sections. The first discusses several

methodological issues that arise in interpreting cross-sectional studies of how

marginal tax rates affect individual tax compliance and household behavior more

generally. Section II presents new empirical evidence on how tax rates affect
                                      —2—


compliance based on time series analysis of capital gains reporting rates. The

conclusion evaluates the debate over whether the capital gains tax reduction of

1978 was self-financing in light of these findings on evasion behavior.



1. Cross-Sectional vs. Time Series Data in Empirical Public Finance


     Most previous studies of individual tax evasion, like studies of charitable

giving and the realization of capital gains, analyze cross-section data on indi-

vidual tax returns. Two problems arise in using these data to assess how mar-

ginal tax rates affect household behavior. First, it is very difficult to

separate income effects from marginal tax rate effects. Most of the dispersion

in marginal tax rates is generated by variation in income, so estimated tax rate

coefficients may reflect nonlinear income effects rather than tax rate effects.

Slemrod (1985) is unable to separate income and tax effects with any confidence,

and even when estimated tax coefficients are statistically significant, they may

not describe the behavioral response to a tax reform. Daniel Feenberg (1982)

suggests a potential remedy for this problem and uses interstate variation -in

income tax rates to identify the impact of marginal tax rates on charitable

giving. Additional progress could be made with panel data spanning multiple tax

regimes, but such information -is not available in the tax evasion context.

     The second problem with cross-sectional data is that much of the variation

in marginal tax rates conditional upon income results from household choices.

These choices may be correlated with omitted individual characteristics that

also affect the behavior, such as evasion, under investigation. For example,

married taxpayers face lower marginal tax rates than single taxpayers with iden-
                                      -3-



tical earnings, but marriage may affect a taxpayer's compliance behavior through

channels other than the marginal tax rate. Unobserved characteristics that

affect a taxpayer's level of charitable giving or his demand for homeownership

will also affect marginal tax rates, but they may affect the proclivity to evade

taxes as well. Because tax returns contain minimal demographic data, control-

ling for these omitted characteristics is extremely difficult.

     Relying on time series analyses of tax rates and household behavior is

appealing precisely because the experimental variation derives from changes in

the tax code. Time series studies encounter other difficulties, however.

First, it is difficult to summarize the tax system in one or a few variables.

For most behavioral decisions, there is enormous heterogeneity in the marginal

tax rates facing different taxpayers. For capital gains, marginal rates vary

both because of differences in investors' non-capital gains income that affect

their marginal tax rates on capital gains, as well as from particular gain and

loss realization patterns (see Poterba (1987)). Fortunately, the capital gains

tax reforms of the last two decades affected the marginal tax rates facing most

investors in similar ways, so they may still be useful for tax research.

     The second problem with time series data is the inevitable difficulty of

controlling for other factors that affect taxpayer behavior. Two factors are

particularly significant for analyzing capital gains tax evasion. First, inter-

temporal variation in tax enforcement is potentially very important. In 1965,

the first year of my sample, 4.6% of individual tax returns were examined by IRS

revenue agents and auditors. By 1982, the last year, only 1.5% of returns were

examined. There have also been changes in tax shelter enforcement that may

affect capital gains reporting. In 1973, the IRS began an enforcement program
                                      -4-


directed at oil and gas shelters; the program was expanded to other shelters in

the late 1970s. Second, the composition of gains also affects capital gains

compliance. Some types of gains, notably those on stocks and bonds, have volun-

tary reporting rates of nearly 9O. Corporate stock accounts for only a third

of capital gains, however, and many other transactions such as sales of real

property have much lower compliance rates (see Thomas Thompson (1987)). The mix

of gains has shifted through time, with real estate transactions becoming

increasingly important, and this may affect the compliance level.

     Despite these difficulties, time series data provide a new source of evi-

dence on taxpayer behavior. At worst, they constitute a useful validation of

the estimates from cross-sectional studies, and at best they may yield more

reliable estimates of how structural tax reform will affect household behavior.

The next section analyzes time series data on the capital gains tax voluntary

reporting percentage (VRP) to explore how marginal tax rates affect tax evasion.



2. Time Series Evidence on Tax Rates and Tax Compliance


     The Internal Revenue Service estimates the fraction of realized capital

gains that are reported on tax returns, the VRP, as part of each Taxpayer

Compliance Monitoring Program survey. There were six TCMP surveys between 1965

and 1982, and the estimated VRPs varied from a high of 83.2 in 1965 to a low of

61.1 in 1976. These data, plotted as the solid line in Figure I, are described

in more detail in Internal Revenue Service (1983).

     I investigate the relationship between the capital gains VRP and two

measures of the marginal tax burden on capital gain realizations. The first,
                       Marginal Tax Rates and Voluntary
                       Reporting Percentages, 1965—1982

VRP (Percent)                                                      MTR    (Percent)
   85           ——_____         _____ ______—                             —40


   80—                                                                    —35


                                                                            30
                                                                      /
   70                               \                             /       H25
                                        \                        /\\
                                                             /
   65                                       \                             20
                                                \
   60                                                            ——         15

    1965        1969        1973                1976      1979            1982
                                    Year
                                            —5—


MTR1, is the maximum statutory tax rate on long-term gains. I ignore a variety

of complicated capital gains tax provisions the affected a very small fraction

of investors during the mid—1970s (see Lawrence Lindsey (1987) for a more

detailed discussion of these provisions, which involve the alternative minimum

tax and the maximum tax on earned income). This tax rate series is plotted as

the broken line in Figure 1. The second tax rate series, MTR2, is a weighted

average of actual marginal rates on realized long-term gains computed by Lindsey

(1987). Its movements are similar in direction, but less dramatic, than those

in MTR1. Although Joseph Stiglitz (1983) and George Constantinides (1983)

emphasize the impossibility of distilling the capital gains tax system into a

single marginal tax rate that affects household behavior, I argue elsewhere

(1987) that the marginal tax rates on long-term gains realized by a majority of

investors move in tandem with these series. Some investors may develop trading

strategies that shelter gains and therefore face zero marginal tax rates on

capital gains, so the tax reforms have no effect on them. Very few, if any,

investors received reductions in their capital gains tax rates as a result of

the legislation that raised the top marginal rate.

      I estimate regression equations linking the logarithm of the voluntary

reporting percentage with the log of the marginal tax rate and a time trend, the

latter included to capture changes in enforcement, tax compliance mores, and

other factors. The results for the two basic equations are shown below, with

standard errors in parentheses:


(1)    ln(VRP) =   -0.680    -    .410*ln(MTR1)   -    .044*TIME   R2 =   .68
                   (0.250)       (.197)               (.022)



(2)    ln(VRP) = —1.787      —    979*ln(MTR2)    —    .042*TIME   R2 =   .39
                   (1.065)       (.652)               (.031)
                                        -6-


Equation (2) is estimated by instrumental variables, since MTR2 is based on

reported capital gains, with the maximum statutory rate (MTR1) as an instrument.

       Both equations suggest important marginal tax rate effects on the tax eva-

sion decision. The first equation implies that a one percent change in the mar-

ginal tax rate raises the reported tax base by .4 percent. A change like the

1978 tax reform, which lowered the marginal tax rate from 35% to 28%, would

therefore raise reported capital gains by roughly eight percent. The second

equation suggests an even larger tax rate effect, with reported gains displaying

a unit elasticity with respect to the marginal tax rate. Because the 1978 tax

reform has a smaller effect on MTR2 than on MTR1, reducing it only from 21.8% to

17.7%, the second equation predicts only a 4% change in the reported tax base.

       Although these equations are estimated using only six observations, the MTR

coefficient is statistically significant at the .15 level in first equation and

at just below the .20 level in the second. The trend variable in these

equations may be capturing changes over time in tax enforcement. To allow for

this possibility I replaced the trend variable with the fraction of individual

tax returns that were audited. The estimated marginal tax rate coefficient

changes very little between (1) and this specification, but the coefficient on

enforcement probability is statistically insignificant. Its point estimate is

large, however, and suggests that a one percentage point increase in the exami-

nation probability raises tax compliance by about four percent.

       To control for the possibility that attitudes toward tax evasion in general

had evolved through time in ways that were spuriously correlated with the capi-

ta) gains tax rate, I also estimated an equation controlling for the level of

tax   evasion on other types of capital income:
                                             —7—



(3) ln(VRPcg/VRP.int&d iv   =   -.250    -    .368*ln(MTRC9/MTRd.1V) - .046*TIME   R2.51
                                (.108)       (.262)                   (.029)

The dependent variable is the log of the VRP on capital gains, divided by the

VRP for interest and dividend income. The tax variable is MTR1 divided by a

weighted average marginal tax rate on individual dividend income, calculated by

Martin Feldstein and Joosung Jung (1987). This equation tests the hypothesis

that changes in the relative tax burdens on different types of capital income,

capital gains versus interest and dividends, lead to changes in the relative

compliance rates on the different income sources. The results support this

view. Although the standard error on the tax rate variable is now somewhat

higher than in equation (1), the coefficient changes relatively little and the

implied elasticity of the tax base with respect to the marginal tax rate is .37.

     The time series evidence on the sensitivity of tax evasion to marginal tax

rates is surprisingly similar to the findings of cross-sectional studies.

Evaluated at the 1976 values of the compliance level and marginal tax rate, the

estimates in equations (1) and (2) imply elasticities of unreported capital

gains with respect to marginal tax rates of .64 and 1.54 respectively. By com-

parison, Clotfelter (1983) reports an elasticity of unreported taxable income of

1.46 with respect to the marginal tax rate for high income filers, the group

most comparable to the taxpayers reporting capital gains. The comparison with

Alexander and Feinstein (1986) is more difficult, because they report primarily

probit results on the discrete choice of whether or not to evade. For a tax-

payer with total taxable income of $100,000 and $20,000 of taxable capital

gains, their estimates imply that reducing the taxpayer's marginal tax rate from

.45 to .33 (as the Tax Reform Act of 1986 does) would reduce the probability of
                                         -8-



tax evasion from .72 to .55. If all individuals who evade fail to report the

same amount of income, this would imply an elasticity of unreported income with

respect to marginal tax rates of 1.53.

      The estimates from (1) and (2) are only suggestive for two reasons. First,

they fail to control for changes through time in the composition of capital

gains, principally the increased importance of residential capital gains. If

anything this would induce a downward trend in the measured VRP over time,

making the 1982 compliance increase even more difficult to explain. Second, the

estimates make only a crude correction for varying enforcement patterns. The

results do however support earlier studies that find a significant role for

marginal tax rates in determining tax compliance.



3. Tax Policy Implications


      The influence of marginal tax rates on taxpayer compliance is a central is-

sue in assessing the revenue effects of tax reform. Total revenue raised from

a tax is the product of the tax rate and the reported tax base:

(4)         T =   T*V(T)*B(T)
where the reported base is the product of the true tax base, B(T), and the vol-

untary reporting percentage v(r). The revenue effect of a tax reform can there-

fore be decomposed into three parts, a rate effect, a reporting effect, and a

behavioral effect on the true tax base. Although the elasticity of the reported

capital gains base u(T)*B(T) with respect to tax rates has been a subject of

substantial debate, there has been virtually no discussion of the effect of tax

rates on tax compliance y(T) as opposed to gain realization, B(i). Most pre-
                                     -9-


vious studies treated (T) as fixed at one in interpreting their findings on the

distortions due to the capital gains tax. The time series estimates using MTR2

imply that a one percent change in the marginal tax rate leads to a one percent

change in reported income, so even without any change in the true tax base,

B(T), capital gains tax cuts would be essentially self-financing. The estimates

using MTRI imply that only half of the revenue lost through reduced rates is

made up by increased reporting.

     The estimates from the last section can be used to evaluate the relative

importance of reporting effects, alnv/alnr, and realization effects, alnB/alnT,

in accounting for the elasticity of the capital gains tax base with respect to

tax rates. First, consider the cross-sectional data on the elasticity of

reported realizations. Studies using panel data to disentangle temporary and

permanent changes in marginal tax rates suggest an elasticity of realized long-

term gains with respect to marginal tax rates of between -1.2 and -2.2 (see U.S.

Treasury (1985) and Gerald Auten and Clotfelter (1982)). The compliance effects

in the last section imply that between one quarter and half of these effects

could be due to variability in taxpayer reporting, not to changing realization

behavior. Feldstein, Slemrod, and Shiomo Yitzhaki (1980) estimated larger

realization elasticities than those from the panel data studies, however, so

reporting effects explain a smaller fraction of their results.

     There have also been time series studies of how capital gain realizations

respond to marginal tax rates. Lindsey (1987) concludes that a one percentage

point reduction in the marginal tax rate on capital gains, measured as MTR2,

will raise realized long—term gains by five percent. This implies that a tax

change like the 1978 reform would increase the reported capital gains tax base
                                      -10-


by twenty percent, so the evasion effects could account for between 20% and 40%

of the total effect. Both the micro and time series estimates suggest that pre-

vious studies overstate the behavioral distortions from the capital gains tax.

     The problem of distinguishing reporting effects from more substantive beha-

vioral effects arises in other microeconometric tax research as well. Studies

of charitable giving that estimate how marginal tax rates affect contribution

levels may be capturing in part a tax compliance effect. Richard Fratanduono

(1986) reports estimates from the 1982 TCMP showing that charitable contribu-

tions were overstated by 10%, in comparison with 14.7% overstatement in the late

1960$ when marginal tax rates were typically much higher. An important but

unresolved issue concerns the extent to which the sizable increase in reported

taxable income following the marginal rate reductions of 1981 (see Lindsey

(1985)) can be attributed to changing compliance patterns.

     Recognizing the possibility of capital gains tax evasion, and changing eva-

sion opportunities over time, can also affect analyses of tax distortions.

There are wide inter-asset disparities in noncompliance rates. Compliance is

much lower for sales of real assets such as business property and personal resi-

dences than on corporate stock and bonds (see Thompson (1987)). This effec-

tively reduces the tax burden on structures (see Roger Gordon, James Hines, and

Lawrence Summers (1987)) and also implies that recent initatives to increase tax

compliance by requiring information reporting on most asset sales will alter the

relative tax burdens on different assets. Complete analysis of this problem

requires integrating work on the deadweight burden due to income tax evasion

with work on inter-asset and intertemporal distortions.
                                      —11—


                                 References

Alexander, Craig and Jonathan Feinstein, "A Microeconometric Analysis of Income
     Tax Evasion," mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, November 1986.

Auten, Gerard and Charles Clotfelter, "Permanent versus Transitory Tax Effects
     and the Realization of Capital Gains," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     November 1982, 97, 613-632.

Clotfelter, Charles T., "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of Individual
     Returns," Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1983, 65, 363-373.

Constantinides, George M., "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax,"
     Econometrica, May 1983, 51, 611-636.

Feenberg, Daniel, "Identification in Tax-Price Regression Models: The Case of
     Charitable Giving," NBER Working Paper 988, Cambridge MA, September 1982.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Joosung Jun, "The Effects of Tax Rules on Nonresident-
     ial Fixed Investment," in N. Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on
     Capital Formation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Feldstein, Martin S., Joel Slemrod, and Shlomo Yitzhaki, "The Effects of
     Taxation on the Selling of Corporate Stock and the Realization of Capital
     Gains," Quarterly Journal of Economics, June 1980, 94, 777-791.

Fratanduono, Richard J., "Trends in Voluntary Compliance of Taxpayers Filing
     Individual Tax Returns," in Trend Analysis and Related Statistics: 1986
     Update, Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue
     Service, March 1986.

Gordon, Roger H., James R. Hines, and Lawrence H. Summers, "Notes on the
     Taxation of Structures," in M. Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation
     on Capital Formation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Internal Revenue Service, Income Tax Compliance Research, Estimates for
     1973-1981, Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 1983.

Lindsey, Lawrence B., "Taxpayer Behavior and the Distribution of the 1982 Tax
     Cut," NBER Working Paper 1760, Cambridge MA, October 1985.

Lindsey, Lawrence B., "Capital Gains: Rates, Realizations, and Revenues,"
     forthcoming in N. Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on Capital
     ation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

Poterba, James M., "How Burdensome are Capital Gains Taxes?," Journal of Public
     Economics, 1987, forthcoming.

Slemrod, Joel, "An Empirical Test for Tax Evasion," Review of Economics and
     Statistics, May 1985, 57, 232-238.
                                      —12-


Stiglitz, Joseph, "Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains," Journal of
     Public Economics, July 1983, 21, 257-294.

Thompson, Thomas, "Analysis of Capital Gains Noncompliance," in Trend Analysis
     and Related Statistics: 1987 Update, Washington: U.S. Department of the
     Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, March 1987.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Capital Gains Tax Reductions of 1978,
     Washington: Office of Tax Analysis, 1985.
</ref_section>
