                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CULTURE AND GLOBAL SOURCING

                                         Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                         Bohdan Kukharskyy
                                            Gerard Roland

                                         Working Paper 21198
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21198


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2015




We thank Pol Antràs, Oliver Hart, and seminar participants in Munich (ETSG) and Hohenheim for
their helpful comments and suggestions. Parts of this paper were written during Bohdan Kukharskyy’s
research stay at Harvard. The author is grateful to this institution and, in particular, to Pol Antràs for
making this visit possible. Gorodnichenko thanks the NSF for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Bohdan Kukharskyy, and Gerard Roland. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Culture and Global Sourcing
Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Bohdan Kukharskyy, and Gerard Roland
NBER Working Paper No. 21198
May 2015
JEL No. F1,F14,F23,P14,P26,P48,Z1

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of global sourcing with culturally dissimilar countries. Production of
final goods requires the coordination of decisions between the headquarter of a multinational firm
and managers of their component suppliers. Managers of both units are assumed to have strong beliefs
about the right course of action and are reluctant to adjust their decisions. We characterize the optimal
allocation of decision rights across firms when contracts are incomplete. Our theoretical model delivers
two key predictions: the incentive of a firm to integrate (rather than outsource) its input supply is decreasing
in the cultural distance between the home and the host country and decreasing in trade costs between
the two countries. Combining data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Related Party Trade with various
measures for cultural distance and trade cost, we find empirical evidence strongly supportive of these
two predictions.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko                                    Gerard Roland
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880                                   University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                     627 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                               and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu                             groland@econ.berkeley.edu

Bohdan Kukharskyy
Department of Economics
Mohlstrasse 36, 72074
University of Tuebingen
Germany
bohdan.kukharskyy@uni-tuebingen.de
1     Introduction
Whenever managers of multinational companies are asked about the challenges of globaliza-
tion to their businesses, keywords like ‘cultural differences’ or ‘intercultural communication’
are among the most frequently given answers. For instance, a global survey of 572 executives
conducted by the Economist Intelligence Unit (2012) reports ‘differences in cultural tradi-
tions’ to be the greatest obstacle to productive cross-border collaboration. Not surprisingly,
courses on intercultural communication have become indispensable components of most (if
not all) business programs around the world and the impact of cultural differences on com-
mercial transactions is widely explored in the business literature. Yet, the effect of cultural
differences in international business transactions remains mostly ignored by economists.
    This paper aims at shedding light, both theoretically and empirically, on the effects of
problems of cultural communication across countries on the organization of global sourcing.
In particular, we investigate how national cultural distance, defined as the extent to which the
shared values and norms in one country differ from those in another, affects the managerial
decision whether to integrate a foreign supplier into a multinational firm’s boundaries or to
cooperate with the latter at arm’s length. The basic trade-off analyzed in this paper is as
follows: Integration leads to a better coordination of decisions across firm units and a higher
monetary payoff to the headquarter manager, but is associated with a loss in the latter’s
non-monetary job satisfaction as a result of frictions within the integrated firm. Given that
these frictions are likely to be amplified by managerial cultural differences, this paper argues
that the prevalence of integration decreases in the cultural distance between countries.
    It is particularly interesting to study the effect of culture in the context of multinational
enterprises rather than that of exporting or importing firms, for two reasons. First, since
a multinational firm “controls and manages production establishments (plants) located in
at least two countries” (Caves 2007: 1), managers of multinational firms are inevitably
confronted with the issue of cross-cultural collaboration. Second, multinational firms play
a major role in the global economy. According to the UNCTAD (2011) World Investment
Report, multinational enterprises account for one-quarter of world GDP. Roughly one-third
of the volume of world trade is intra-firm trade. Moreover, roughly another third of world
trade is accounted for by transactions in which multinational firms are one of the two sides
of the exchange, see UNCTAD (2000).1
    Culture is generally defined as the set of values and beliefs, which are shared by a com-


1
    In case of the U.S., the role of multinationals is even more significant. Roughly 90 percent of U.S. exports
    and imports flow through multinational firms, and nearly one-half of U.S. imports are transacted within
    boundaries of multinational firms rather than across unaffiliated parties, see Antràs and Yeaple (2014).

                                                      1
munity and are persistent over time. There is by now a rapidly expanding literature (see,
e.g. Fernandez et al. 2004, Fernandez 2010, Guiso et al. (2003, 2006, 2009), Gorodnichenko
and Roland (2010, 2011), Tabellini (2008, 2010), Alesina et al. 2013, Alesina and Giuliano
2015), analyzing the impact of culture on various economic outcomes. Yet, to the best of
our knowledge, the impact of culture on the organization of multinational firms and on their
outsourcing decisions has not been explored in the economics literature.
    To address our research question, we need a theory of a multinational firm’s boundaries
that incorporates frictions between managers of different cultures. We build on the recent
theory of the firm by Hart and Holmström (2010). Their approach moves the focus away
from the canonical property rights theory by Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore
(1900) – which emphasizes the role of non-human assets in determining a firm’s boundaries
– towards a theory that highlights the role of managers in making strategic coordination
decisions across firm units. A key feature of their approach is the assumption that managers
enjoy two kinds of benefits: monetary profits and private non-monetary benefits (or job
satisfaction). The latter benefits are usually modeled as exogenous parameters. Instead,
we endogenize job satisfaction in our model and assume that it depends negatively on the
frictions created by the cultural distance between cooperating managers.2
    On that basis, we develop a theoretical model of global sourcing that features vertical
fragmentation of the production process as in Antràs and Helpman (2004), firm heterogene-
ity along the lines of Melitz (2003), and cross-country heterogeneity with regard to national
cultural values. Production of final goods requires cooperation of two units: headquar-
ters and manufacturing suppliers, which provide headquarter services and manufacturing
components, respectively. Each unit is led by a single owner-manager, who is in charge of
coordinating strategic decisions (e.g., technological standards or the degree of relationship-
specificity of inputs) across units. It is assumed that managers of both units have strong
beliefs about the right course of action and these beliefs differ. Hence, from a managerial
perspective, coordination of decisions across units is associated with a fundamental trade-
off. On the one hand, better coordination leads to a higher quality of final goods and larger
managerial profits. On the other hand, deviation from one’s most preferred vision and con-
vergence towards the decision of the cooperation partner reduces a manager’s non-monetary
job satisfaction. The decision-making process crucially depends on the firm’s organizational
form. If the two units are not integrated, each unit’s manager makes strategic decisions


2
    Both the business literature and press are rife with anecdotes about challenges encountered by managers
    working in foreign cultural environments. Several recent empirical contributions have tried to quantify
    this anecdotal evidence by establishing a negative link between cultural distance and job satisfaction of
    expatriates, cf., e.g., Froese and Peltokorpi (2011, 2012).

                                                     2
solely in his own unit. Under integration, the manager of the supply unit becomes a sub-
ordinate of the headquarter unit and has to follow the latter’s instructions. To the extent
that the enacted decision deviates from the supply unit manager’s most preferred vision,
he experiences a loss in non-monetary job satisfaction. We follow Hart and Holmström
(2010) by assuming that an aggrieved subordinate-manager may ‘transfer the hurt back’ by
reducing a supervisor’s job satisfaction. From the viewpoint of the headquarter manager,
the make-or-buy decision is thus associated with a simple trade-off: Integration leads to a
better coordination of decisions across units and higher monetary profits at the expense of
a non-monetary cost of enacting decisions in the supply unit.
   How do we introduce culture in the model? The decision by the headquarter manager
whether to source components from an independent or from an integrated supplier depends
on the effect of cross-cultural communication on his private non-monetary benefits. We show
that component suppliers are more likely to be integrated into firm boundaries when their
cultural distance to the headquarters is smaller. Intuitively, as cultural distance increases,
it becomes increasingly hard for a manager of an integrated firm to enact his most preferred
decisions in a supply unit. If the associated loss in non-monetary job satisfaction outweighs
the monetary benefit of integration stemming from better coordination of decisions, the
headquarter manager may decide to cooperate with the supplier at arm’s length.
   Apart from this central finding, our model delivers the following three results. First,
we show that better coordination of strategic decisions under integration results in a higher
quality of final goods as compared to outsourcing. Second, the higher the firm’s productivity
the more likely managers of multinational firms are to integrate their suppliers into the firm
rather than cooperating with them at arm’s length. The intuition behind this result lies in the
supermodularity of profits in productivity and final goods quality. Since higher productivity
allows firms to reap higher profits, headquarter managers get a greater incentive to increase
the quality of final goods by bringing their suppliers inside the firm’s boundaries. Third, the
higher the trade costs between the two countries the less likely a foreign supplier is to be
integrated. This result is driven by the submodularity of profits in variable trade cost and
final goods quality. Intuitively, higher trade costs decrease operating profits and, thereby,
reduce the marginal gain from improving the final goods quality. As a result, the incentive
to enhance coordination across units by integrating a supplier decreases.
   All three above-mentioned theoretical propositions find strong empirical support. First,
there is a broad consensus in the business literature that integration of an independent
supplier into the firm boundaries increases the quality of goods or services. The Deloitte
(2012) Global Outsourcing and Insourcing Survey reports unsatisfactory quality to be the


                                              3
the major factor in the decision to terminate an existing arm’s-length relationship. Moreover,
almost all of the surveyed firms that switched from outsourcing to integration were satisfied
with the result in terms of improved quality.3 Second, using firm-level data, several studies
have shown that firms engaged in foreign vertical integration appear to be more productive
than those undertaking foreign outsourcing (see Corcos et al., 2013 for France; Kohler and
Smolka, 2009 for Spain, and Tomiura, 2007 for Japan). Third, Antràs (2015) and Corcos et
al. (2013) provide supportive evidence for our hypothesis of a negative effect of trade costs
on integration.
    Yet, our central result – the effect of cultural distance on the international make-or-buy
decision – has not been empirically analyzed. We bring this prediction to the data by study-
ing the sourcing decisions of U.S. firms. Following Nunn and Trefler (2008, 2013), we use
as dependent variable U.S. intra-firm imports as a share of total U.S. imports from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Related Party Trade dataset.4 A high share of intra-firm imports reflects a
greater willingness of US firms to obtain an ownership or control stake in foreign suppliers
instead of buying intermediate goods at arm’s length. Our key explanatory cultural variable
is Hofstede’s (2001) well-known individualism-collectivism index, generally considered to be
the main dimension of cultural variation across countries (see, e.g., Heine, 2007). As the
US is the most individualistic country according to Hofstede’s measurement, and since we
are looking at cultural distance between the US and its trade partners, the individualism-
collectivism index provides a convenient measure of cultural distance. We find indeed that
there is a negative and significant relationship between a country’s cultural distance to the
US and the share of intra-firm imports in total U.S. imports from this country, using a wide
range of control variables.
    While it is quite plausible that cultural distance affects decisions to integrate firms, it
may also be the case, albeit to a lesser extent, that the presence of US firms in a country
reduces cultural distance with managers working in those US firms. It may even be the case
that a large presence of US firms in a country may reduce cultural distance between that
country and the US. In order to infer a causal effect of cultural distance, we then follow
two alternative identification strategies. First, we apply instrumental variables approach,
whereby cultural distance is instrumented by the genetic distance between the population


3
    There is also a wealth of anecdotal evidence suggesting a link between make-or-buy decision and quality.
    For instance, outsourcing of more than 60% of components of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner to independent
    producers is considered to be one of the major reasons for poor quality and for almost four years of
    delay of the final good, see e.g., Tang et al. (2009).
4
    Given that comprehensive firm-level data on integration decisions is not readily available, this product-
    level dataset has been extensively used in the empirical literature to study international make-or-buy
    decisions, cf. Antràs (2013, 2015).

                                                     4
in a given country and the population in the U.S., as in Gorodnichenko and Roland (2011).5
Given that genetic distance is exogenous to the firms’ make-or-buy decisions, our instrument
satisfies the exclusion restriction. Second, we construct an alternative measure for cultural
distance based on ethnic composition of U.S. industries. More specifically, we use the 2000
U.S. Census data to calculate for each industry the shares of managers with a given cultural
background and then uses weights to compute industry-specific cultural scores. Both iden-
tification strategies confirm the negative impact of cultural distance on intra-firm imports
found in simple linear regressions.
    Related literature. From a theoretical perspective, our paper is closely related to the
seminal contribution by Antràs and Helpman (2004), who study the international make-
or-buy decision in a framework with monopolistic competition, contractual incompleteness,
and firm-level heterogeneity. Their framework is centered on the property rights approach
along the lines of Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990). In contrast, we
emphasize the effect of cultural distance between managers on the internalization decision,
and our framework borrows from Hart and Holmström’s (2010) theory of the firm.6 To
be clear, the findings of our paper do not contradict but rather complement the results
by Antràs and Helpman (2004). Moreover, our empirical analysis suggests that these two
alternative explanations of multinational firms’ boundaries simultaneously hold. We return
to this issue in the conclusion.
    From an empirical perspective, our paper is related to the burgeoning literature that aims
at understanding the effect of culture on international trade and foreign direct investment.
Using data from the Eurovision Song Context, Felbermayr and Toubal (2010) construct a
measure of cultural proximity and show a strong positive effect of this measure on trade
volumes. Using historically motivated instrumental variables, Siegel et al. (2011, 2012) find
a negative causal effect of egalitarianism distance – defined as the difference in the belief
that all people are of equal worth and should be treated equally in society – on foreign direct
investment flows, cross-national flows of bond and equity issuances, syndicated loans, and
mergers and acquisitions. Guiso et al. (2009) construct a measure of bilateral trust between
European countries and instrument it with religious, genetic, and somatic similarities to
show that lower bilateral trust leads to less trade and less direct and portfolio investment
between two countries. Yet, none of these empirical studies considers the effect of cultural
5
    The choice of U.S. as a benchmark country is motivated by the fact that U.S. happens to be the most
    individualistic country in Hofstede’s dataset.
6
    Conconi et al. (2012) and Legros and Newman (2013) introduce Hart and Holmström’s (2010) theory
    to the context of international trade in order to study the effect of liberalization of product and factor
    markets on the organization of the firms. Both the focus and the approach of the current paper, however,
    are different. Our aim is to understand the effect of cultural distance on the international make-or-buy
    decisions of multinational firms.

                                                     5
distance on the international make-or-buy decision.
    By putting managers into the center of our analysis, this paper is also related to the
empirical literature that studies the impact of managerial effort on firm and economy-wide
performance. Several empirical studies have shown a causal effect of successful managerial
practices on firm performance (see, e.g., surveys by Bloom and Van Reenen 2010, Gibbons
and Roberts 2013, and Syverson 2011). In a recent empirical study, Bloom et al. (2013)
also find that cross-country differences in managerial practices may explain a substantial
fraction of heterogeneity in total factor productivity across nations. Yet, there is a large
consensus in the sociological literature that managerial behavior itself is a function of a
country’s cultural values (see, e.g., Sagiv et al., 2010 for an overview of this literature). We
relate these two independent literature strands by showing how cultural differences shape
managerial behavior and, thereby, affect both a firm’s performance and the attractiveness
of countries from the viewpoint of international investors.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic set up.
Section 3 discusses the equilibrium make-or-buy decision and derives theoretical predictions.
Section 4 presents econometric evidence supporting this paper’s key proposition: a negative
relationship between cultural distance and the prevalence of integration. Section 5 concludes.



2     Set-up
Our model economy consists of a home country, N , and many foreign countries, `. All
countries have identical consumer preferences. Foreign countries ` differ with regard to their
geographical and cultural distance to N . Each country is populated by a unit measure of
consumers. Each consumer is endowed with a unit of inelastically supplied labor. A subset
of individuals also possess leadership abilities, which allow them to become entrepreneurs.
For simplicity, we assume that each firm is operated by a single owner-manager. There are
two types of firms: headquarters and manufacturing suppliers. Headquarters are located in
the home country, while manufacturing suppliers are located in foreign countries.
Preferences. Preferences of an individual i in any country are represented by the following
quasi-linear utility:
                           Ui = zi + µ ln X + 1i=H, M jiint + jiext ,
                                                                   
                                                                                            (1)

where zi denotes consumption of a homogenous numeraire-good, X is an index of aggregate
consumption of differentiated varieties v ∈ V , and µ is a parameter governing the intensity
of preferences for differentiated goods. Aggregate consumption of differentiated varieties has



                                               6
the following form:                                                         σ
                                         Z                               σ−1
                                                      1       σ−1
                                   X=             q(v) x(v)
                                                      σ        σ    dv           ,                        (2)
                                            v∈V

whereby x(v) and q(v) denote, respectively, the quantity and quality of differentiated varieties
and σ > 1 represents the elasticity of substitution between any two varieties.
     As will be shown further below, these non-homothetic preferences imply a linear rela-
tionship between consumer’s income and utility. Following Hart and Holmström (2010), we
assume that managers derive their utility not only from the monetary payoff but also from a
non-monetary job satisfaction.7 This notion is reflected through 1i=H,M , an indicator func-
tion which takes the value one if an individual i is a manager and zero otherwise, whereby
H denotes a manager of a headquarter unit and M represents a manager of a supplier firm
(see below). The expression in parentheses denotes private job satisfaction. In the spirit
of Hart and Holmström (2010), we subdivide this private benefit into two components: in-
trinsic, jiint , and extrinsic, jiext .8 The intrinsic component of job satisfaction stems from the
pleasure a manager gets from working on the task itself and from the feeling of accomplish-
ment, whereas its extrinsic component stems from the factors bestowed upon an individual
by peers (e.g. a friendly working atmosphere, respect of co-workers etc.). Both components
of the non-monetary job-satisfaction are assumed to enter a manager’s utility function in a
linearly additive way.9 However, in our model, job satisfaction is endogenous. Functional
forms for jiint and jiext will be introduced below.
     An individual’s budget constraint reads P X + zi = Yi , where Yi denotes an individual
                  R                   1
i’s income, P = v∈V p(v)1−σ q(v)dv σ−1 is a quality-adjusted price index, where p(v) is the
price of variety v ∈ V . Standard utility maximization yields equilibrium demand functions
for the homogeneous good, a bundle of differentiated varieties, and the inverse demand
function for each differentiated variety, respectively:10

                                                                            1        1   1   σ−1
                  zi = Yi − µ ,       X = µP −1      ,    p(v) = q(v) σ x(v)− σ µ σ P         σ    .      (3)


Plugging these results back in (1), we obtain an individual’s indirect utility:


                                  Wi = Yi + 1i=H, M jiint + jiext − κ,
                                                                 
                                                                                                          (4)



7
     Although we confine our analysis of non-monetary benefits strictly to managers, our model can be
     extended so as to incorporate employees’ job satisfaction as well.
8
     This conceptualization is widely used in organization science, see e.g., Naumann (1993a), Staw (1989).
9
     In fact, this is a standard working assumption in the organizational literature, cf. Naumann (1993b).
10
     We assume sufficiently small preferences for differentiated goods (i.e., µ < Yi ) to ensure positive con-
     sumption of the traditional good in equilibrium.

                                                      7
where κ ≡ µ ln P − µ(ln µ − 1) summarizes all terms that are constant across individuals.
Throughout the analysis, Wi will be used as the welfare function of a manager i = H, M .
Production. The traditional good is produced in all countries under constant returns to
scale and perfect competition. This good will be chosen as the numéraire. Production of
one unit of output requires aN units of labor in the home country and al < aN labor units in
the foreign country (i.e. workers in N are assumed to be more productive than in any foreign
country `). This numéraire good is assumed to be costlessly traded, implying the same unit
price in all regions. Consequently, the model exhibits a constant wage differential between
the home country and foreign destinations: wN > w` . For simplicity, we normalize the wage
rate in N to unity, wN = 1.
     Production of differentiated varieties exhibits monopolistic competition, whereby each
variety is produced by a single firm under increasing returns to scale. As in Melitz (2003),
firms are heterogeneous with respect to the productivity. To start the production of a
variety v, a headquarter firm has to bear a fixed cost of entry, consisting of fE units of local
labor. Upon paying these fixed costs, the firm draws a productivity level θ from a known
distribution function G(ϕ). After θ is revealed, the headquarters decide whether to exit
the market or start producing. Production of final goods requires the cooperation of two
units: the headquarter firm and manufacturing suppliers. Each unit is operated by a single
owner-manager. The manager of the headquarter and manufacturing unit will be referred
to as H and M , respectively. Headquarter units specialize in the provision of headquarter
services h, while supply units provide manufacturing components m. Inputs h and m are
produced with a unit labor input requirement each. These inputs are combined into final
goods according to the following Cobb-Douglas production function:
                                                      η           (1−η)
                                                h(v)          m(v)
                                 x(v) = θ                                     ,                      (5)
                                                 η            1−η

where parameter η ∈ (0, 1) captures the relative importance of headquarter services in the
production process (henceforth, headquarter intensity), which is assumed to be constant
across all firms. To simplify on notation, we drop the variety-index v from here onward and
identify firms by their productivity θ.
     As mentioned above, we assume that all headquarters are located in the home country,
whereas manufacturing suppliers are located in foreign countries.11 After manufacturing
components have been produced, they are shipped to N for final assembly, (see equation
11
     Our framework can be easily extended to the case in which manufacturing units are located both in
     home and foreign countries and headquarters decide between domestic and foreign sourcing, cf. Antràs
     and Helpman (2004). However, given that we do not observe this internationalization margin in the
     dataset used in the subsequent empirical analysis, we rule out domestic sourcing at the outset.

                                                       8
(5)). Transportation of manufacturing inputs from country ` to N involves iceberg-type
trade cost τ ` , which may differ across locations ` due to differences in distance and/or trade
barriers.
   In contrast to Antràs and Helpman (2004), we assume that parties can write enforceable
contracts on the quantity of inputs h and m. This assumption is made to eliminate the well-
known channel of inefficiencies stemming from the ex post hold-up and the associated ex ante
underinvestment in inputs. Yet, we assume that the final-goods quality cannot be verified by
the courts. In our model, the quality of final goods depends on the managerial coordination
of strategic decisions across units (e.g., adoption of a common technological standard or
platform). For simplicity, we normalize the set of possible coordination decisions to a unit
interval and denote by α ∈ [0, 1] decisions made in the headquarters’ unit and by β ∈ [0, 1]
decisions implemented in the manufacturing firm.
   Managers H and M are assumed to have differing visions about the right course of action.
More specifically, H prefers α to be as high as possible, while M prefers the smallest possi-
ble β. This assumption can be rationalized by invoking the issue of relationship-specificity:
While final good producers might seek to adopt a specific production technology (e.g., to
set themselves apart from competitors), manufacturing suppliers prefer to operate under a
general technology (which would increase their outside option and/or allow them to serve
multiple final good producers). For production to be efficient, it does not matter which par-
ticular decisions are chosen in both units, as long as these decisions are perfectly coordinated
across firms. We thus assume the quality function takes the following form:


                                       q = 1 − (α − β)2 ,                                    (6)


whereby the quality of a final good is highest (q max = 1) for any combination of α = β (i.e.
perfect coordination across units) and it is decreasing as α and β diverge.
   Given that managers have strong diverging beliefs about the right course of actions, coor-
dination of decisions across units leads to a reduction in managerial intrinsic job satisfaction.
The marginal decrease in intrinsic job satisfaction is highest, the more a manager departs
from his most preferred decision (i.e. α = 1 for H and β = 0 for M ). We choose the
simplest possible way to introduce these assumptions into the managerial utility function by
capturing the intrinsic private cost of coordination as follows:

                               int
                              jH   = −(1 − α)2     ,    int
                                                       jM   = −β 2 .                         (7)


   Apart from the non-monetary intrinsic cost from cooperation, managerial job satisfac-


                                               9
tion also includes an extrinsic component, which stems from the factors bestowed upon an
individual by peers. We assume that the ability of a manager to affect the other manager’s
job satisfaction crucially depends on the ownership structure of a firm. If the two units are
not integrated, H choses α for the headquarter unit and M choses β for the manufacturing
unit. Given that an arm’s-length transaction amounts to a purchase of manufacturing in-
puts according to ex ante specified conditions, managers have a limited ability to affect each
others extrinsic job satisfaction. For simplicity, we normalize both managers’ extrinsic job
satisfaction under outsourcing to zero. By integrating a manufacturing supplier into firm
boundaries, however, H obtains residual control rights to make decisions in both units and
M becomes H’s subordinate. More specifically, H instructs the manager of an integrated
manufacturing unit to choose a particular β in this unit and M must follow these instruc-
tions. However, to the extent the decision implemented in the manufacturing unit deviates
from M ’s most preferred agenda (β = 0), M is aggrieved and can ‘transfer the hurt back’
to H by reducing the latter’s extrinsic job satisfaction.12 As before, we normalize the upper
bound of headquarter manager’s extrinsic job satisfaction to zero and capture H’s extrinsic
private cost under integration as follows:

                                               ext
                                              jH   = −c` β 2 ,                                           (8)


where the parameter c` ∈ [0, 1) represents the cultural distance between the headquarter
manager and the supply unit manager in country `. Intuitively, the larger the cultural dis-
tance between the two managers, the higher H’s private cost of instructing M to implement
any β > 0.
     We assume that the contracting parties agree in advance on the future division of sur-
plus.13 Both under integration and outsourcing, H and M stipulate the quantity of deployed
inputs {h, m} and the associated reward for workers producing these inputs. Furthermore,
managers stipulate ex ante the surplus sharing rule: Under outsourcing, the headquarter
manager H obtains a share s ∈ (0, 1) of the operating profit, whereas the remaining share
(1 − s) accrues to the manager M of the manufacturing firm. For simplicity, we assume that
these shares are identical for all H and M . Under integration, H diverts the entire operating
profit and compensates M with a fix wage ω.
     Headquarters that have drawn their productivity θ and decided to start a production

12
     A natural question that arises in this context is why M is kept as a subordinate under integration
     despite the extrinsic private cost from instructing this manager. This assumption can be justified by
     referring to M ’s intangible capital or specific know-how of governing the manufacturing unit.
13
     In view of the fact that most, if not all, real-world commercial contracts include (some kind of) speci-
     fication for future compensation, this assumption seems realistic.

                                                     10
face the following timing of events:

     t1 Each H decides whether to outsource manufacturing production to an independent
       producer or to integrate a supplier into the firm’s boundaries. H contractually commits
       to compensate M with a fraction (1−s) ∈ (0, 1) of a joint operating profit in the former
       case and a fixed wage ω in the latter.

     t2 Under outsourcing, H chooses α, while M chooses β. Under integration, H chooses
       both α and β.

     t3 H stipulates the quantity of inputs h and m. Inputs are produced and combined into
       final goods according to the production technology from equation (5).

     t4 The resulting output is sold and the revenue is distributed among the parties according
       to the sharing rule specified at t1 .



3      Equilibrium
We solve this game through backward induction. The revenue from the sale of the final
goods is R = px, which, using (3), (5), and (6) can be written as

                                                 η      (1−η) ! σ−1
                                                                     σ
                                        1
                                       2 σ       h      m                1  σ−1
                   R = 1 − (α − β)            θ                         µσ P σ .                      (9)
                                                 η     1−η

The associated joint operating profit is:


                                         Π` = R − h − τ ` w` m.                                      (10)


Consider first the case of outsourcing, which we index by O. At t4 , this operating profit is
divided between two firms according to the sharing rule specified ar t1 , i.e. H receives sΠ` ,
whereas M obtains (1 − s)Π` . Anticipating this outcome, H chooses at t3 the quantity of
                                                              
inputs {h, m} that maximize his welfare WH = s R − h − τ ` w` m + jH
                                                                   int
                                                                       − κ, whereas R is
given by (9).14 This maximization problem yields equilibrium input quantities h = η σ−1
                                                                                     σ
                                                                                        R
and m = (1 − η) σ−1  R
                 σ τ ` w`
                          . Plugging these quantities back in (10) yields joint operating profit
for any tuple {α, β}:
                                      Π` = 1 − (α − β)2 ΘB ` ,
                                                       
                                                                                                     (11)


14                                                                                         int      ext
      Recall that coordination decisions α and β have already been made at this point and jH   and jM   do
      not enter this maximization problem.

                                                    11
where firm-specific productivity Θ ≡ θσ−1 has been redefined for notational simplicity and
                                                                            σ−1
                                `      `   ` −(1−η)(σ−1) µ           σ−1
                               B ≡ (τ w )                                            P σ−1                       (12)
                                                             σ        σ

summarizes all terms that are constant across firms that source m from a given location `.
     Managers anticipate Π` and make at t2 coordination decisions that maximize their wel-
fare. More specifically, H chooses α to maximize WHO` :


                         max WHO` = s(1 − (α − β)2 )ΘB ` − (1 − α)2 − κ,                                         (13)
                           α


                               O`
while M chooses β to maximize WM  :

                              O`
                         max WM  = (1 − s)(1 − (α − β)2 )ΘB ` − β 2 − κ.                                         (14)
                           β


Manipulating the first-order conditions, we obtain equilibrium coordination decisions under
outsourcing to `:
                           `        1 + (1 − s)ΘB `                          (1 − s)ΘB `
                          αO =                               ,       βO` =               .                       (15)
                                       ΘB ` + 1                               ΘB ` + 1
                                           `
It can immediately be seen from (15) that αO > βO` , i.e., strategic decisions are not perfectly
coordinated across units. As a result, the quality of final goods under outsourcing

                                              `     ΘB ` (ΘB ` + 2)
                                             qO =                                                                (16)
                                                     (ΘB ` + 1)2

                                                                    `
is below its maximum level for all possible parameter values, i.e. qO < 1.15 Plugging (15) in
(13), we obtain H’s equilibrium welfare under outsourcing:

                                             s(ΘB ` )2 (ΘB ` + 2 − s)
                                    WHO` =                            − κ.                                       (17)
                                                  (ΘB ` + 1)2

     Consider next the case of integration, indexed by I. The manager of the integrating firm
(H) diverts the entire operating profit and compensates the manager of the integrated firm
(M ) with a fixed wage ω. At t4 , H maximizes his welfare WH = R − h − τ ` w` m − ω + jH
                                                                                       int
                                                                                           +
 ext
jH   − κ by choosing the equilibrium input quantities h = η σ−1
                                                             σ
                                                                R and m = (1 − η) σ−1  R
                                                                                   σ τ ` w`
                                                                                            .
As before, the resulting joint operating profit, Π` = (1 − (α − β)2 ) ΘB ` is a function of
equilibrium decisions {α, β}. Yet, in contrast to outsourcing, H now has the right to make
strategic decisions in both units. Bearing in mind the extrinsic private cost from instructing


                                                         `
15                                                     ∂qO               2                              `
     This follows immediately from the fact that     ∂(ΘB ` )
                                                                 =   (ΘB ` +1)3
                                                                                  > 0 and lim(ΘB ` )→∞ qO = 1.

                                                        12
M , see (8), H’s maximization problem at t2 is given by:


                   max WHI` = (1 − (α − β)2 )ΘB ` − (1 − α)2 − c` β 2 − ω − κ.                                              (18)
                    α,β


Manipulating the two first-order conditions, we obtain equilibrium coordination decisions
under integration:

                                  ΘB ` + c`                                        ΘB `
                       αI` =                                ,       βI` =                       .                           (19)
                               ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + c`                          ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + c`

It can immediately be seen that βI` < αI` < 1. This means that although H now possesses
decision rights in both units, strategic decisions under integration are not perfectly coordi-
nated. Intuitively, H internalizes the loss in job satisfaction from instructing M but does
not insist on his most preferred outcome, βI` = αI` = 1 because of the cost c` associated in
imposing his position on the foreign manager. As a result, the quality of final goods under
integration
                                             ΘB ` (1 + c` )(ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + 2c` )
                                     qI`   =                                                                                (20)
                                                    (ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + c` )2
is as well below the maximum level, qI` < 1.16 However, a simple comparison of (20) and
(16) yields
Lemma 1. The final goods quality under integration is higher than under outsourcing.
                                                              ΘB ` (ΘB ` (1+2c` )+2c` )
                                         `
Proof. Follows from the fact that qI` − qO =                (ΘB ` (1+c` )+c` )2 (ΘB ` +1)2
                                                                                               > 0.
Intuitively, the authority to make decisions in both units under integration allows H to
achieve better coordination compared to an arm’s-length relationship and, thereby, improve
on the final goods quality.
     Plugging (19) in (18), we obtain H’s welfare under integration:

                                                   (ΘB ` )2 (1 + c` )
                                       WHI` =                         − ω − κ.                                              (21)
                                                  ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + c`

At t1 , a headquarter manager anticipates this outcome and compares it with his welfare
under outsourcing. H thus decides in favor of integration if and only if WHI` − WHO` > 0.
Using (17) and (21), this condition can be written as:

                                       (ΘB ` )2 (1 + c` )   s(ΘB ` )2 (ΘB ` + 2 − s)
                  Ω` (c` , τ ` ) ≡                        −                          > ω.                                   (22)
                                      ΘB ` (1 + c` ) + c`        (ΘB ` + 1)2

It can immediately be seen that Ω` |Θ=0 = 0 < ω. That is, managers of headquarter firms


                                                           ∂qI`           2(1+c` )(c` )2
16
     This immediately follows from the fact that         ∂(ΘB ` )
                                                                    =   (ΘB ` (1+c` )+1)3
                                                                                            > 0 and lim(ΘB ` )→∞ qI` = 1.

                                                            13
with the lowest productivity strictly prefer outsourcing to integration. It can also be shown
that limΘ→∞ Ω` = ∞ for all parameter values, i.e., firms with highest productivity strictly
prefer integration to outsourcing. Finally, we prove in Appendix A.1 that Ω` (·) is increasing
in Θ.
Lemma 2. As long as ω is finite and Θ has positive support over (0, ∞), there exits a unique
productivity cutoff Θ̂ such that final good producers with productivity below Θ̂ engage in
outsourcing, while those with productivity above this cutoff integrate their suppliers into
firm boundaries.
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
   The intuition behind this Lemma lies in the supermodularity of profits in productivity
and final goods quality (see equation (11)). An improvement in final goods quality leads to
a larger increase in profits the higher a firm’s productivity. Since H’s welfare is a function of
the firm’s profits, managers of more productive firms have the highest incentive to increase
the quality of final goods by integrating manufacturing suppliers into firm boundaries.
   Apart from firm-specific productivity, a firm’s integration decision also depends on two
country-specific factors. A simple differentiation of (22) implies that Ω` is decreasing in c` .
We thus have
Proposition 1. Final good producers are more likely to integrate their foreign suppliers
into the firm’s boundaries instead of cooperating with them at arm’s-length if the cultural
distance between the two countries is lower.
                                                                       ` 2
                                                    ∂Ω`
Proof. Follows immediately from the fact that       ∂c`
                                                          = − (ΘB `(ΘB  )
                                                                    (1+c` )+1)2
                                                                                < 0.
To infer the intuition behind this result, recall the key tradeoff between integration and out-
sourcing from the viewpoint of a headquarter manager: compared to outsourcing, integration
leads to a higher monetary payoff but is associated with a loss in extrinsic job satisfaction
(see equation (8)). Given that this non-monetary cost is increasing in c` , integration becomes
relatively less attractive as cultural distance between the managers of two units increases.
   Furthermore, the internalization decision depends on the trade cost between ` and N .
We show in Appendix A.2 that Ω` is decreasing in τ ` . This implies
Proposition 2. The lower trade cost between the two countries the more final goods
producers are likely to integrate their foreign suppliers into the firm’s boundaries instead of
cooperating with them at arm’s-length.
Proof. See Appendix A.2.
The intuition behind this result relates to the fact that profits are submodular in trade cost
τ ` and final goods quality (see (11) and (12)). In other words, as trade costs decrease, the
marginal increase in firm’s profits due to an improvement of final goods quality increases.


                                               14
Given that H’s welfare is a function of the firm’s profits, the incentive of the headquarter
manager to improve upon the quality of final goods by integrating a manufacturing suppliers
increases.



4      The Empirical Analysis

4.1      Data
To test the predictions of our theoretical framework, we pool together several datasets. To
measure the extent to which multinational firms integrate their foreign supplies rather than
cooperate with them at arm’s-length, we use the “U.S. Related Party Trade” product-level
data collected by the U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection.17 As discussed in
Antràs (2013, 2015), this data is one of the most frequently used in the analysis of the
international make-or-buy decision. The database contains 390 manufacturing industries for
232 countries from 2000-2011.18 As a measure of vertical integration, we use U.S. intra-
firm import share, defined as the ratio of related-party imports to the sum of related and
non-related imports. A related-party import is defined as an import transaction involving
parties “with various types of relationships including any person directly or indirectly, owning,
controlling or holding power to vote, 6 percent of the outstanding voting stock or shares of
any organization”, whereas non-related imports involves parties that “have no affiliation with
each other”. Because this dataset covers only U.S. firms, our analysis is U.S. centered.
     The second key ingredient in our analysis is a measure of cultural differences across
countries. We use cultural indices constructed by Geert Hofstede, initially for about 30
countries in the early 1970s and later extended to cover more than 90 countries. Hofstede
initially identified four key dimensions of culture: individualism vs. collectivism, uncertainty
avoidance, power distance (strength of social hierarchy), and masculinity-femininity (task
orientation versus person-orientation). Since the cross-cultural psychology literature views
the individualism-collectivism cleavage as the main cultural difference across countries (see
Heine, 2008), our baseline analysis focuses on this cultural dimension, but we report results
for additional dimensions in Appendix B.19 Figure 2 presents the map of individualism
scores. Conveniently, the U.S. is the country with the highest individualism score. The

17
      The data is drawn from the dataset compiled and made publicly available by Pol Antràs on his homepage:
      http://scholar.harvard.edu/antras/books
18
      Sectoral disaggregation is at the six-digit level as given by the North American Industry Classification
      System (NAICS).
19
      Gorodnichenko and Roland (2011) find that, among a variety of cultural dimensions, including the
      other Hofstede measures, the individualism-collectivism dimension is the most important and robustly
      significant explanatory factor of long run growth.

                                                      15
cultural distance of country ` to the U.S. is then given by Culturaldistance` = |I` − IU S |,
where I` is the individualism score of country `. We thus examine whether cultural distance
between countries affects U.S. intra-firm import shares across countries.
     Industries in the U.S. are, however, heterogeneous in their exposure to foreign markets,
organization of foreign production (i.e., integration vs. arm’s-length), and ethnic composi-
tion of their managers. To enhance our identification, we construct a measure of cultural
distance at the industrial level between a given country and the U.S. More specifically, we
use information on the ancestry of U.S. citizens from the 2000 U.S. Census to estimate ethnic
composition of managers in U.S. industries. In this census, 80.1 percent of the population
reported their ethnic origin, 72 percent of which specified a single ancestry and the remaining
28 percent mentioned two ancestries. For the construction of our measure, we use the first
ancestry indicated by an individual. Since our theoretical model emphasizes the effect of cul-
tural distance on the managerial make-or-buy decisions, our baseline measures for cultural
composition of a sector include only those individuals who indicated their occupation as
‘Manager’ or ‘C.E.O’.20 Having calculated the ethnic shares of managers in a given industry,
we weigh them with the individualism levels of their ancestor’s country of origin to obtain
industry-specific individualism scores:

                                                      X
                                           IU S,s =        Ω`s I` ,                                  (23)
                                                       `

where Ω`s is the share of ethnic group ` in industry s. The cultural distance between a trading
partner p and the U.S. for industry s is thus given by Culturaldistancep,s = |Ip − IU S,s |.
     We consider three versions of this measure to assess the robustness of our results to
alternative treatments of missing values as well as to rule out competing theories of the
structure of trade. First, we consider only those managers who report their ancestry, and
                                                                      (1)         (1)
define the associated cultural distance as Culturaldistancep,s = |Ip − IU S,s |. For the second
measure, we assign the average U.S. individualism score to all respondents of the U.S. Census
                                    (2)    P
who do not report their ancestry, IU S,s = ` Ω̃`s I` . We denote the corresponding distance
                    (2)           (2)
Culturaldistancep,s = |Ip − IU S,s |. The third measure is a modification of the first measure
tailored to minimize the effects of missing values and network effects within ethnic groups,
see Rauch (1999). In particular, we construct a measure of individualism for a given trading
partner of the U.S. and a given industry such that this measure considers only ethnic groups
other than the one from the trading partner. For example, when we calculate cultural
                                                            (3)          P
distance between the U.S. and China for industry s, we use IChina,U S,s = `:`6=China Ω̆`s I` to

20
     Our robustness checks show that the results continue to hold if we consider general employment rather
     than just managers.

                                                      16
                                              (3)                 (3)
compute cultural distance CulturaldistanceChina,s = |IChina − IChina,U S,s |.
   To control for potentially confounding factors, we also use data from previous studies
and other sources. We describe additional variables below.


4.2    Econometric Specification
Our baseline specification is as follows:


      IF ISspt =a0 × Culturaldistancesp + γp + λt
              +b0 × log(geodist)p + b1 × F reightCostssp + b2 × T arif f ssp
                                                                              
                          R&D                   Capital                    Skilled
              +b3 × log            + b4 × log              + b5 × log
                          Sales sp               Labor sp                U nskilled sp
              +b6 × P roductivityDispersionsp + b7 × Elasticitysp + b × Xsp + error,


where IF IS is the U.S. intra-firm import share from the U.S. Bureau of Customs and
Border Protection and s, p and t index sectors, trading partners, and years, respectively.
Culturaldistancesp is the above-mentioned proxy for cultural distance, γp and λt are fixed
effects for trading partners and years, respectively, and X is a vector of controls which we
describe below.
   The next three control variables are proxies for trade cost, included to test for our Propo-
sition 2. Log(geodist) is drawn from Mayer and Zignago (2011) and denotes the log of a
country’s geographic distance to the US weighted by the geographic distribution of popula-
tion inside each nation. FreightCosts are from Schott (2010) and are measured by the ratio
of CIF imports to FOB imports for a given product and origin country for the period 2000-
2005. Tariffs are U.S. tariffs from the World Integrated Trade Solution (WITS) maintained
by the World Bank (for details, see data appendix in Antràs (2015)).
   The inclusion of the next three control variables is motivated by the property rights The-
ory of the firm, i.e. Grossman and Hart (1986) and Antràs and Helpman (2004). According
to this theory, the ownership rights should be assigned to the party that conducts the most
important relationship-specific investment. Hence, in industries with a high headquarter
intensity, headquarter firms are more likely to integrate their manufacturing producers and
to source intermediate inputs within firm boundaries (implying a high intra-firm import
share). The empirical literature on the property rights theory of the firm has suggested the
following three proxies for the headquarter intensity (see, e.g., Nunn and Trefler (2008, 2013)
and Antràs (2015)): Log(R&D/Sales) is a measure of Research and Development (R&D) in-
tensity of an industry and is calculated as the the log of R&D expenditures divided by total


                                              17
sales; Log(Capital/Labor) is a proxy for capital intensity of an industry, measured as the log
of the real capital stock per worker; Log(Skilled/Unskilled) is an industry’s skill intensity,
calculated as the log of the number of non-production workers divided by total employment.
All three measures are available from Antràs (2015) at the 6-digit NAICS level.
   The final two variables in our baseline specification are productivity dispersion and de-
mand elasticity in the U.S. market. The inclusion of these two control variables is motivated
by the theoretical work of Antràs and Helpman (2004). In their model, a higher productivity
dispersion positively affects the share of intra-firm imports, since firms that integrate their
foreign suppliers are more productive than firms that source foreign inputs at arm’s length.
Although we do not explicitly show the effect of productivity dispersion on the make-or-buy
decision in the present model, our Lemma 2 is well-aligned with this prediction. Following
Nunn and Trefler (2008, 2013) and Antràs (2015), we measure productivity dispersion as the
standard deviation of the log of exports for a particular good across U.S. port locations and
destination countries in 2000, using data from the U.S. department of Commerce. Similarly,
elasticity of demand is likely to affect the revenue of firms and, thereby, the share of intra-
firm imports. However, as shown by Antràs (2015), this effect is ambiguous. The measure
of U.S. demand elasticity is drawn from Antràs (2015), who adapted these data from Broda
and Weinstein (2006).


4.3    Empirical Analysis
As a first pass at the data, we plot the share of U.S. intra-firm imports aggregated at the
country level against that country’s cultural distance to the U.S. As shown in Figure 1, the
correlation between these two measures is negative and highly significant. A country such as
Pakistan, which has a high cultural distance to the U.S. has less than 10 percent of intra-firm
imports from the U.S. whereas a country like Germany that is culturally much closer has
over 40 percent of imports that are intra-firm.
   While this correlation is informative, obviously we need to control for other variables to
see if this relation is not driven by omitted variables. Table 1 reports results for our baseline
econometric specification. We find that as we add more controls the coefficient on cultural
distance does not really change. The estimated coefficient is a robust 0.28. This means that
a standard deviation change in the level of individualism (22.13 points in the individualism
index) is associated with a 6.4 percentage point change in the share of intra-firm imports.
This is a significant magnitude since the average share of intra-firm imports in the data base
we use is 19.92%. Furthermore, in accordance with Proposition 2, all three proxies for trade
costs negatively affect the share of intra-firm trade, as can be seen in columns (2) to (5).

                                               18
              Figure 1: Cultural distance and the share of intra-firm imports by country.



   Estimates for the control variables in columns (3) and (4) are broadly in line with previous
empirical studies of global sourcing, (see, e.g., Chapter 8 in Antràs (2015)). As we see,
Log(R&D/Sales) and Log(Capital/Labor) both have the predicted sign and are significant,
while Log(Skilled/Unskilled) has the right sign but is insignificant. Importantly, comparing
fit of the statistical model in columns (4) and (5), with and without cultural distance,
suggests that cultural distance nearly doubles the R2 and thus has considerable predictive
power. This is an important result as it shows that culture is as important as property rights
considerations in explaining outsourcing decisions of multinational firms.
   While the baseline specification includes controls routinely used in global sourcing liter-
ature, one may be concerned that cultural distance can potentially pick variation of other
factors related to culture. To address this concern, we include additional regressors that
can simultaneously affect global sourcing and culture. First, in order to ensure that our
results are not confounded by common religious values, we include the share of Catholics
and Protestants in the population, taken from Barro (2003). Second, one could think that
cultural proximity merely picks up the effect of a common language. Hence, we include a
dummy variable equal to one if English is an official language of a partner country. This
variable is drawn from Mayer and Zignago (2011). Third, the structure of trade and cultural
attributes may be associated with the level of economic development. For example, more
developed trading partners may happen to have a closer proximity to the U.S. in terms of
culture and, thereby, exhibit a higher prevalence of integration. To rule out this alternative


                                                  19
                           Table 1: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                                            Dependent variable:     IF IS
                                             (1)        (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)
           Cutural distance              -0.290*** -0.286***        -0.284***     -0.284***
                                          (0.035)    (0.035)          (0.035)       (0.035)
           Log(geodist)                              -0.056*          -0.055*       -0.055*        -0.057*
                                                     (0.032)          (0.032)       (0.032)        (0.028)
           Freight Costs                            -1.068***       -0.784***     -0.797***      -0.807***
                                                     (0.074)          (0.063)       (0.064)        (0.064)
           Tariffs                                  -0.182***       -0.110***     -0.093***      -0.109***
                                                     (0.027)          (0.022)       (0.021)        (0.021)
           Log(R&D/Sales)                                            0.023***      0.023***       0.024***
                                                                      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
           Log(Capital/Labor)                                        0.019***      0.020***       0.022***
                                                                      (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)
           Log(Skilled/Unskilled)                                      0.001          0.003          0.004
                                                                      (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.006)
           Productivity Dispersion                                                   -0.005         -0.004
                                                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)
           Elasticity of Demand                                                   -0.001***      -0.001***
                                                                                    (0.000)        (0.000)
           Observations                   256,110       255,565       255,565       255,565       255,565
           R2                              0.045         0.078         0.090          0.091          0.047
           Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
           country level and presented in brackets. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 % significance.



explanation, we include the log of a country’s GDP, Log(GDP), as an additional regressor.
We should note that while it has been shown that the level of income can affect the volume
of trade between countries, we are not aware of models or empirical evidence linking the level
of income to the structure of global sourcing. Fourth, Guiso et al. (2006) suggest that the
level of trust can influence the volume of trade between countries. It is, however, not clear
how differences in the level of trust between countries affect a firm’s international make-or-
buy decision. To tackle this question, we also control for the country’s level of Trust, drawn
from the World Values Survey. Finally, the correlation between make-or-buy relationship
and culture may be driven by the volatility of the institutional environment. For example,
poor and volatile institutions may be associated to a higher level of collectivism (e.g., it may
be easier to survive as a group) and increased integration (e.g., it may be easier to avoid
hold-up problems). To measure the stability of institutions, we use the ICRG’s Government
Stability score averaged over 1980s through 2000s.21
     We find that including these additional controls does not alter our conclusions about the
strength of the relationship between cultural distance and the structure of global sourcing,
as can be seen from Table 2. The estimated coefficients on these additional variables may

21
     The International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) Government Stability score provides an assessment both
     of the government’s ability to carry out its declared program(s), and its ability to stay in office. The
     risk rating assigned is the sum of three subcomponents, each with a maximum score of four points and
     a minimum score of 0 points. A score of 4 points means Very Low Risk and a score of 0 points means
     a Very High Risk. The maximum score, based on the three subcomponents, is 12.

                                                          20
be interesting in their own right. For example, the U.S. multinationals are more likely to
integrate their foreign affiliates in countries with a great share of Catholics and Protestants,
having an official language other than English, a higher level of income, and more stable
governments.
   While including more regressors mitigates the omitted variables bias, we can make further
steps to sharpen our conclusions. Specifically, we consider two additional identification
strategies. First, we apply an instrumental variables approach. Second, we use variation of
ethnic compositions across U.S. industries.
   To implement the first strategy, we follow Gorodnichenko and Roland (2011) who use
differences in the frequency of blood types across ethnic groups to quantify genetic distance
between countries. Since blood type is a neutral genetic marker determined many centuries
before the industrial revolution, this genetic marker is unlikely to have a direct effect on
economic outcomes. Gorodnichenko and Roland (2011) document that blood distance is
a strong predictor of cultural differences. Column (6) in Table 2 shows that using this
IV reduces the size of the estimate (from -0.211 to -0.105) and, while the magnitude is
economically significant, the estimated coefficient is not statistically different from zero.
This reduction in the size of the coefficient is largely due to Mexico that has a very high
intra-firm import share (because of NAFTA) but is culturally quite different (see figure 1).
Once we exclude Mexico from the regression (column 7), the IV estimate of cultural distance
becomes significant at the 5% level.
   While these results are reassuring, they do not eliminate the possibility that there are
confounding factors that vary at the level of the country. The standard practice is to in-
clude country fixed effects to address this issue. Unfortunately, we cannot implement this
approach in the baseline specification because our cultural distance between countries does
not vary across industries. However, as we discussed above, there is considerable variation
in the ethnic composition of management across U.S. industries. We can thus construct
country/industry-specific measures of cultural distance and use country and year fixed ef-
fects to attenuate the adverse effects of these confounding factors. This constitutes our
second strategy.
   Columns (1) through (3) in Table 3 show that using these alternative measures of cultural
distance yields results similar to the baseline where we do not include country or year fixed
effects. The coefficient is in general higher than with the country cultural distance. This is
good news, because it tends to suggest that the cultural distance effect between managers
is even larger than the estimate obtained when using country cultural distance. Note that
the number of observations is different in Table 3 relative to Tables 1 and 2 as industry


                                              21
                             Table 2: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                                                    Dependent variable:     IF IS
                                    (1)            (2)         (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
 Cultural distance              -0.261***      -0.278*** -0.225***          -0.230***     -0.211***         -0.105        -0.163**
                                 (0.042)        (0.043)     (0.044)           (0.046)       (0.049)        (0.088)         (0.074)
 Log(geodist)                     -0.033         -0.031      -0.036            -0.037        -0.040         -0.035          -0.005
                                 (0.036)        (0.033)     (0.032)           (0.035)       (0.036)        (0.031)         (0.019)
 Freight Costs                  -0.797***      -0.798*** -0.814***          -0.826***     -0.808***      -0.808***       -0.805***
                                 (0.065)        (0.065)     (0.067)           (0.068)       (0.067)        (0.067)         (0.068)
 Tariffs                        -0.093***      -0.091*** -0.085***          -0.092***     -0.099***      -0.101***       -0.097***
                                 (0.022)        (0.022)     (0.021)           (0.021)       (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
 Log(R&D/Sales)                 0.023***       0.023***    0.023***          0.024***      0.023***       0.023***        0.023***
                                 (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
 Log(Capital/Labor)             0.020***       0.020***    0.018***          0.019***      0.019***       0.021***        0.019***
                                 (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)
 Log(Skilled/Unskilled)           0.003           0.003       0.004            0.002          0.003          0.004           0.003
                                 (0.006)        (0.006)     (0.006)           (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.007)
 Productivity Dispersion          -0.005         -0.005      -0.004            -0.005        -0.004         -0.004          -0.004
                                 (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)
 Elasticity of Demand           -0.001***      -0.001*** -0.001***          -0.001***     -0.001***      -0.001***       -0.001***
                                 (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
 Catholics                        0.042           0.033       0.048             0.045         0.050        0.074*          0.066*
                                 (0.038)        (0.038)     (0.035)           (0.037)       (0.037)        (0.040)         (0.036)
 Protestants                      0.044           0.040     0.087**             0.075       0.088*         0.146**         0.177*
                                 (0.054)        (0.051)     (0.042)           (0.052)       (0.052)        (0.069)         (0.060)
 English                                        -0.042*      -0.034            -0.039        -0.033         -0.018          -0.026
                                                (0.022)     (0.023)           (0.025)       (0.024)        (0.025)         (0.023)
 Log(GDP)                                                   0.020**          0.020**       0.021**       0.026***         0.019**
                                                            (0.008)           (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.009)
 Trust                                                                         0.000         -0.000         -0.000          0.000
                                                                              (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
 Government Stability                                                                       0.022*        0.027**         0.022**
                                                                                            (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.011)
 Observations                    251,505        251,505       250,385        239,845        236,552        236,552         231,988
 R2                               0.090          0.092         0.100          0.099           0.103          0.106           0.099
 Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions in columns (1) - (5) and of an IV regression in columns (6) and (7). The
 F -statistic of the latter is 135.66. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level and presented in brackets. ***, **, *
 denote 1, 5, 10 % significance.



classification available in the public version of the U.S. Census is coarser than industry
classification in the database of the U.S. Bureau of Customs and Border Protection. When
we control for the country and year fixed effects, we continue to find a strong negative
association between cultural distance and intra-firm import share.22 The magnitude of the
estimate is somewhat smaller but this reduction in magnitude may simply reflect a decrease
in the signal-to-noise ratio in a regression with many fixed effects (see Griliches and Hausman
1986). The coefficient on Culturaldistance(2) remains negative but loses its significance. The
lack of significance is not surprising given that this measure assigns the U.S. individualism
score to all respondents of the U.S. Census and, thus, takes out some of the variation on the
industry level.

22
     Note that the variable geographical distance, which does not vary across industries is absorbed into
     country fixed effects.

                                                              22
                            Table 3: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                                            Dependent variable: IF IS
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)                  (5)             (6)
    Culturaldistance(1)           -0.484***                           -0.213**
                                    (0.028)                            (0.106)
    Culturaldistance(2)                       -0.413***                                       -0.070
                                                (0.024)                                      (0.236)
    Culturaldistance(3)                                   -0.476***                                        -0.221**
                                                            (0.028)                                         (0.101)
    Log(geodist)                  -0.071*** -0.081*** -0.082***
                                    (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
    Freight Costs                    -0.472      -0.502      -0.500     -0.499                 -0.505         -0.505
                                    (0.430)     (0.429)     (0.418)    (0.420)                (0.420)        (0.420)
    Tariffs                       -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***                   -0.002***      -0.002***
                                    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)                (0.001)        (0.001)
    Log(R&D/Sales)                0.039***     0.039***    0.039***   0.040***               0.040***      0.040***
                                    (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)    (0.012)                (0.012)        (0.013)
    Log(Capital/Labor)            0.034***     0.034***    0.034***    0.027**               0.027**         0.027**
                                    (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.013)                (0.013)        (0.013)
    Log(Skilled/Unskilled)           -0.009      -0.003      -0.003     0.006                   0.007          0.007
                                    (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)    (0.038)                (0.038)        (0.038)
    Productivity Dispersion          -0.002      -0.003      -0.003     -0.006                 -0.005         -0.005
                                    (0.036)     (0.035)     (0.035)    (0.037)                (0.037)        (0.037)
    Elasticity of Demand           -0.003**    -0.003**    -0.003**   -0.003**               -0.004**       -0.004**
                                    (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.001)                (0.001)        (0.001)
    Observations                    37,173      37,173      37,173      37,173                37,173          37,173
    Fixed Effects                     None        None        None    Ctr/Year              Ctr/Year       Ctr/Year
    R2                               0.147       0.142        0.139      0.268                 0.269           0.269
    Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level and
    presented in brackets. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 % significance.



   In the last robustness check, we repeat our exercise using a slightly modified measure of
cultural distance. More specifically, we expand our definition of cultural distance to include
the other three Hofstede’s cultural dimensions: power distance, masculinity, and uncertainty
avoidance. Power distance measures the extent to which the less powerful members of
organizations and institutions (in society and the family) accept and expect that power
is distributed unequally. Masculinity refers to the dominance of men over women and to
the dominance of “male” values such as assertiveness and competitiveness versus norms of
caring and modesty. Uncertainty aversion measures a society’s tolerance for uncertainty
and the extent to which members of society feel either uncomfortable or comfortable in
situations that are novel, unknown, surprising, different from usual. Uncertainty avoiding
cultures try to minimize the possibility of such situations by strict laws and rules, safety and
security measures. They are less tolerant and reject forms of diversity within society. The
cultural distance measures we use are the sum of the absolute differences of the four different
indicators in the country of origin of the imports and the constructed index in the U.S. sector
based on ethnic shared derived from the census. We rerun our original regressions using
these measures and report the associated coefficients in Tables 4, 5, and 6 in Appendix B.


                                                            23
As before, the negative effect of cultural distance on the intra-firm import share is significant
and robust to various specifications. Yet, the magnitude of the effect is generally slightly
lower than in the original regressions using only the individualism-collectivism dimension.
This confirms our original conjecture that the individualism-collectivism dimension is the
main cultural distance variable across countries.



5     Conclusion
We presented an incomplete contract model of global sourcing with culturally dissimilar
countries. In this model, headquarter managers decide whether to source intermediate inputs
from independent suppliers or integrate the latter into firm boundaries against the backdrop
of private costs associated with cross-cultural collaboration. The key prediction of our model
is that greater cultural distance will reduce the headquarters’ incentive to source inputs from
an integrated supplier. Using an extensive dataset on U.S. firms’ related-party imports and
the well-known cultural dimensions by Hofstede, we find a strong empirical support for our
key prediction, controlling for a great range of additional variables and accounting for the
issue of endogeneity. Although we cannot rule out that cultural motives for the international
make-or-buy decision may also work via other channels than the ones suggested in our
model, our empirical results show that cultural motives can shed new light on patterns of
international trade and organization of production.
    Our theoretical framework leaves open several questions for future research. First, cul-
tural dimensions in the current version of model affect solely managerial job satisfaction.
While we believe that our results will continue to hold if we allow for workers’ job satis-
faction, a study of organizational structure and international team-work in a multi-cultural
environment might be an appealing research agenda in itself. Second, we abstracted from
the canonical property rights approach by Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore
(1900). Our empirical work, however, suggests that both theories may simultaneously explain
the international make-or-buy decision. An investigation of the interaction between these
two alternative explanations of a multinational firm’s boundaries in a unified theoretical
framework may constitute an interesting research agenda.




                                               24
References
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, N. Nunn (2013): On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469-530.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano (2015): Culture and Institutions. Journal of Economic Literature
(forthcoming).

Antràs, P. (2013): Grossman-Hart (1986) Goes Global: Incomplete Contracts, Property
Rights, and the International Organization of Production. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 30(1), 118-175.

Antràs, P. (2015): Global Production: Firm, Contracts and Trade Structure. Available
online at http://scholar.harvard.edu/antras/scholar.harvard.edu/antras/pages/books

Antràs, P., E. Helpman (2004): Global Sourcing. Journal of Political Economy, 112, 552-
580.

Antràs, P., S. Yeaple (2014): Multinational Firms and the Structure of International Trade.
In Helpman E., Rogoff K., G. Gopinath (eds), Handbook of International Economics, Vol-
ume 4, 55-130.

Barro, R. (2003): Religion Adherence Data. Available online at http://rbarro.com

Becker, R., W. Gray, J. Marvakov (2009): NBER-CES manufacturing industry database.
The National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bloom, N., J. Van Reenen (2010): Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and
Countries? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 203-224.

Bloom, N., R. Sadun, J. Van Reenen (2013): Management as a Technology? mimeo.

Caves, R. (2007): Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Third edition. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Conconi, P., P. Legros, A. Newman (2012): Trade Liberalization and Organizational
Change. Journal of International Economics, 86, 197-208.

Corcos, G., D. Irac, G. Mion, T. Verdier (2013): The Determinants of Intra-Firm Trade.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 825-838.

Deloitte (2012): Global Outsourcing and Insourcing Survey. Deloitte Consulting LLP.


                                           25
Economist Intelligence Unit (2012): Competing across borders: How cultural and commu-
nication barriers affect business. Available at: http://www.eiu.com

Felbermayr, G., F. Toubal (2010): Cultural Proximity and Trade. European Economic
Review, 54, 279-293.

Fernandez, R., A. Fogli, C. Olivetti (2004) : Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
Female Labor Force Dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4), 1249-1299.

Fernandez, R. (2010): Does Culture Matter? In Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, M. Jackson (eds.),
Handbook of Social Economics, 481-510.

Froese, F., V. Peltokorpi (2011): Cultural Distance and Expatriate Job Satisfaction. Inter-
national Journal of Intercultural Relations, 35(1), 49-60.

Froese, F., V. Peltokorpi (2012): Organizational expatriates and self-initiated expatriates:
differences in cross-cultural adjustment and job satisfaction. International Journal of Hu-
man Resource Management, 24(10), 1953-1967.

Gibbons, R., J. Roberts (2013): The Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Gorodnichenko, Y., G. Roland (2010): Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations.
mimeo.

Gorodnichenko, Y., G. Roland (2011): Which Dimensions of Culture Matter for Long-Run
Growth? American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3), 492-498.

Griliches, Z., J. Hausman (1986): Errors in variables in panel data. Journal of Econometrics,
31(1), 93-118.

Grossman, S., O. Hart (1986): The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94(4), 691-719.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, L. Zingales (2003): People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Atti-
tudes. Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 225-282.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, L. Zingales (2006): Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20, 23-48.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, L. Zingales (2009): Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange. Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1095-1131.


                                            26
Hart, O., B. Holmström (2010): A Theory of Firm Scope. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125, 483-513.

Hart, O., J. Moore (1990): Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm. Journal of Political
Economy, 98, 1119-1158.

Heine, S. (2007): Cultural psychology. W. W. Norton & Company.

Hofstede, G. (2001): Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, and Organi-
zations Across Nations. 2nd edition. Sage Publications.

Kohler, W., M. Smolka (2009): Global Sourcing Decisions and Firm Productivity: Evidence
from Spain. CESifo Working Paper No. 2903, CESifo Group, Munich.

Legros, P., A. Newman (2013): A Price Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration. Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 128, 725-770.

Mayer T.,       S. Zignago (2011):     Notes on CEPII’s distances measures:              The
GeoDist   database.    CEPII Working Paper 2011-25.          Data   available   online   at:
http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm

Melitz, M. (2003): The impact of trade on intraindustry reallocations and aggregate indus-
try productivity. Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.

Naumann, E. (1993a): Organizational Predictors of Expatriate Job Satisfaction. Journal
of International Business Studies, 24(1), 61-80.

Naumann, E. (1993b): Antecedents and Consequences of Satisfaction and Commitment
Among Expatriate Managers. Group&Organization Management, 18, 153-187.

Nunn, N., D. Trefler (2008): The Boundaries of the Multinational Firm: An Empirical
Analysis. In Helpman E., D. Marin, T. Verdier (eds.), The Organization of Firms in a
Global Economy, Harvard University Press, 55-83.

Nunn, N., D. Trefler (2013): Incomplete Contracts and the Boundaries of the Multinational
Firm. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 94(1), 330-344.

Rauch, J. (1999): Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of International
Economics, 48(1), 7-35.

Sagiv, L., S. Schwartz, S. Arieli (2010): Personal Values, National Culture and Organiza-
tions: Insights Applying the Schwartz Value Framework. In Ashkanasy N., C. Wilderom,


                                            27
M. Peterson (eds.), Handbook of Organizational Culture and Climate, Sage, Newbury Park,
CA, 515-537.

Siegel, J., A. Licht, S. Schwartz (2011): Egalitarianism and International Investment. Jour-
nal of Financial Economics, 102, 621-642.

Siegel, J., A. Licht, S. Schwartz (2012): Egalitarianism, Cultural Distance, and FDI: A
New Approach’. Forthcoming in Organization Science.

Staw, B. (1989): Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation. In Leavitt, H., L. Pondy, D. Boje
(eds.), Readings in Managerial Psychology, 4th edition, University of Chicago Press.

Syverson, C. (2011): What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature,
49(2), 326-365.

Tabellini, G. (2008): Institutions and Culture. Presidential Address European Economic
Association. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 255-294.

Tabellini, G. (2010): Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677-716.

Tang, C., J. Zimmerman, J. Nelson (2009): Managing New Product Development and
Supply Chain Risks: The Boeing 787 Case. Supply Chain Forum: an International Journal,
10(2), 74-86.

Tomiura, E. (2007): Foreign Outsourcing, Exporting, and FDI: A Productivity Comparison
at the Firm Level. Journal of International Economics, 72, 113-127.

UNCTAD (2000): World Investment Report: Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions and
Development. Geneva: The United Nations.

UNCTAD (2011): World Investment Report: Non-equity Modes of International Produc-
tion and Development. Geneva: The United Nations.




                                            28
Appendix

A     Theoretical Appendix

A.1      Proof of Lemma 2
A simple differentiation of Ω` with respect to Θ yields after simplification

                    ∂Ω`   (Θ(1 + c` ) + 2c` )(1 + c` )Θ s((Θ)2 + 3Θ + 4 − 2s)Θ
                        =                              −                       .               (25)
                    ∂Θ        (Θ(1 + c` ) + c` )2              (Θ + 1)3

Notice that
                                   ∂ 2 Ω`           2c`
                                          = −                     < 0.
                                  ∂Θ∂c`       (Θ(1 + c` ) + c` )3
              ∂Ω`
That is, if   ∂Θ
                    > 0 holds for the highest possible c` (i.e. c` = 1), it holds a fortiori for all
                                              ∂Ω`
c` < 1. Utilizing c` = 1 in (25), we have     ∂Θ
                                                    > 0 if and only if

                                 2(2Θ + 2)   s(Θ2 + 3Θ + 4 − 2s)
                        LHS =              >                     = RHS.                        (26)
                                 (2Θ + 1)2        (Θ + 1)3

The right-hand side (RHS) of this inequality is strictly increasing in s, as can be seen from

                                 ∂RHS   Θ2 + 3Θ + 4(1 − s)
                                      =                    > 0.
                                  ∂s         (Θ + 1)3

That is, if inequality (26) holds for s = 1, it holds a fortiori for all s < 1. Substituting s = 1
in the right-hand side of inequality (26), we obtain

                                 2(2Θ + 2)   Θ2 + 3Θ + 2
                           LHS =           >             = RHS|s=1 .
                                 (2Θ + 1)2    (Θ + 1)3

Rearranging this inequality, immediately yields

                                                3Θ2 + 5Θ + 2
                         LHS − RHS|s=1 =                         > 0.
                                              (2Θ + 1)2 (Θ + 1)3




A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
Notice from (22) that B ` enters Ω` with the same sign as Θ. Hence, the fact that ∂Ω` /∂Θ > 0
(cf. Lemma 2) immediately implies ∂Ω` /∂B ` > 0. Since B ` is decreasing in τ ` (cf. (12)), τ `
has a negative impact on Ω` .

                                                    29
                                       B
                                       Figures and Tables




30
     Figure 2: Individualism Scores.
            Table 4: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                        Dependent variable: IF IS
                             (1)       (2)          (3)                         (4)
Cutural distance         -0.106*** -0.105*** -0.105***
                          (0.023)    (0.023)      (0.023)
Log(geodist)              -0.060*    -0.059*      -0.059*                    -0.057*
                          (0.032)    (0.032)      (0.032)                    (0.028)
Freight Costs            -1.068*** -0.795*** -0.809***                      -0.807***
                          (0.074)    (0.063)      (0.064)                    (0.064)
Tariffs                  -0.192*** -0.119*** -0.102***                      -0.109***
                          (0.027)    (0.022)      (0.021)                    (0.021)
Log(R&D/Sales)                      0.023***     0.023***                   0.024***
                                     (0.002)      (0.002)                    (0.002)
Log(Capital/Labor)                  0.020***     0.021***                   0.022***
                                     (0.004)      (0.004)                    (0.004)
Log(Skilled/Unskilled)                0.001        0.003                       0.004
                                     (0.006)      (0.006)                    (0.006)
Productivity Dispersion                           -0.005*                     -0.004
                                                  (0.003)                    (0.003)
Elasticity of Demand                            -0.001***                   -0.001***
                                                  (0.000)                    (0.000)
Observations              255,565    255,565      255,565                    255,565
R2                         0.054      0.066        0.067                       0.047
Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions. Robust standard errors are clustered
at the country level and presented in brackets. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 % significance.




                                           31
                            Table 5: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                                                    Dependent variable:    IF IS
                                   (1)             (2)         (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)
Cutural distance               -0.080***      -0.109*** -0.074**            -0.076**      -0.061**         -0.080         -0.126*
                                (0.020)         (0.025)     (0.029)          (0.031)       (0.032)        (0.072)         (0.065)
Log(geodist)                     -0.020          -0.019      -0.027           -0.027        -0.035         -0.036          -0.005
                                (0.033)         (0.032)     (0.029)          (0.032)       (0.032)        (0.033)         (0.021)
Freight Costs                  -0.801***      -0.805*** -0.821***          -0.833***     -0.812***      -0.813***       -0.808***
                                (0.064)         (0.064)     (0.066)          (0.067)       (0.066)        (0.066)         (0.068)
Tariffs                        -0.100***      -0.098*** -0.089***          -0.097***     -0.103***      -0.102***       -0.099***
                                (0.022)         (0.022)     (0.021)          (0.021)       (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
Log(R&D/Sales)                 0.023***       0.023***     0.023***         0.024***      0.023***       0.023***        0.023***
                                (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
Log(Capital/Labor)             0.021***       0.021***     0.019***         0.020***      0.020***       0.021***        0.019***
                                (0.004)         (0.004)     (0.004)          (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)
Log(Skilled/Unskilled)           0.003            0.004       0.004           0.003          0.004          0.004           0.003
                                (0.006)         (0.006)     (0.006)          (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.007)
Productivity Dispersion         -0.005*         -0.005*      -0.005           -0.005        -0.004         -0.004          -0.004
                                (0.003)         (0.003)     (0.003)          (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)
Elasticity of Demand           -0.001***      -0.001*** -0.001***          -0.001***     -0.001***      -0.001***       -0.001***
                                (0.000)         (0.000)     (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
Catholics                        0.071*           0.057     0.071**          0.071**       0.077**          0.070           0.060
                                (0.037)         (0.038)     (0.035)          (0.034)       (0.035)        (0.044)         (0.041)
Protestants                    0.128***         0.110**    0.160***         0.146***     0.155***         0.140*            0.107
                                (0.047)         (0.047)     (0.037)          (0.051)       (0.053)        (0.078)         (0.072)
English                                        -0.061**      -0.043           -0.047        -0.035         -0.045          -0.067
                                                (0.028)     (0.027)          (0.031)       (0.029)        (0.044)         (0.043)
Log(GDP)                                                   0.025***        0.025***      0.026***        0.025**           0.016
                                                            (0.009)          (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.011)         (0.010)
Trust                                                                         0.000         -0.000         -0.000          0.000
                                                                             (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
Government Stability                                                                      0.027* *        0.025*           0.019
                                                                                           (0.012)        (0.014)         (0.015)
Observations                    251,505        251,505       250,385        239,845        236,552        236,552         231,988
R2                               0.073          0.077         0.089          0.088           0.093          0.092           0.087
Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions in columns (1) - (6) and of an IV regression in column (7). The F -statistic
of the latter is 135.66. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level and presented in brackets. ***, **, * denote 1, 5,
10 % significance.




                                                             32
                        Table 6: Determinants of U.S. Intra-firm Import Shares.
                                        Dependent variable: IF IS
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)                  (5)             (6)
Culturaldistance(1)           -0.180***                            -0.108*
                                (0.018)                            (0.063)
Culturaldistance(2)                       -0.193***                                       0.222
                                            (0.016)                                      (0.148)
Culturaldistance(3)                                   -0.172***                                        -0.171**
                                                        (0.018)                                         (0.073)
Log(geodist)                  -0.067*** -0.069*** -0.069***
                                (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Freight Costs                    -0.402      -0.417      -0.414     -4.445                 -4.445         -4.445
                                (0.439)     (0.441)     (0.439)    (0.415)                (0.418)        (0.417)
Tariffs                       -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***                   -0.002***      -0.002***
                                (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)                (0.001)        (0.001)
Log(R&D/Sales)                0.040***     0.039***    0.039***   0.042***               0.042***      0.042***
                                (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)    (0.012)                (0.012)        (0.012)
Log(Capital/Labor)            0.037***     0.037***    0.037***    0.028**               0.029**         0.029**
                                (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.013)                (0.013)        (0.013)
Log(Skilled/Unskilled)           -0.013      -0.010      -0.010     0.008                   0.008          0.008
                                (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)    (0.038)                (0.038)        (0.038)
Productivity Dispersion          0.010       0.009        0.009      0.005                 0.006           0.006
                                (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.036)    (0.037)                (0.037)        (0.037)
Elasticity of Demand           -0.003**    -0.003**    -0.003**   -0.004**               -0.004**       -0.004**
                                (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.001)                (0.002)        (0.002)
Observations                    33,825      33,825      33,825      33,825                33,825          33,825
Fixed Effects                     None        None        None    Ctr/Year              Ctr/Year       Ctr/Year
R2                               0.107       0.095        0.091      0.286                 0.286           0.286
Note: The table reports estimates of OLS regressions. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level and
presented in brackets. ***, **, * denote 1, 5, 10 % significance.




                                                        33
