                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE INDIGENOUS ROOTS OF REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY

                                         Jeanet Bentzen
                                       Jacob Gerner Hariri
                                       James A. Robinson

                                      Working Paper 21193
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21193


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2015




We thank Rasmus Fonnesbaek Andersen, Antonio Ciccone, Bertel Teilfeldt Hansen, David Stasavage,
and seminar participants at the APSA 2013 annual meeting and the AFS at Gothenburg University
for useful comments on an earlier version. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Jeanet Bentzen, Jacob Gerner Hariri, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Indigenous Roots of Representative Democracy
Jeanet Bentzen, Jacob Gerner Hariri, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 21193
May 2015
JEL No. D72,N4,P16

                                               ABSTRACT

We document that rules for leadership succession in ethnic societies that antedate the modern state
predict contemporary political regimes; leadership selection by election in indigenous societies is associated
with contemporary representative democracy. The basic association, however, is conditioned on the
relative strength of the indigenous groups within a country; stronger groups seem to have been able
to shape national regime trajectories, weaker groups do not. This finding extends and qualifies a substantive
qualitative literature, which has found in local democratic institutions of medieval Europe a positive
impulse towards the development of representative democracy. It shows that contemporary regimes
are shaped not only by colonial history and European influence; indigenous history also matters. For
practitioners, our findings suggest that external reformers' capacity for regime-building should not
be exaggerated.


Jeanet Bentzen                                        James A. Robinson
University of Copenhagen                              Harvard University
Department of Economics                               Department of Government
Øster Farimagsgade 5                                  N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
1353 København K, Denmark                             Cambridge, MA 02138
jeanet.bentzen@econ.ku.dk                             and NBER
                                                      jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
Jacob Gerner Hariri
University of Copenhagen
Department of Political Science
Øster Farigmagsgade 5
1353 København K, Denmark
jgh@ifs.ku.dk
1     Introduction

Representative democracy is a modern European invention, traced commonly to the Glo-
rious Revolution of 1688 in England (e.g., Narizny 2012; Przeworski 2010, 3). Yet demo-
cratic practices such as popular assemblies, leadership succession by election, and public
deliberation are neither modern nor European. Indeed, such practices have been found in
societies that antedate the modern state in most parts of the world.1 This paper demon-
strates that one such democratic practice – leadership succession by election or communal
consensus – in indigenous societies robustly predicts contemporary representative democ-
racy at the national level.2 This finding is consistent with a substantive qualitative liter-
ature, which has found that proto-democratic institutions of medieval Europe facilitated
the development of modern, representative democracy. (Blockmans 1978; Blum 1971a;
Downing 1989, 1992; Ertman 1997). To take a few examples, Robert Dahl (2000) traced
contemporary Norwegian democracy to the premodern assemblies, the tings, and Brian
M. Downing (1988) traced the ancestry of the Swedish national parliament to informal
village assemblies. Indeed, Esposito and Voll (1996, 22) found that in most of Europe,
the existence of proto-democratic indigenous institutions provided democratic reformers
with a narrative of historical continuity, which lended legitimacy to democratic rule.3
    It is not obvious that a similar link would exist between modern political institutions
and indigenous institutions also outside Europe. If representative government was a Eu-
ropean invention, how can one trace it to indigenous institutions outside of Europe? In
this vein, Adam Przeworski (2010, 20), for example, writes that
1
  A few examples, listed in Muhlberger and Paine 1993, include the kampong assemblies of Malaysia, the
  councils of the Amerindian confederacies, the gumlao of the Kachin in Burma, the Maori hapus, the
  kokwet of the east African Sebei, the panchayats of India, and the kgotla of the Tswana in Botswana.
  See, also, Sabetti 2004; and Sen 2003.
2
  Some of the issues investigated in this paper were independently researched by Giuliano and Nunn
  (2013) who also discovered the positive cross country correlation between contemporary democracy and
  the extent to which a country had democratic ethnographic societies. This is not the focus of our paper
  since, as we show, the simple correlation is driven by regional differences.
3
  One of the leading scholars on Athenian democracy, Mogens Herman Hansen, finds few – if any – traces
  of ancient Athens in contemporary democratic institutions but identifies “an unbroken tradition which
  connects modern legislatures with medieval parliaments of the 13th century onwards Hansen (2010, 30).




                                                   2
         “it is easy to find elements of democracy in ancient India, medieval Iceland,
         or precolonial Africa, but the implication that modern polities in these places
         owe something to their own political traditions is farfetched. Indeed, modern
         Greek democracy has no roots in the democracy of Ancient Greece. English
         constitutional monarchy had more impact on modern Greek political history
         than Athens did.”4


We show below that such indigenous elements of democracy are in fact associated with
contemporary democracy also outside the European continent. This suggests that there
is nothing particularly “European” about the historical link from early subnational insti-
tutions to modern national institutions; on the contrary, the European experience seems
to generalize well outside the continent.
       The modern state did not arise ex nihilo. States were built on top of and usually
in conflict with existing political units. In its simplest form, this article argues that the
way these indigenous political units were governed mattered for how the state came to
be governed. We show that the ability of indigenous units to shape subsequent regime
developments was conditioned on their relative strength; politically stronger units were
able to shape national institutions, weaker units were not. To make this argument, we rely
on Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas as well as the Standard Cross Cultural Sample
(Murdock and White 1969) to measure rules of leadership selection in 871 indigenous
societies across 106 countries. We code indigenous societies as proto-democratic if leaders
are selected by election or consensus and undemocratic otherwise. We use Polity IV to
measure contemporary democracy at the country-level. We use three different proxies
for the relative strength of indigenous political units. The first is a group’s proximity
to the country’s capital. We find that only the institutions of groups located “close” to
the capital are associated with subsequent regime developments. This finding confirms
the notion that political influence and power in many countries are disproportionately
4
    Karl Wittfogel (1957, 108-26) also did not expect participatory government at the local level to lead to
    democracy at the country level. On the contrary, despotic state-level institutions are fully compatible
    with pockets of subnational participatory government. Wittfogel dubbed this the “beggar’s democracy”.


                                                      3
centered on the capital (e.g., Bates 1981, Herbst 2000). The second proxy is the complexity
of the indigenous settlement. We show that the institutions of groups with more complex
settlement patterns are more strongly associated with national democracy. Our last proxy
for political influence is economic activity, measured at the level of the indigenous group
using satelite data on light density at night. Nighttime luminosity has been shown to
correlate strongly with economic activity (e.g., Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil 2011;
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou 2011). We show that the higher the current economic
activity in the local area of the indigenous group, the larger the association between the
institutions of the group and the national institutions.
      With all three measures of political influence, we document a substantively relevant
and statistically significant association between indigenous rules for leadership succession
and contemporary national institutions. Figure 1 illustrates that the association between
current and indigenous democracy depends on the political strength of the indigenous
group. The figure shows the average polity2-scores by strength (proximity to the capital)
and by continent. There are two sets of bars for each continent: The blue bars show average
democracy scores for all ethnic groups in a continent, and the red bars show the same
for influential groups only. Each color is again divided into ethnicities with indigenous
democracy below median (light colors) and above median (dark colors). When we look
at the world as a whole, there is a clear positive association between contemporary and
indigeneous democracy: countries with a more proto-democratic indigenous history are
more democratic today. This association does not, however, generally obtain when we
compare countries within continents (i.e., the difference between the dark and light blue
bars is rather small). Yet when we zoom in on influential indigenous groups, defined
here as groups located within 400 kilometres of the capital, there is generally a positive
association between indigenous and national institutions (i.e., the difference between the
dark and light red bars is larger).5

5
    The exception to the rule is America, where the association is negative within the full sample and
    insignificant within the influential sample. However, the American sample is small: There are only
    between 5 and 9 countries in each group.


                                                   4
              Figure 1: Current and indigenous Democracy across Continents




Notes. The figure shows the mean polity2-scores across countries by continents. Within each continent,
the sample of countries is split in two based on the degree of indigenous democracy. Darker colors
represent countries with above median levels of indigenous democracy, lighter colors indicate below
median. Indigenous democracy is measured based on the variable “succession of the local headman”
(described in the data section) and calculated across all 871 ethnographic societies in all the blue bars
and across the 251 ethnographic societies located within 400 km of the capital city in the red bars. The
number of countries behind the bars is as follows (<median,>median): World 53,53 in the full sample
(blue bars) and 51,35 in the influential sample (red bars); Africa 22,22 and 29,10; America 8,9 and 5,7;
Asia and Oceania 18,17 and 16,11; Europe 4,6 and 2,6.




The regression analyses show that the association between current and indigenous democ-
racy for influential societies is statistically significant, obtains for the three proxies for
political power, and robust to a broad set of controls, including historical European in-
fluence and colonization, geographical controls, as well as a set of common correlates
of democracy. In general, the association doubles when we focus the analysis on the
influential societies compared to the entire sample. Furthermore, increasing democracy
among the politically influential indigenous societies by one standard deviation, increases
the polity IV index by 1.7 units on the 21 unit scale (amounting to a third of a stan-
dard deviation). We show, also, that the association between indigenous democracy and

                                                   5
current democracy disappears in the European settlement colonies as expected, where
the dominant position of the settlers severed the link from indigenous to contemporary
institutions.
   Examining the effect of local ethnic institutions on national institutions is complicated
by endogeneity; national institutions may affect indigenous institutions, and unobserved
cultural or historical factors may plausibly affect both. To alleviate concerns of reverse
causation, note that we find a robust association between indigenous institutions and
national institutions only for ethnic groups that were relatively strong. For reverse cau-
sation to explain this finding would require that national institutions affect only local
institutions in relatively strong ethnic societies. While such a selective effect of national
institutions on local institutions is not impossible, we find it hard to rationalize. A more
straightforward interpretation of our results is that stronger groups are better able to
influence national regime trajectories. To alleviate concerns of omitted variable bias,
we used generalized sensitivity analysis (Imbens 2003; Harada 2013) and show that, for
omitted factors to explain our findings, these would have to show an exceptionally strong
association with both national and local institutions.
   We propose three channels through which indigenous institutions might have affected
national regime developments. First, the existence of local assemblies provided a source of
resistance against the state. Popular assemblies could facilitate coordination and collective
action and allow local communities to raise resources (or even a local militia) to oppose
the state. This argument is much in line with the large literature that sees the origins of
representative institutions as the outcome of a bargain between a revenue-seeking ruler
and society. The stronger are societal actors vis-à-vis the ruler, the more likely were rulers
to grant political rights in return for revenue (e.g., Bates and Lien 1985; Hoffman and
Rosenthal 1997; Tilly 1975). Second, subnational democratic institutions might affect
regime developments by teaching citizens locally the merits and mores of democracy.
This view is naturally associated with Tocqueville (2000 [1835]) who famously likened
participatory local government to a “primary school for democracy”. Third, we argue


                                              6
that dynamics of institutional path dependence may explain the mapping of subnational
institutions into national institutions. Such dynamics, we argue, are likely to be more
prevalent when the ethnic group and the state are more congruent.
    One broad implication of our findings is that modern regimes may be more deeply
grounded in indigenous societies than previous theories have suggested.6 Much of the
literature on comparative regime development outside Europe has focused on the colo-
nial legacies, effectively treating indigenous political history as secondary.7 When carried
over into the prescriptive realm, our findings suggest that external reformers’ capacity
for regime-building should not be exaggerated. While our results suggest an indigenous
grounding of national regimes, they also show that weaker groups are not generally able
to influence a country’s regime trajectory. They therefore call for caution before too much
potential for change is attached to local regime dynamics.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops the argument
from historical observation and presents three potential channels through which indige-
nous institutions might affect national ones. In section 3 we describe the data and the
following section shows the basic association. In section 5 we discuss how institutions at
the level of the ethnic group can be aggregated to the country-level and propose to attach
more weight to “influential” groups. We then document that the institutions of relatively
“strong” groups are associated with subsequent regime developments. In section 6, we
show that the association is robust to various measures of colonization, and that it disap-
pears in European settlement colonies. Sections 7 and 8 perform robustness checks and
address endogeneity concerns. The last section concludes.
6
  The importance of indigenous institutions for contemporary economic performance has been explored
  by, e.g., Acemoglu, Reed, and Robinson (2014); Dell (2010); Gennaioli and Rainer (2007); Michalopoulos
  and Papaioannou (2013).
7
  See, e.g., Chabal (1986, 3); Herbst (2000, 28f.) for similar points.




                                                   7
2        From Indigenous Assemblies to Representative Gov-

         ernment

The historical roots of representative government in Europe have been traced to medieval
assemblies of king and feudal lords (e.g., Myers 1975; Downing 1992; Ertman 1997; Tilly
1975) as well as to local village assemblies (e.g., Dahl 2000; Downing 1988). Yet the exis-
tence of village - or tribal assemblies was clearly not unique to Europe (e.g., Muhlberger
and Paine 1993; Sabetti 2004; Sen 2003); nor were the structure and functions of such
assemblies. Rulers have convoked assemblies to give solemnity to ceremonial events and
obtain council in all parts of the world.8 Such assemblies were often unconstitutional and
ad hoc: They were called irregularly, not held in any fixed place, and without formal
legal authority (Blockmans 1978, 196; Blum 1971a 554-5; Lewis 1961, 189-9; Marongiu
1968, 24). The councils often had both advisory and judicial functions. Participation was
usually restricted to adult males, and elders held a privileged position. Among their areas
of responsibility were the maintenance of order, adjudication of disputes, management of
communal resources, and public goods provision (Blum 1971a, 545-7; Downing 1988, 31;
Lewis 1961, 228, 234). To meet these costs, the local communities made regular levies
upon its members; possibly by requiring able men to work for the community (Blum
1971a, 547; Lewis 1961, 234).
       Brian M. Downing (1988, 10) found in such local assemblies of medieval Europe “not
only the obstacle to absolutism [...], but also a positive impulse towards popular govern-
ment.” Yet if the characteristics of these assemblies were not unique to Europe, neither,
perhaps, were their impulse towards popular government? In the remainder of this section,
we present three ways in which the existence of proto-democratic indigenous assemblies
might have influenced a country’s political regime trajectory.
       First, it is an integral part of the process of state formation that states seek to eradicate
competing institutions (e.g. Hui 2004; Spruyt 1994; Tilly 1985). If societal actors are
8
    See, e.g., Marongiu (1968, 46) for medieval Europe. See Schapera (1967, 64) for the Sotho tribes of the
    Nguni and the Tsonga.


                                                      8
relatively strong, state makers may be forced to concede rights to societal representatives
(e.g., Bates and Lien 1985; Ertman 1997; Finer 1997, e.g. 1036; Hoffman and Rosenthal
1997; Levi 1988; North and Weingast 1989; North 1990; Stasavage 2003, 2010). Many
factors have been argued to shape the relative bargaining power of societal actors and
state makers, including the existence of indigenous or local government (e.g., Downing
1992; Ertman 1997) and the cohesiveness of local societies (e.g., Blum 1971b, 164-5; Boone
2003, 22; Moore 1966, 475). The existence of local government allowed communities to
coordinate actions vis-à-vis the state, and the right to tax allowed them to mount the
resources needed to oppose state power. Thus, Thomas Ertman (1997, 22) argued that
local assemblies provided “the resources needed to mount an effective defense [...] against
overweening royal ambition: A ready-made forum in which all of the local elite could meet
and discuss a common course of action; financial resources such as local taxes; and even
armed forces in the form of the local militia.” As well, the participatory nature of the
assemblies likely increased the cohesiveness of indigenous societies and thus their ability
and citizens’ willingness to take concerted action against the state.9 In Latin America,
the cabildos (town councils) of colonial Spanish America serve to illustrate. Here, men of
some social standing could participate in local government (e.g., Diamond et al. 1989, 3)
and elect leaders (Finer 1997, 1387). In matters of importance, the local council convoked
the public in cabildos abierto (public assemblies); it was at such public assemblies that
collective resistance and the wars of independence against the Spanish Crown were begun
in Argentina and Venezuela in 1810.10
    Turning to the second channel, local assemblies with popular participation and elected
leaders may also affect national regime trajectories by forming citizen attitudes. This
perspective is naturally associated with Alexis de Tocqueville who saw participatory local
government as a training school where citizens could develop democratic mores (e.g., 2000
[1835], 46): “Municipal institutions are to liberty what primary schools are to knowledge;
9
 Boone (2003, ch. 3) used the Diola society in southern Senegal to show how horizontally cohesive groups
 can exhibit a considerable capacity for collective action.
10
   Specifically, the cabildo abierto in Buenos Aires on May 22, 1810, and in Caracas on April 19, 1810.



                                                   9
they place it within reach of the people; they give the experience of the peaceful exercise
of it and habituate them to make use of it. Without municipal institutions a nation may
give itself a free government, but it does not have the spirit of liberty.”11 A contemporary
perspective on the merits of local government was given in 2005 by Wen Jiabao, then
Premier in China, stating that “if the Chinese people can manage a village, I believe in
several years they can manage a township” (Gilley 2013, 406).
     Also, proto-democratic indigenous institutions may provide democratic reformers with
a narrative of historical continuity, which lends legitimacy to democratic rule. To illus-
trate, the idea of a Scandinavian proto-democracy was first invoked in public discourse in
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden in the 1930s to counter the totalitarian ideological cur-
rents of Communism and Fascism (Jakobsen 2010, 322). Similarly, in early 20th century
England, the Anglo-Saxon polity was said in Encyclopedia Britannica to provide “all the
constituent parts of parliament” (Esposito and Voll 1996, 22).12 According to Esposito
and Voll (ibid.), such “reconceptualizations of premodern institutions played an impor-
tant role in the development of democratic attitudes in Europe.” Tradition and historical
continuity brings legitimacy, which may induce people to struggle for democracy and
support it once it is there.
     Lastly, the link from indigenous institutions to national ones may also be a result
of path dependence: Political institutions can be highly persistent; once in place, they
are hard to change. This is empirically well documented (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson 2001; Putnam 1993), and many mechanisms have been proposed to explain this
fact.13 The argument here concerns institutional persistence from one polity (the ethnic
group) into another, which contains the first (the state). Whatever the mechanisms that
underlie it, the dynamics of path dependence are likely to be more prevalent if the two
11
   John Stuart Mill expressed a similar perspective on the merits of local government. He held that
   ??free and popular local and municipal institutions” are part of “the peculiar training of a citizen, the
   practical part of the education of a free people.” Quoted in Elkin (1987, 1).
12
   A similar attempt to legitimize national institutions is Lee Kwan Yew’s famous claim that democracy
   was incompatible with with Asian values. This, Przeworski, Cheibub, and Limongi (1998, 25) found
   was “a thin veneer over his desire to hold on to power.”
13
   See Scott Page (2006) for a thorough and rigorous discussion of the causes of path dependence.



                                                    10
polities, the state and the ethnic group, are more congruent. This was the case, for
example, in the Scandinavian countries.
       In summary, local assemblies, may provide an impetus to toward national democratic
institutions as a source of resistance against repressive state power (cf., e.g., Ertman 1997,
22), as a training school for democratic practices and ideals (cf., e.g., Tocqueville), and
by the dynamics of path dependence. These channels are of course, mutually compatible.



3        Data

To measure the existence of early democratic institutions at the level of the indigenous
society, we use the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967) and the Standard Cross Cultural
Sample (SCCS) (Murdock and White 1969). The Atlas holds data on a broad set of
characteristics for 1265 societies across 148 countries.14 It was published in successive
installments of the journal Ethnology from 1962 onwards. The original coding was done
by Yale Professor of Anthropology George Peter Murdock based on the ethnographic
sources listed in the notes to each installment in Ethnology. About a fifth of the original
codings were checked by graduate students and collaborators (Murdock 1967, 110), and
the data have been updated and corrected many times since its first publication in 1967
(e.g., Gray 1999; Peregrine 2003). It seems fair to say that the Ethnographic Atlas is
now becoming a standard reference in social science research (e.g., Alesina et al. 2013;
Englebert et al. 2002; Gerring et al. 2011; Giuliano and Nunn 2013; Nunn and Wantchekon
2011).
       For each society, the information in the Atlas reflects “the earliest date for which
satisfactory ethnographic data are available or can be reconstructed [in order to] avoid
insofar as possible the acculturative effects of contacts with Europeans” (Murdock and
White 1969, 340). In the sample used here, 1919 is the median year to which the ethno-
graphic information pertains (the average is 1896). While these years do not generally
14
     The SCCS is a subsample of 186 more thorougly investigated societies from the Ethnographic Atlas.



                                                   11
antedate modern statehood, the sources describing each society were “chosen so that cul-
tural independence of each unit in terms of historical origin and cultural diffusion could
be considered maxima” (ibid., abstract). The data have thus been recorded to reflect
characteristics that predate modern statehood as well as European contact. In section
8 we discuss at some length the possibility – against the intention of the coders – that
indigenous institutions were influenced by national institutions.
       The independent variable is early democratic institutions at the level of the ethnic
group. This was coded using the variable Succession to the office of the local headman
(variable v276 in SCCS and v72 in the Ethnographic Atlas). Societies are coded as demo-
cratic if leaders are selected by election or consensus and undemocratic otherwise. Table
1 shows the distribution of the categories of local leadership succession in the data.



                                           [Table 1 about here]



The dependent variable is contemporary democracy, measured using the 21-point scaled
variable polity2 from Polity IV. To avoid having short spells of regime instability affect
the results, polity2 is averaged over the post-Cold War period (1990-2010). Robustness
checks are done using the dichotomous democracy indicator originally constructed by
Przeworski et al. (2000) and more recently updated by Cheibub et al. (2009). With this
data, our sample consists of 871 societies in 106 countries.
       Figure 2 shows the geographical distribution of the 871 societies in our sample.15 The
indigenous societies are represented by dots; the darker ones are coded as democratic,
lighter ones are coded as undemocratic. The coloring of countries represents the dependent
15
     In order to match the societies to countries, we used an ESRI shapefile of country borders. For each
     indigenous society, the SCCS and the Ethnographic Atlas report the latitude and longitude of its
     position. For the majority of the societies, the precision is 1 degree, amounting to an error of +/- 55
     km in every direction. If we matched societies to countries exclusively by way of being located exactly
     within a country’s borders, we would loose societies that were mistakenly located in the ocean barely
     outside the country borders. 1107 of the 1265 societies lie exactly within country borders, 1231 lie
     within 55 km of country borders. We therefore match each society to a country by identifying the
     closest country of each ethnographic society. 10 of the original 1265 societies are located more than
     200 km from a country border, which we interpret as a reporting error and exclude them from the
     analysis. Results are robust to including them and also to choosing a different cutoff.

                                                      12
variable, contemporary democracy (1990-2010) as measured by Polity IV. Again, darker
is more democratic.




             Figure 2. Indigenous Democracy and Representative Government




Notes. The dots show the 871 ethnographic societies in our sample. The darker dots represent indigenous
democracy, where the local headman was selected by means of elections or communal consensus. Countries
are colored to represent contemporary democracy as measured by Polity IV.




The figure reveals regional clustering. For example, the proportion of ethnic societies with
local democracy is comparatively large in Europe (62 percent of all societies in Europe
are coded as democratic) and in North America (31 percent) and comparatively limited
in Africa (9 percent). Thus, the map immediately suggests that between-regional varia-
tion would drive a positive association between indigenous democracy and contemporary
political regimes.


3.1     Measuring Indigenous Institutions at the Country-Level

Our dependent variable is democratic institutions at the country level, and we therefore
need a country-level measure of the indigenous institutions within a country. Local in-
stitutions can be aggregated in different ways. Giuliano and Nunn (2013), for example,

                                                  13
manually match each ethnic group to a language group. They then calculate the country
average by weighting each ethnic group with the current population-size of the language
group, such that ethnographic societies belonging to larger language groups are given
more weight. These language groups can be quite broad, and the implicit assumption is
that indigenous institutions are identical within language groups (even across societies
and countries). Against this assumption, however, the renowned anthropologists, Meyer
Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940, 3), warned that “[i]t is well to bear in mind that within
a single linguistic or cultural area we often find political systems which are very unlike
each other in many important features.”
    Our approach to aggregation is different because we only record indigenous institutions
for the country in which a society was located. With this, a simple measure of indigenous
proto-democracy in country c would be the share of societies within that country where
leadership succession is by election, formal or informal consensus. Formally, indigc =
 1
   PN
N    s=1 indigsc for all N societies s within country c, where indigsc is a dummy equal to

1 if society s had rules for leadership succession by either “election or formal consensus”
or “informal consensus”, zero otherwise. Note that this approach weighs all groups within
a country equally; implicitly assuming that the groups in a country mattered equally for
subsequent regime developments. We relax this assumption in section 5.



4     Basic Correlations

Table 2 reports coefficients from OLS regressions of contemporary democracy on a coun-
try’s history of indigenous democracy corresponding to the following equation:


                              Dc = α + βindigc + X0c δ + c                             (1)

where Dc is contemporary democracy in country c, indigc is the share of democratic
ethnic societies in country c, and X0c is a vector of controls. The coefficient of interest
is β, which measures the association between local indigenous institutions and national

                                            14
institutions.


                                     [Table 2 about here]


Column (1) documents a highly significant, unconditional association of 3.96 between
contemporary democracy and a history of indigenous democratic institutions. Substan-
tively, this suggests that if Angola or Kazakhstan (indigc = 0) had had the same level
of indigenous democracy as, say, Italy (indigc = 1), one should expect contemporary
democracy to be 3.96 polity2-units higher, all else equal.
   Column (2) controls for the (absolute) value of latitude. This is informed by Jared
Diamond’s argument that, throughout history, technological and institutional diffusion
were easier at similar latitudes where the length of the day and climate were not dras-
tically different (Diamond 1997, ch. 10). This specification compares countries along the
historically important East-West axis rather than the disparate experiences of the North
to the South. Column (3) controls for the “approximate time level to which the ethno-
graphic data pertains” (Murdock 1967, 116), since this might have a bearing on how
local institutions map into national ones. Column (3) thus compares countries for which
the timing of the ethnographic information is roughly similar. Column (4) adds a control
for historical development, proxied by settlement complexity. In line with Alesina et al.
(2013) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), we proxy development by the variable “Settle-
ment Patterns” (variable v30 in the Ethnographic Atlas and v234 in the SCCS), which
measures the permanency and density of settlements ranging from “Nomadic or fully mi-
gratory” to “Complex settlements” on an 8-point scale. Comparing countries at similar
levels of latitude, timing of the ethnographic data collection, and societal complexity does
not affect the coefficient of interest.
   Reassuringly, the results in columns (1)-(4) are entirely consistent with those presented
in Giuliano and Nunn (2013), despite the differences in aggregation techniques, control
variables and the time-frame in which contemporary democracy is measured. The mag-
nitude of the estimated association is even quite similar. Guillano and Nunn’s estimates

                                             15
range from 2.0 to 3.6 and ours lie between 2.7 and 3.96; the intervals are statistically
indistinguishable.
      In column (5), we include a full set of regional dummies.16 Figure 2 suggested that
the proportion of ethnic groups with popularly elected headmen is not evenly distributed
geographically: The highest proportion of ethnic groups with leadership succession by
election or consensus was found in Europe; the lowest was found in Africa. When regional
fixed effects are included, the coefficient measures the average intra-regional association
between indigenous and national institutions, effectively comparing European countries
to other European countries, and so on. This nearly cuts the estimated association in
half and it is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels. This does not in-
validate the finding, however; indeed, it is the central claim in a historical-sociological
literature (e.g., Downing 1989, 1992; Ertman 1997) that contemporary Europe is compar-
atively democratic precisely because of its early modern history of local, proto-democratic
assemblies.



5        Whose Indigenous Institutions Matter?

We now relax the assumption that all groups within a country matter equally for its
political regime dynamics. Some groups are inevitably more powerful than others and
better able to influence the national regime trajectory. In North America, for example,
European settlers were more powerful than the indigenous groups and better able, there-
fore, to impose their preferred institutions on the country as a whole. In the late 19th
century, villagers in contemporary Ukraine elected their own district leader, but attempts
at regime change from below were crushed by the tsar (Gilley 2013, 397). Similarly in
China, where initatives for township elections were brought to a halt by the government
(ibid., 397). These examples illustrate how subnational institutions that are not backed
by sufficiently powerful groups likely do not map into national institutions.
16
     The regions included are sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Europe, Oceania, North America, South America,
     and the Middle East and North Africa.


                                                   16
       Even if the idea is theoretically straightforward, measuring the relative power or in-
fluence of indigenous groups is not. We propose three different proxies for groups’ relative
political power. The first is proximity to the current capital. This is based on the idea
that if power is concentrated in the capital, proximity to the capital likely facilitates
political influence. The two second proxies are measures of past and current economic
development; the basic motivation being that more developed societies were likely to be
more influential. Strictly speaking, of course, all proxies measure the base of power (e.g.,
Dahl 1957, 202; Simon 1953, 507f.), i.e. the resources and conditions for the exercise of
power or influence; not the power relation itself. All three proxies yield identical results.
Summary statistics for all three proxies are shown in Appendix Table A1.

Proximity to the capital Usually, a country’s capital is home to its highest political
offices and decision-making authority. It is home also to the means of coercion and law
enforcement (or the administration of it, at a minimum) and the central bureaucracy.
Physical proximity to this centre of authority likely increases political influence (e.g.,
Campante, Do, and Guimaraes 2013; Ades and Glaeser 1995, 198f; Herbst 2000; Olsson
and Hansson 2011).17 First, the threat of violence or rebellion is less urgent from a
distance, and groups’ ability to exchange force for political influence should thus increase
with their proximity to the capital. Second, since influential public offices are concentrated
in the capital, public officials are likely to be recruited from the groups located in the
vicinity of the capital. Third, groups closer to the capital are better able to monitor what
happens there. The state, therefore, is likely to be more responsive to the demands of
groups living closer to the capital. Finally, the location of the capital is itself endogenous
to an underlying distribution of power among different groups in a country. The dominant
group, we argue, is likely to set up the institutional infrastructure in its own vicinity.
       In many European colonies, capital cities were externally imposed: Colonizers often
17
     Herbst (2000) and Olsson and Hansson (2011) focus on the projection of power from the capital, arguing
     that the state’s ability to broadcast power decreases with the distance from the capital. Campante,
     Do, and Guimaraes (2013) and Ades and Glaeser (1995) focus on how distance matters for the ability
     to project influence into the capital. Our perspective is the latter.



                                                     17
centralized authority in capitals that were either built from scratch or relocated to a new
city that met better the logistical needs of the colonial power.18 However, capitals were
also the locus of power in colonies. Thus, the relocation served to weaken the ties between
the capital-region and the rest of the country, and Europeans often only made limited
efforts to extend the power and political reach of the capital into the countryside. Politics
in former colonies is therefore widely regarded as being disproportionately centered on
the capital (e.g., Bates 1981; Herbst 2000). This capital-bias often continued into the
post-colonial period, because the urban population and the capital region in particular
were critical to leaders’ political survival (e.g., Alence 2004; Bates 1981; Bratton and de
Walle 1992). Regardless of whether countries were colonized or not, we hypothesize that
societies located closer to the capital are better able to affect a country’s regime trajectory
than groups located further away. The association between national political institutions
and indigenous institutions should thus increase when we zoom in on indigenous societies
located closer to the capital.
     To introduce the empirical model, assume to start with that we do have information
on current democracy at the level of indigenous societies, Dsc . Let the indicator variable
Isc , described in detail below, equal one if the society is located “close” to the capital,
zero otherwise. To see if the association between indigenous and national institutions is
conditioned on societies’ relative proximity to the capital, one can estimate the following
equation:


                  Dsc = α + β1 indigsc + β2 indigsc × Isc + γIsc + X0sc δ + sc                     (2)

If indigenous democracy is positively associated with current democracy in politically
influential societies, we expect that β2 > 0. Yet by construction, contemporary national
democracy does not vary at the level of the indigenous groups, but only at the country
level. Therefore, we aggregate all variables to the country-level and obtain the following:19
18
   Lusaka, Nairobi, and Harare were all, for example, built de novo, whereas, e.g., Lagos and Accra were
   upgraded to capitals by the British.
                                         PN                       PN                     PN
19
   We arrive at equation (3) by: N1 s=1 Dsc = α + β1 N1 s=1 indigsc + β2 N1 s=1 indigsc ×


                                                  18
                      Dc = α + β1 indigc + β2 indigcp + γclosec + X0c δ + c                         (3)

                                                                        PN
where Dc is contemporary democracy in country c, indigcp = N1              s=1   indigsc × Isc is the av-
erage level of democracy among indigenous societies interacted with whether the society
is located close to the capital city. closec measures the fraction of societies located close
to the capital city of country c. In order to estimate the significance of the association
between current democracy and indigenous democracy among politically powerful soci-
eties, one needs to estimate the significance of the composite estimate β1 + β2 . Instead,
we estimate the equivalent model to get a direct estimate of the association of interest:


                     Dc = α + β3 indigcp + β4 indigcnp + γclosec + X0c δ + c                        (4)

                     1
                         PN
where indigcnp =     N     s=1   indigsc × (1 − Isc ) is the average level of democracy among
indigenous societies interacted with whether the society is located far from the capital
city. Now, the estimate of interest, β3 measures the direct impact of indigenous democracy
in politically influential societies. We allow “close” to vary at increments of 100 kilometers
ranging from a distance of 1,000 kilometers (or more) to 100 (or less). In the few cases
where a capital was relocated, we focus on the contemporary capital.20 The capital of
interest here must have served as capital at the moment in which the foundations of a
political regime are laid. And since we focus on the contemporary regime, we focus also
on the contemporary capital.
    All models include the following controls in addition to the controls from Table 2: A
control for (log of) the country area, since democratic rule may be more viable in smaller
countries (e.g., Dahl and Tufte 1973; Stasavage 2010) and since indigenous groups are
            PN           PN       0
                                           PN
   Isc +γ N1 s=1 Isc + N1 s=1 Xsc   δ + N1 s=1 sc .
20
   In our sample of 106 countries, eight capitals have moved since 1960. These are Cote d’Ivoire (Abidjan
   to Yamoussoukro in 1983; Kasakhstan (Almaata to Astana in 1997); Malawi (from Zomba to Lilongwe
   in 1974); Micronesia (Kolonia to Palikir in 1989); Myanmar (Rangoon to Naypyidaw in 2005); Nigeria
   (from Lagos to Abuja in 1991); Pakistan (Karachi to Islamabad in 1974); Tanzania (Dar es Salaam to
   Dodoma in 1996).




                                                   19
closer to the capital in smaller countries.21 Further, since many capitals are located close
to the ocean, which may itself improve the prospects for democracy by, e.g., facilitating
economic integration with the outside world, we control for the (log of) average distance
to the coast from all ethnographic societies within a country. Lastly, since the measure is
based on the societies located “close” and “far” from the capital as defined in each column,
we control for the share of ethnographic societies located “close” to the capital.22 Table
3 shows the results.23



                                           [Table 3 about here]



The table documents that the indigenous institutions of societies located in the prox-
imity of a country’s capital are more strongly associated with its national institutions
than are the institutions of societies located further away. Panels A and B are identical
except that, in Panel B, regional fixed effects are included. Column (2) shows that the
indigenous institutions of ethnic groups located within 1,000 kilometers of the capital are
significantly and positively correlated with national institutions (a point estimate of 3.65);
institutions in societies located further away are uncorrelated with national institutions.
Moreover, when the average proximity to the capital is increased gradually (shown in
column (2)-(11)), the association between indigenous and national institutions increases
almost monotonically. When regional fixed effects are included in panel B, the parame-
ter estimate becomes significant for indigenous institutions located within 800 kilometers
of the capital. The squared brackets below the estimates indicate the number of ethnic
societies located “close” and “far” from the capital city.
21
   Campante, Do, and Guimaraes (2013) show that capital isolation is associated with misgovernance.
   They operationalize capital isolation as the natural log of the average distance of a country’s population
   to its capital. Controlling for the natural log of the average distance of a country’s ethnographic societies
   to its capital instead of country size does not affect the results in Table 3.
22
   Results are robust to excluding either of these controls.
23
   Instead of this interaction model, a naı̈ve way to test the hypothesis would be to let the measure of
   indigenous proto-democracy be based only on the societies located close to the capital city, throwing
   away the information on all other societies. The results in Table 3 hold in this model.




                                                      20
     The results in Table 3 are thus consistent with the discussion above; if political power
and the ability to shape the subsequent national regime trajectory are centered on the
capital, we should expect the estimated coefficient to increase for ethnic societies located
in relative proximity to the capital.24 In the rest of the paper, we use the specification
in column (8) where “close” is defined as being within 400 kilometres of the capital. As
measured by R2 , this specification provides the best fit with the data.25

Settlement complexity Our second proxy for the indigenous groups’ ability to influence
country-level institutions is the complexity of their settlements.26 Settlement patterns are
usually taken by archaeologists as an indication of political and social development (e.g.,
Steponaitis 1981).27 More developed societies are better able to raise the resources needed
to build armies and coordinate war-making efforts (cf. Crone 1986, 171). More generally,
economic capability is a fungible source of power that can be used in disparate areas (e.g.,
Waltz 1979, 131).
     To examine if settlement complexity conditions the association between indigenous
institutions and national institutions, we estimate the following equation:


                    Dc = α + β1 indigcc + β2 indigcnc + γcomplexc + Xc0 δ + c                          (5)

                                                                            PN
Equation (5) is similar to equation (4) except that indigcc = N1               s=1   indigsc × Isc , where
Isc now equals one if the particular society is complex, zero otherwise. Similarly for
indigcnc . We allow the definition of complex to vary in increments from more complex than
“nomadic or fully migratory” to more complex than “compact permanent” settlements.
24
   This result is tangent to the study by Stasavage (2010), who finds that the ability to sustain national
   assemblies declines with the average distance from the capital. It is tangent, also, to the study by
   Wantchekon and Poncé (2011), who find that, in Africa, urban insurgencies are followed by democratic
   regime transitions whereas rural insurgencies are followed by autocracy.
25
   Note that the results are not driven by societies within 100 kilometres of the capital; excluding these
   (48) societies does not alter the conclusion (results available upon request).
26
   The variable is an eight-point scale ranging from “Nomadic or fully migratory” to “Complex settle-
   ments”.
27
   Population density is another oft used proxy for economic development. While data on population den-
   sity is not available at the level of the ethnic group, it should be mentioned that settlement complexity
   is strongly and significantly correlated with the total population size of a society (0.58, p-value 0.00
   for the 582 available societies).


                                                    21
complexc measures the share of societies that are defined as complex according to the
particular cutoff. Table 4 reports the results.


                                        [Table 4 about here]


In the first column, all societies that are more complex than “nomadic or fully migratory”
are defined as politically strong. Moving towards the right in the table, the definition of
“politically strong” is gradually tightened, until column (7) where only societies that are
coded as having complex setttlements in the Atlas are defined as politically strong. The
table shows that the indigenous institutions in relatively complex societies are associ-
ated with contemporary national institutions, whereas those in less complex societies are
not. This suggests that more developed indigenous groups were better able to influence
national regime trajectories.28 In the analyses that follow, we used the specification in
column (6), since this provides the best description of the data as measured by R2 .

Economic activity at the grid level Our third proxy for the relative power of indige-
nous groups is their level of contemporary economic development. Since official statistics
(e.g., GPD per capita) are not constructed for ethnic groups, we proxy economic activity
using satellite data on light density at night. The usefulness of this measure has recently
been established by Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2011), who demonstrate a strong
within-country correlation between light density at night and GDP levels. The measure
was further corroborated by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011, 11), who show that
within countries in sub-Saharan Africa, light density correlates strongly with household
income. At the level of the ethnic society (where income data is unavailable), they further
document that light density correlates with educational attainment.
     The data on light density at night in year 2000 is provided by the National Geophysical
Data Center at NASA.29 For each grid cell of 0.5 × 0.5 degrees, the data measures the
28
   In column (7) the estimated association remains positive, but insignificantly so. This is likely due to
   the small number of complex settlements in our data (only about 3 percent of the societies in our
   sample are coded as complex settlements.
29
   Available online at http://ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/.

                                                   22
degree of luminousity at night. For each indigenous society, we calculated the average
light density within a circle of 200 km radius.
     Light density reflects the contemporary level of development in the area of an ethnic
group. The motivation behind this proxy is that societies that managed to (later) generate
higher economic activity were also more likely to influence national regime trajectories.30
     One caveat is in order: Light density likely reflects urbanization as much as economic
activity. Luminosity is likely therefore to be centered on a country’s capital meaning that
two of our proxies for political power (proximity to capital and night-time luminosity)
might in fact capture the same underlying reality. As it turns out, however, the two
proxies are essentially orthogonal (the correlation is -0.02; the p-value is 0.50).31
     To examine whether the ability of ethnographic societies to influence national politi-
cal institutions is conditioned on their relative economic development, we estimated the
following OLS regression:


                     Dc = α + β1 indigc + β2 indigclight + γlightc + X0c δ + c                          (6)

where indigc is the fraction of proto-democratic indigenous societies in country c, indigclight =
1
  PN
N   s=1 indigsc × lightsc for the N societies s within country c. lightsc is the (0.01 + log

of) average light density within a circle of 200 km of the centre of society s in country c.32
lightc is the average night-time luminosity across the societies in country c. X0c represents
controls. The coefficients of interest are a composite of β1 and β2 .
30
   Using contemporary light density implicitly assumes that the contemporary homeland of an ethnic
   group is the same as identified in Murdock’s (1967) atlas. This does seem justifiable, however. Focus-
   ing on the individual level, Nunn and Wantchekon (2008, 36) find a strong correlation of 0.62 between
   the location of individuals in 2005 and the historical homeland of their ethnic group. Presumably,
   entire societies are less susceptible to relocation than are individuals. This arguably makes the as-
   sumption of constant location less demanding here than in, e.g., Nunn and Wantchekon (2008, 2011)
   or Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013). Further, the fact that some societies obviously did change
   location over the period of analysis will bias our estimate of interest towards zero. In this respect, our
   results can be seen as a lower bound of the impact of indigenous democracy.
31
   Moreover, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011, 10-11) show that the association between luminosity
   and economic development is strengthened once the effect of urbanization has been partialled out.
32
   The natural log of 0.01 + light density was used to account for a few extreme observations in the right
   tail of the distribution and to ensure that observations were not lost when log transforming. This is
   similar to Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 125). The results are robust to excluding the societies
   with zero light density.


                                                     23
                                   [Table 5 about here]



Column (1) in Table 5 shows the results from a simple model that includes only indigenous
democracy, light density, and the interaction between the two. As hypothesized, the
coefficient on the interaction term is positive and highly significant. This means that the
local institutions of more economically developed groups are associated more strongly
with national institutions. At the sample mean of light density (-1.43), the marginal
association between local and national institutions is 3.54 + 1.16 × (−1.43) = 1.88. For
societies with higher luminosity, the marginal association is higher. Columns (2) and
(3) add our standard controls (latitude; the average year to which the ethnographic
information pertains; societal complexity) and a full set of regional fixed effects. This did
not change the conclusion.
    In sum, across all three proxies, the association between indigenous institutions and
contemporary regimes is increasing in the (proxy for the) relative power of the indigenous
groups. We proceed to examine the robustness of this finding.



6     Outside Europe: Colonization and Indigenous Democ-

      racy

Colonialism caused profound disjunctures in authority structures and social hierarchy
in most of the world outside Europe. Even if the colonial state rarely lasted more than
a few centuries, it is not obvious, therefore, that one can find deep continuities from
precolonial indigenous institutions to contemporary, postcolonial institutions. Moreover,
if representative institutions are a European invention, how can one trace it to indigenous
institutions outside of Europe? In Table 6, we demonstrate that, outside Europe and after
controlling for the influence of European colonization, indigenous institutions are still
associated with contemporary institutions. Columns (1)-(3) control for a set of plausible
determinants of European colonization; columns (4)-(10) control for indicators of different

                                             24
colonial experiences. Political influence is proxied by luminosity in Panel A; proximity
to the capital in Panel B; and settlement complexity in Panel C. The three proxies yield
qualitatively identical results.



                                         [Table 6 about here]



The first column adds a control for precolonial state development. Hariri (2012) shows
that precolonial state development was an historical impediment to the development of
democracy, because of the way it shaped European colonization. If local democracy was an
obstacle to political centralization (cf., e.g., Ertman 1997, 22) and political centralization
was an historical obstacle to the transmission of institutions and ideals from Europe, this
could be driving our findings. Column (1) shows, however, that the result is robust to
comparing countries at similar levels of precolonial state development.
       Much work has established that geographical factors can shape (indigenous) institu-
tional choices (e.g., Alsan 2013; Bentzen et al. 2012) as well as colonial experiences (e.g.,
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001; Nunn and Puga 2012). Controlling for a set
of geographical variables in column (2), however, leaves the coefficients on local democ-
racy and local democracy interacted with light density positive and highly statiscally
significant. Controlling for precolonial population density in column (3) (cf. Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson 2002) does not affect the parameter of interest.
       Columns (4)-(6) include, in turn, a dummy for countries that were colonized, colonial
duration, and a set of colonizer fixed effects. None of these controls change the coefficients
of interest. In column (7) we control for the extent of ’indirect rule’ in colonial governance.
Under indirect rule, colonial powers ruled through existing institutions, which often rein-
forced the traditional authority structures (e.g., Boone 2003) or destroyed participatory,
traditional institutions (e.g., Ashton 1947; Mamdani 1996).33 As expected, the extent
33
     Matthew Lange (2004) proposed to measure indirect rule by the number of colonially recognized
     customary court cases divided by the total number of court cases. The idea is that colonial powers
     would not recognize customary courts under direct rule, but rather implement a uniform legal system



                                                    25
of indirect colonial rule is negatively associated with contemporary democracy. But the
coefficients on indigenous democracy remain positive and highly significant in Panels A-C.
    Column (8) in Table 6 zooms in on European settler colonies, defined as former colonies
where at least 10 percent of the population is of European descent. This definition yields
22 settler colonies. For this group of countries, there was no association between indige-
nous institutions and national institutions. This is unsurprising. To take but one example,
the founding fathers at the Constitutional Convention in Philidelphia were influenced by
Enlightenment ideals, not indigenous American institutions. Column (9) shows that all
results obtain when settlement colonies are excluded. Column (10), finally, includes an
interaction between European settlement and indigenous democracy. The negative co-
efficient shows that European settlement significantly weakens the association between
indigenous institutions and contemporary institutions.



7     Robustness

The model in column (1), Table 7, excludes countries in Europe as well as the Euro-
pean offshoots (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the USA). If the link from early
institutions to national democracy is particular to Europe (as argued by, e.g., Downing
(1992, 18ff) and consistent with Figure 2), these countries could be driving the finding.
This does not seem to be the case, though. For all three measures of political power,
the conclusion remains; indigenous democracy in politically strong societies is positively
associated with current democracy levels, also outside Europe and neo-Europe.



                                        [Table 7 about here]
 based on metropolitan laws. Under indirect rule, however, the colonial legal system would incorporate
 the indigenous legal structure. In our sample this measure unfortunately only exists for 20 former
 colonies, but because the form of colonial rule varied very systematically with the number of settlers
 (Lange 2004, 908; Gerring et al. 2011, 388), we used our measures of settlement to predict the extent
 of indirect rule for the countries with missing values. While this is a crude measure of indirect rule, we
 should emphasize that we reach the same conclusion for the 20-country sample with Lange’s original
 measure as with the imputed measure of indirect rule.



                                                   26
The historical span of the data in the Ethnographic Atlas is wide: The first percentile is
year 1570 BC; the 99th is 1960. In columns (2) and (3) we exclude in turn the earliest
decile (1860) and latest decile (1950) to see if the basic conclusion obtains also for a more
temporally focused sample. We exclude societies recorded early since early information is
presumably less precise and because the assumption that ethnographic societies have not
relocated since they were coded in the Atlas seems more demanding for these societies.
Excluding the late decile is more a check for reverse causality, which should be more
of an issue among the societies where the ethnographic information was recorded later.
Columns (2) and (3) show that our results are robust to excluding these societies.
   Finally, in columns (4) and (5), we exclude influential observations. DFBETA mea-
sures the difference in the estimated coefficient for local democracy when a country is
included and when it is excluded from the sample. Following Besley, Kuh, and Welsch
                                                                                √
(1980, 28), the model in column (4) omits the countries for which |DFBETAi | >2/ n,
where n is the number of observations. The model in column (5) excludes all high-leverage
countries. In both cases, the coefficient on local democracy remains positive and significant
as does the light density-interaction. As shown in Panel B, for all controls and sample
manipulations, the basic conclusion obtains also when political influence is proxied by
relative proximity to the capital.
   Table 8 compares countries at similar levels of a number of common correlates of
democracy. Lipset (1959, 80) found that “economic development carries with it the po-
litical correlate of democracy??, while Acemoglu et al. (2008) found that this association
dissapears once country-fixed effects are controlled for. Nevertheless, it is possible that
indigenous democracy is associated with modern representative democracy across coun-
tries because it fostered economic development. Yet column (1) shows that the basic
association is robust to controlling contemporary economic development.



                                     [Table 8 about here]




                                             27
Protestant Christianity has been argued to be particularly conducive to democracy (e.g.,
Bruce 2006), and Islam is commonly argued to be particularly inimical to democracy
(e.g., Huntington 1993, 40). If Protestant individualism was conducive to participatory
political institutions at both a local and a national level (and Islam the opposite), the
association we have uncovered would be spurious, driven by culture. Column (2), however,
rejects this view: If anything the association is strengthened when the influence of religion
is partialled out.
    Column (3) controls for societal heterogeneity, which is commonly seen as inimical to
democracy. If countries with a higher proportion of democratic indigenous societies are
more homogenous, this would bias upwards the estimated coefficients. Column (3) shows
that this is not the case, however. Lastly, column (4) controls for natural resources. At all
levels of political order, the availability of natural resource rents raises the cost of sharing
power. Yet as shown in column (4), this does not drive our basic conclusion.
    Panels A, B, and C in Table 8 thus show that whether we proxy political influence
by economic current wealth, proximity to the capital, or historical societal density, the
basic association between indigenous democracy and national representative institutions
is robust to controlling for indicators of a set of alternative theories of the causes and
correlates of democracy.



8     Endogeneity Concerns

The rules for leadership selection were not assigned randomly across indigenous groups,
and the coefficients presented are thus more properly seen as conditional correlations than
causal estimates. There are two challenges to causal identification here: National insti-
tutions may shape indigenous institutions (reverse causation), and unobservable omitted
factors may confound the association between the two. Beginning with the first, many
scholars have documented instances where dynamics at the state-level shape indigenous
institutions. One example is Mahmood Mamdani’s important Citizen and Subject (1996),


                                              28
which shows how the colonial and postcolonial state in Africa transformed traditional
authority. The public assembly, for example, “was turned into a forum where decisions
were announced but not debated” (Mamdani 1996, 46). While many such examples can
be found,34 reverse causation does not in our view adequately account for the findings
presented above. For reverse causation to account for our findings would require that
national institutions only shape the indigenous institutions in stronger groups and have
no effect on the institutions in weaker indigenous units. As well, our three proxies for the
strenght of indigenous units are essentially orthogonal.35 This means that – while one
can easily imagine that national institutions shaped the institutions of groups located
closer to the capital compared to those further away – reverse causation requires that
national institutions should affect indigenous institutions in the vicinity of the capital and
in economically developed areas and in groups with higher historical settlement density
– but not elsewhere. Rationalizing such a “selective effect” of national institutions on
indigenous institutions is not straightfoward. Moreover, it should be remembered that
the data on indigenous societies were collected to reflect each unit’s indigenous traits and
thus be independent of state-level influence (or the influence from, e.g., colonists).
     Turning to the problem of omitted variables, the analyses above showed the associ-
ation between indigenous - and contemporary democracy to be robust to a broad set
of observable potential confounders. The obvious limitation is that we cannot observe
unobservables and cannot assess their confounding effects. To understand if unobserved
confounding could be driving our findings, we used the Generalized Sensitivity Analysis
developed by Imbens (2003) and Harada (2013), depicted in Figure 3. This method sim-
ulates unobserved variables and asks how influential such variables would have to be in
order to substantively change the estimated association between indigenous democracy
34
   For example, Jerome Blum (1971a, 586ff) documented how the central governments in medieval Eng-
   land, Saxony, and Northwest Germany weakened the village community through well-meaning policies
   of Bauernschutz (peasant protection). In a recent and interesting literature, local pockets of authori-
   tarianism in otherwise democratic countries are also explained from central dynamics (e.g., Gervasoni
   2010; Gibson 2005; Giraudy 2012).
35
   Across the 869 societies where data is available for the three proxies for political strength, proximity
   to the capital correlates 0.03 with (log 0.01+) light intensity and -0.36 with settlement complexity.
   Settlement complexity and light intensity correlates at -0.03.


                                                    29
and contemporary democracy.



               Figure 3: The Potential Influence of Unobserved Confounders




Notes. The figure shows the results of a generalized sensitivity analysis (Imbens 2003; Harada 2013).
The plusses represent the covariates that were included when we estimated the association between
indigenous democracy and contemporary democracy. These covariates are plotted according to their
partial association with the dependent variable (contemporary democracy) on the vertical axis and with
the regressor of interest (indigenous democracy) on the horizontal axis. The downwarding sloping curve
shows how much a covariate (observed or unobserved) should be correlated with both indigenous and
contemporary democracy in order to halve the observed association.


The downward sloping curve in Figure 3 shows the required partial association between an
unobserved factor and contemporary democracy (vertical axis) and indigenous democracy
(horizontal axis) that would cut the coefficient of interest in half. The figure shows that
an unobserved factor should explain more than twice as much of the variation in both
indigenous and contemporary democracy than do our most influential observed covariates.
Thus, it would have to be more influential than ’close’ (an indicator for societies located
within 400 kilometers of the capital), which is correlated with indigenous democracy by

                                                 30
construction. It would also have to be much more influential than any of the existing
theories of democracy pertaining to, e.g., GDP per capita, European language fraction
or societies’ (average) distance to the ocean. This strikes us as unlikely.
    The Generalized Sensitivity Analysis does not rule out that omitted variables could
explain our findings. It does show, however, that we would have to assume a very strong
unobserved confounding effect for an unobservable factor to substantively change our
findings. We performed a similar analysis to see if omitted variables could turn the esti-
mated association insignificant at a ten percent level. The conclusion here was the same:
The omitted variable in question would have to be much more strongly correlated with in-
digenous and contemporary democracy than any of the theoretically motivated variables
considered thus far.



9     Conclusion

This article has documented a substantial and robust association between indigenous
political institutions and contemporary national regimes: Territories where indigenous
groups selected their leaders through elections or consensus are more likely to be demo-
cratic countries today. However, this basic association was conditioned on the relative
strength of the indigenous groups within a country; stronger groups seem to have been
able to shape national regime trajectories, weaker groups have not.
    At the broadest level, our findings document the weight of history in explaining con-
temporary political outcomes and suggest that we ought to be careful to avoid accounting
for these only by processes developing since the beginning of modernity. Moreover, in ad-
dition to colonial history and historical European influence, our results show that indige-
nous history seems to have shaped the contemporary spread of democracy. Some observers
have seen in Chinese village democracy a model for national democracy in China (e.g.,
Financial Times, January 30, 2013). Yet our results suggest caution here: Subnational
institutions do not seem to translate into national institutions unless the subnational


                                             31
group in question is powerful enough to impose its institutions on the country as a whole.
   While we have emphasized the role of history, we do not want to suggest historical de-
terminism in political regime developments. Our argument is clearly not that democracy
cannot become consolidated in countries that did not have proto-democratic indigenous
institutions. While the evidence suggests that indigenous institutions are an indepen-
dently important factor in explaining contemporary regimes – it is not the only factor,
nor is it the principal one.
   This article has presented three ways in which proto-democratic indigenous insti-
tutions might shape subsequent regime developments. Future research should focus on
tracing empirically the mediating mechanisms that link countries’ national institutions
to their indigenous ones.




                                           32
References

[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial
   Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Eco-
   nomic Review, 91 (5): 1369-1401.

[2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson (2002):“Reversal of For-
   tune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Dis-
   tribution”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (4): 1231-1294.

[3] Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James A. Robinson (2014): “Chiefs: Economic
   Development and Elite Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone”, Journal of Political
   Economy, 122 (2): 319-368.

[4] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A Robinson, and Pierre Yared (2008):
   “Income And Democracy”, American Economic Review 98 (3): 808-842.

[5] Ades, Alberto F. and Edward L. Glaeser (1995): “Trade and Circuses: Explaining
   Urban Giants”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (1): 195-227.

[6] Alence, Rod (2004): “Political Institutions and Developmental Governance in Sub-
   Saharan Africa”, The Journal of Modern African Studies, 42 (2): 163-187.

[7] Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gen-
   der Roles: Women and the Plough”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2):
   469-530.

[8] Ashton, E.H. (1947): “Democracy and Indirect Rule”, Africa: Journal of the Inter-
   national African Institute, 17(4): 235-251.

[9] Bates, Robert H. (1981): Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Political Basis
   of Agricultural Policies. University of California Press.




                                          33
[10] Bates, Robert H. and Donald Lien (1985): “A Note on Taxation, Development and
    Representative Government”, Politics and Society 14: 53-70.

[11] Bentzen, Jeanet, Nicolai Kaarsen, and Asger Wingender (2012): “Irrigation and Au-
    tocracy”, Discussion Papers 12-06, University of Copenhagen.

[12] Besley, David A., Edwin Kuh and Roy E. Welsch (1980): Regression Diagnostics:
    Idenifying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. John Wiley and Sons.

[13] Blockmans, W.P. (1978): “A Typology of Representative Institutions in Late Me-
    dieval Europe”, Journal of Medieval History, 4 (1978): 189-215.

[14] Blum, Jerome (1971a): “The Internal Structure and Polity of the European Village
    Community”, The Journal of Modern History, 43(4): 541-576.

[15] Blum, Jerome (1971b): “The European Village as Community: Origins and Func-
    tions”, Agricultural History, 45(3): 157-178.

[16] Boone, Catherine (2003): Political Topographies of the African State. Territorial
    Authority and Institutional Choice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[17] Bratton, Michael and Nicolas van de Walle (1994): “Neopatrimonial Regimes and
    Political Transitions in Africa”, World Politics, 46 (4): 453-489.

[18] Bruce, Steve (2006): “Did Protestantism Create Democracy?”, Democratization,
    11(4): 3-20.

[19] Campante, Filipe R., Quoc-Anh Do, Bernando V. Guimaraes (2013): “Isolated Cap-
    ital Cities and Misgovernance: Theory and Evidence”.

[20] Chabal, Patrick (1986): Political Domination in Africa: Reflections of the Limits of
    Power. Cambridge University Press.

[21] Cheibub, Jose Antonio; Jennifer Gandhi; James Raymond Vreeland (2009): “Democ-
    racy and Dictatorship Revisited”, Public Choice 143 (1-2): 67-101.

                                           34
[22] Crone, Patricia (1986): “The Tribe and the State” John A. Hall (ed.): States in
    History. New York: Basil Blackwell Inc. pp. 48-77.

[23] Dahl, Robert A. (1957): “The Concept of Power”, Behavioral Science, 2(3): 201-215.

[24] Dahl, Robert A. (2000): On Democracy, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

[25] Dahl, Robert Alan and Edward R. Tufte (1973): Size and Democracy. Stanford
    University Press.

[26] Dell, Melissa (2000): “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita”, Econometrica,
    78(6):1863-1903.

[27] Diamond, Larry J., Jonathan Hartlyn, Juan Linz, and Seymour Martin Lipset (eds.)
    (1989): Democracy in Developing Countries: Latin America. New York: W. W. Nor-
    ton and Company, Inc.

[28] Diamond, Jared M. (1997): Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies.
    New York: W. W. Norton and Company, Inc.

[29] Downing, Brian M. (1988): “Constitutionalism, Warfare, and Political Change in
    Early Modern Europe”. Theory and Society, 17(1): 7-56.

[30] Downing, Brian M. (1989): “Medieval Origins of Constitutional Government in the
    West” Theory and Society, 18(2): 213-247.

[31] Downing, Brian M. (1992): The Military Revolution and Political Change: Origins
    of Democracy and Autocracy in Early Modern Europe. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press.

[32] Elkin, Stephen L. (1987): City and Regime in the American Republic. Chicago, IL:
    The University of Chicago Press.




                                          35
[33] Engleberg, Pierre, Stacy Tarango, and Matthew Carter (2002): “Dismemberment
    and Suffocation. A Contribution to the Debate on African Boundaries”, Comparative
    Political Studies 35(10): 1093-1118.

[34] Ertman, Thomas (1997): Birth of the Leviathan: Building States and Regimes in
    Medieval and Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[35] Esposito, John L., and John O. Voll (1996): Islam and Democracy. Oxford University
    Press

[36] Finer, Samuel E. (1997): The History of Government from the Earliest Times. Ox-
    ford: Oxford University Press.

[37] Fortes, Meyer and E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1940): African Political Systems. Oxford
    University Press.

[38] Garcia-Ponce, Omar and Leonard Wantchekon (2013): “Critical Junctures: Indepen-
    dence Movements and Democracy in Africa?”, Centre for Competitive Advantage in
    the Global Economy (CAGE) Working Paper 173.

[39] Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Cen-
    tralization in Africa”, Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3): 185-234.

[40] Gilley, Bruce (2013): “Democratic Enclaves in Authoritarian Regimes”, Democrati-
    zation, 17(3): 389-415.

[41] Giraudy, Agustina (2012): “Varieties of Subnational Undemocratic Regimes: Evi-
    dence from Argentina and Mexico”. Studies in Comparative International Develop-
    ment 48(1): 51-80 .

[42] Gerring, John, Daniel Ziblatt, Johan Van Gorp, and Julian Arevalo (2011): “An
    Institutional Theory of Direct and Indirect Rule”, World Politics 63 (3): 377-433.




                                           36
[43] Gervasoni, Carlos (2010): “A Rentier Theory of Subnational Regimes: Fiscal Federal-
    ism, Democracy, and Authoritarianism in the Argentine Provinces”, World Politics,
    62 (2): 302-340.

[44] Gibson, Edward L. (2005): “Boundary Control: Subnational Authoritarianism in
    Democratic Countries”, World Politics, 58(1): 101-132.

[45] Gray, J. Patrick (1999): “A Corrected Ethnographic Atlas”, World Cultures, 10(1):
    24-85.

[46] Giuliano, Paola and Nathan Nunn (2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From
    the Village to the Nation-State”, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceed-
    ings, 103(3): 86-92.

[47] Hansen, Mogens Herman (2010). “Introduction”, pp. vii-xxxviii in Démocratie
    Athénienne – Démocratie Moderne: Tradition et Influences. Geneve: Entretiens sur
    L’Antiquité Classique 56.

[48] Harada, Masataka (2013): “Generalized Sensitivity Analysis and Application to
    Quasi-experiments”.

[49] Hariri, Jacob Gerner (2012): “The Authocratic Legacy of Early Statehood”, Amer-
    ican Political Science Review 106(3): 471-494.

[50] Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil (2012): “Measuring
    Economic Growth From Outer Space”, American Economic Review, 102(2): 994-
    1028.

[51] Herbst, Jeffrey (2000): States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority
    and Control. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[52] Hoffman, Philip T. and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (1997): “Divided We Fall: The Polit-
    ical Economy of Warfare and Taxation”, Mimeo, California Institute of Technology.


                                           37
[53] Hui, Victoria (2004): “Toward a Dynamic Theory of International Politics: Insights
    from Comparing Ancient China and Early Modern Europe”, International Organi-
    zation, 58(1): 175-205.

[54] Huntington, Samuel P. (1993): “The Clash of Civilizations?”, Foreign Affairs, 72 (3):
    22-49.

[55] Imbens, Guido W. (2003): “Sensitivity to Exogeneity Assumptions in Program Eval-
    uation”, The American Economic Review, 93 (2): 126-132.

[56] Jakobsen, Uffe (2010): “Inventions and Developments of Democracy: The Approach
    of Conceptual History”, European Political Science, 9(3): 316-327.

[57] Lange, Matthew (2004): “British Colonial Legacies and Political Development”,
    World Development, 32 (6): 905-922.

[58] Levi, Margaret (1988): Of Rule and Revenue, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
    of California Press, Ltd.

[59] Lewis, I. M. (1961): A pastoral democracy. A Study of Pastoralism and Politics
    Among the Northern Somali of the Horn of Africa, LIT Verlag Mnster.

[60] Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959): “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic
    Development and Political Legitimacy”, The American Political Science Review, 53
    (1): 69-105.

[61] Mamdani, Mahmood (1996): Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the
    Legacy of Late Colonialism. Princeton University Press

[62] Marongiu, Antonio (1968): Medieval Parliaments: A Comparative Study. London:
    Eyre & Spottiswoode Ltd.

[63] Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2011): “Divide and Rule Or the Rule
    of the Divided? Evidence from Africa”, NBER Working Paper 17184.


                                           38
[64] Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institu-
    tions and Contemporary African Development”, Econometrica, 81(1): 113-152.

[65] Moore, Barrington (1966): Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and
    Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon Press.

[66] Muhlberger, Steven and Phil Paine (1993): “Democracy’s Place in World History”,
    Journal of World History, 4 (1).

[67] Murdock, George Peter (1967): Ethnographic atlas. University of Pittsburgh Press.

[68] Murdock, George Peter and Douglas R. White (1969): “Standard Cross-Cultural
    Sample”, Ethnology 8(4): 329-369.

[69] Myers, A. R. (1975): Parliaments and Estates in Europe. To 1789. London: Thames
    and Hudson.

[70] North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989): “Constitutions and Commitment:
    The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-century Eng-
    land”, Journal of Economic History, 49 (4): 803-832.

[71] North, Douglass C. (1990): Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Perfor-
    mance, Cambridge University Press.

[72] Narizny, Kevin (2012): “Anglo-American Primacy and the Global Spread of Democ-
    racy: An International Genealogy”, World Politics, 64(2): 341-373.

[73] Nunn, Nathan and Diego Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography
    in Africa”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 94 (1): 20-36.

[74] Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins
    of Mistrust in Africa”, American Economic Review, 101(7): 3221-52.

[75] Olsson, Ola and Gustav Hanson (2011): “Country size and the rule of law: Resusci-
    tating Montesquieu”, European Economic Review, 55(5): 613-629.

                                          39
[76] Page, Scott (2006): “Path Dependence”, Quarterly Journal of Political Science, (1):
    87-115.

[77] Peregrine, Peter N. (2003): “Atlas of Cultural Evolution”, World Cultures 14(1):
    2-88.

[78] Potholm, Christian (1970): Four African Political Systems. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
    Prentice-Hall.

[79] Przeworski, Adam (2010): Democracy and the Limits of Self-Government. New York:
    Cambridge University Press.

[80] Przeworski, Adam; Michael M. Alvarez; José Antonio Cheibub; and Fernando
    Limongi (2000): Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Well-Being
    in the World, 1950-1990. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[81] Sabetti, Filipo (2004): “Local Roots of Constitutionalism”, Perspectives on Political
    Science, 3(2): 70-78.

[82] Schapera, Isaac (1967): Government and Politics in Tribal Societies, New York:
    Schocken Books.

[83] Sen, Amartya. (2003): “Democracy and Its Global Roots”, The New Republic, Oc-
    tober 6 2003.

[84] Simon, Herbert A. (1953): “Notes on the Observation and Measurement of Political
    Power”, The Journal of Politics, 15(4): 500-516.

[85] Spruyt, Hendrik (1994): The Sovereign State and Its Competitors. Princeton, New
    Jersey: Princeton University Press.

[86] Stasavage, David (2003): Public Debt and the Birth of the Modern Democratic State:
    France and Great Britain, 1688-1789. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                           40
[87] Stasavage, David (2010): “When Distance Mattered: Geographic Scale and Devel-
    opment of European Representative Assemblies”, The American Political Science
    Review, 104(4): 625-643.

[88] Steponaitis, Vincas P. (1981): “Settlement Hierarchies and Political Complexity in
    Nonmarket Societies: The Formative Period of the Valley of Mexico”, American
    Anthropologist, 83 (2): 320-363.

[89] Tilly, Charles (1975): “Western-State Making and Theories of Political Transfor-
    mation”, in C. Tilly (ed.): The Formation of National States in Western Europe.
    Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[90] Waltz, Kenneth Neal (1979): Theory of International Politics, Reading: Addison-
    Wesley Pub. Co.

[91] Wittfogel, Karl A. (1957): Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power,
    Yale University Press.




                                          41
            Table 1. Succession to the Office of the Local Headman
                                                                   Obs
               Patrilineal heir                                    408
               Matrilineal heir                                    101
               Appointment by higher authority                      42
               Senority or age                                      28
               Influence, wealth or social status                   42
               Election or other formal consensus                  100
               Informal consensus                                   87
               Absence of any such office                          102
               Total                                               910
               Source. The variable is constructed from variables v276
               from the SCCS and v72 from the Ethnographic Atlas.




Table 2. OLS-Regressions of Contemporary Democracy on Indigenous Democracy
                                 (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)        (5)
                                 Dependent variable is mean polity2 1990-2010

        Indigenous democracy   3.96***   2.91**    2.90**     2.71*     1.56
                                (1.43)    (1.36)    (1.35)   (1.42)    (1.41)
        Absolute latitude                0.11***   0.12***   0.12**   0.11***
                                          (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.00)
        Year                                         0.00      0.00     -0.00
                                                    (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)
        Societal complexity                                    0.15      0.20
                                                             (0.35)    (0.32)

        Region FE                   No        No         No       No         Yes
        Observations               106        106       106      106         106
        R-squared                  0.07      0.16       0.16     0.16       0.43
        Notes. All models include a constant term.
        The regions included in column (5) are sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, Europe,
        North America, and the Middle East and North Africa.
        Robust standard errors in parentheses.
        ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                          42
                 Table 3. Contemporary and Indigenous Democracy Interacted with Distance from the Capital
                                                                      Distance, d, from the capital (in kilometers)
                                               1000      900      800     700        600      500        400       300        200       100
                                       (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)        (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)
     Panel A                                                       Dependent variable: Mean polity2 1990-2010

     Indigenous democracy             2.70*
                                      (1.44)
     Indigenous democracy within               3.65**   3.63**   4.17***   4.83***   5.01***   5.83***   6.43***   5.44***   5.14***   5.10***
      d distance from capital                  (1.53)   (1.55)    (1.41)    (1.51)    (1.52)    (1.45)    (1.41)    (1.51)    (1.62)    (1.83)
                                                [515]    [485]     [454]     [411]     [370]     [307]     [251]     [186]     [120]      [48]
     Indigenous democracy outside               0.03     0.39      -3.23     -3.22     -3.29     -3.34     -2.94      0.28     1.26       2.48
      d distance from capital                  (8.80)   (8.27)    (7.21)    (4.67)    (4.44)    (2.92)    (2.43)    (2.79)    (2.73)    (1.87)
                                                [356]    [386]     [417]     [460]     [501]     [564]     [620]     [685]     [751]     [825]

     Region FE                         No       No       No        No        No        No        No        No        No        No        No
43




     Observations                     106       106      106      106     106       106      106       106          106       106       106
     R-squared                        0.23      0.23     0.23     0.24    0.25      0.25     0.29      0.32         0.25      0.24      0.23
     Panel B                                                       Dependent variable: Mean polity2 1990-2010

     Indigenous democracy              2.02
                                      (1.47)
     Local democracy    within                  2.20      2.25   3.02**    3.59**    3.46**    3.68***   4.30***   3.68**    3.38**    3.57*
      d distance from   capital                (1.48)   (1.49)   (1.32)    (1.51)    (1.49)     (1.38)    (1.33)   (1.44)    (1.58)    (1.94)
     Local democracy    outside                 -1.77    -2.30    -6.73     -4.32     -3.57      -2.49     -2.78    -0.50     0.19      1.14
      d distance from   capital                (7.80)   (7.48)   (5.69)    (3.77)    (3.66)     (3.15)    (2.44)   (2.63)    (2.46)    (1.90)

     Region FE                         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes

     Observations                        106      106      106     106        106     106        106       106       106       106      106
     R-squared                           0.47     0.47     0.47    0.49       0.49    0.48       0.50      0.52      0.48      0.47     0.47
     Notes. All models include a constant term, controls for absolute latitude, timing (the average year to which the ethnographic
     information in a country pertains), average societal complexity in a country, country size (log), average distance to the coast from
     each ethnographic society (log), and the share of societies located “close” to the capital city according to the particular cutoff
     level (the latter variable is not included in col 1). The number of ethnographic societies with non-missing headman and non-missing
     polity2-score within distance d of the capital are in square brackets. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
     ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
       Table 4. Contemporary and Indigenous Democracy Varying the degree of Settlement Complexity
                                                               Level of settlement complexity, c
                                    Semi-       Semi-       Compact,       Dispersed     Single     Compact         Complex
                                   nomadic    sedentary   impermanent homesteads community permanent               settlement
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)         (6)              (7)
     Panel A                                              Dependent variable: Mean polity2 1990-2010

     Indigenous democracy with      2.70*      3.88***       3.89***        3.83***       3.17**       4.21***          3.28
       complexity level >= c        (1.52)      (1.47)        (1.42)         (1.41)       (1.49)        (1.59)         (4.28)
     Indigenous democracy with       -1.02       -2.22         -0.90          -0.48        1.11          -1.71          2.31
       complexity level < c         (4.10)      (3.77)        (3.80)         (3.88)       (3.94)        (3.53)         (1.46)

     Region FE                        No         No            No             No            No            No            No
44




     Observations                    106         106          106            106          106        106               106
     R-squared                       0.17        0.18         0.17           0.17         0.16       0.18              0.18
     Panel B                                              Dependent variable: Mean polity2 1990-2010

     Indigenous democracy with       1.42        2.81         3.01*          3.08*          2.51        3.60**          0.98
       complexity level >= c        (1.50)      (1.70)        (1.58)         (1.56)        (1.69)       (1.72)         (3.76)
     Indigenous democracy with       -1.76       -3.06         -2.43          -2.06         -2.47       -4.13*          1.69
       complexity level < c         (2.62)      (3.36)        (3.16)         (2.91)        (2.26)       (2.35)         (1.46)

     Region FE                       Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes

     Observations                     106       106            106              106           106        106           106
     R-squared                       0.45       0.44           0.44            0.45           0.45       0.46          0.43
     Notes. All models include a constant term, controls for absolute latitude, timing (the average
     year to which the ethnographic information in a country pertains), average societal complexity in a country,
     and the share of societies above complexity level c as a share of all societies within a country
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
Table 5. Contemporary and Indigenous Democracy: Luminosity Interactions
                                         Mean polity2 1990-2010
                                        (1)     (2)         (3)

             Indigenous democracy      3.24**   3.28**       2.36*
                                       (1.37)   (1.35)      (1.34)
             Indigenous democracy     1.37***   1.36**      1.14**
              × light density          (0.47)   (0.53)      (0.49)
             Light density              0.28     0.02        0.46
                                       (0.37)   (0.39)      (0.44)

             Regional FE                No       No          Yes
             Baseline controls          No       Yes         Yes

             Observations                 106      106         106
             R-squared                   0.16      0.20        0.47
             Notes. All models include a constant term. ’Baseline
             controls’ refers to latitude, timing (the average year to
             which the ethnographic information in a country
             pertains), and average societal complexity in a country.
             Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *
             indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                       45
                                                        Table 6. Indigenous Roots and colonialism
                                               (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)
     Panel A                                                             Political influence proxied by    economic   activity
     Indigenous democracy                    3.98**    4.13** 4.41*** 4.71*** 4.52** 4.84***               5.06***     -0.52   6.11***    5.39***
                                             (1.61)    (1.70)    (1.64)   (1.72)      (1.73)   (1.77)       (1.66)    (1.53)    (2.01)     (1.97)
     Indigenous democracy x light density    1.50**    1.71** 1.79*** 2.02*** 1.81*** 1.91***              2.08***     0.18    2.57***    2.04***
                                             (0.61)    (0.71)    (0.65)   (0.63)      (0.62)   (0.63)       (0.62)    (0.53)    (0.76)     (0.62)
     Precolonial state development            -2.29
                                             (2.09)
     p-value for geographical controls                 [0.16]
     Population density 1500                                      0.07
                                                                 (0.07)
     Colony                                                                   -0.47
                                                                             (1.90)
     p-value for colonizer FE                                                           [0.91]
     Colonial duration                                                                           0.01***
                                                                                                  (0.00)
     Indirect rule                                                                                           -3.41
                                                                                                            (2.17)
46




     Indigenous democracy x settle                                                                                                         -4.44*
                                                                                                                                           (2.39)
     Settlement colonies                                                                                                                    3.49
                                                                                                                                           (3.74)

     R-squared                                0.45      0.51      0.46         0.43       0.43     0.49      0.46     0.93       0.34      0.44
     Panel B                                                             Political influence proxied by proximity to the capital

     Indigenous democracy within            4.64***    4.54**   5.17***     4.63*** 5.42*** 5.04** 5.04*** 2.48               6.16***     5.36**
       400 km. of capital                    (1.68)    (1.83)    (1.75)      (1.72)      (1.85)   (1.95)    (1.78) (1.67)      (2.05)     (2.08)
     Indigenous democracy outside             -2.66     -3.15     -3.73       -3.12       -2.76    -2.32     -2.77    -6.32     -4.32      -2.25
       400 km. of capital                    (3.15)    (2.77)    (2.82)      (2.92)      (3.01)   (3.15)    (2.97) (3.62)      (3.29)     (3.16)
     Panel C                                                               Political influence proxied by societal complexity

     Indigenous democracy in                    4.06** 4.65*** 4.19** 4.92** 5.19** 6.14*** 5.08**                    0.24    6.60***        5.09**
       compact or complex soc                   (1.98)    (1.75)   (1.88)    (2.06)    (2.01)    (2.06)    (2.01) (1.39)       (2.48)        (2.33)
     Indigenous democracy in                     -3.68    -4.59*    -3.73    -3.99*     -3.28   -4.73** -4.15*       -2.72    -7.10**         -3.30
       less than compact soc                    (2.47)    (2.36)   (2.27)    (2.38)    (2.28)    (2.35)    (2.27) (2.04)       (2.88)        (2.71)
     Observations                                  91       93        91       94         96       90        93        22        74             96
     Region FE                                    Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes            Yes
     Sample                                       Full     Full      Full     Full       Full     Full      Full    Settle non-settle          Full
     Notes. All models include a constant term, controls for latitude, timing (the average year to which the ethnographic information in a country
     pertains), and average societal complexity in a country. The geographical controls in column (2) are ruggedness, average temperature, average
     precipitation, a dummy for landlocked countries, and share of the country area located within 100 km of the coast. The colonizer fixed effects in
     column (5) are dummies for English, French, Portuguese, Spanish, and other European colonies. The model specifications in Panels A, B, and C
     are identical except that political influence is proxied by wealth in panel A; proximity to the capital in panel B, and societal complexity in C.
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
     Table 7. Robustness With Respect to Sample and Influential Observations
                                             Dependent variable is mean polity2 1990-2010

                                  Excl. Europe          Excl.       Excl.      Excl.       Excl.
                                 and neo-Europe early decile late decile DFBETA Leverage
                                       (1)               (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)
Panel A                                   Political influence proxied by economic activity

Indigenous democracy                 4.44**             2.12       2.50*       2.32*        3.21**
                                      (1.73)           (1.52)      (1.42)      (1.23)       (1.38)
Indigenous democracy                 1.89***           1.01*       1.09**      0.93**       1.07*
 × light density                      (0.62)           (0.60)      (0.50)      (0.39)       (0.62)
Light density                          0.31             0.37        0.46        0.52         0.49
                                      (0.47)           (0.49)      (0.45)      (0.42)       (0.45)

Regional FE                            Yes              Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Baseline controls                      Yes              Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes

Observations                            92              102          103          96           98
R-squared                              0.37             0.48         0.46        0.53        0.46
Panel B                                Political influence proxied by proximity to the capital

Indigenous democracy within          4.89***           4.29***      4.09***     3.61***     5.34***
  400 km. of capital                  (1.75)            (1.30)       (1.36)       (1.30)     (1.47)
Indigenous democracy outside           -2.94             -2.79        -2.08        -2.73      -1.20
  400 km. of capital                  (2.89)            (2.44)       (2.59)       (2.92)     (2.80)
Panel C                                   Political influence proxied by societal complexity

Indigenous democracy with             4.77**            3.12*       3.63**        2.28     5.11***
  complexity level >= 7                (2.12)          (1.82)       (1.67)      (1.62)      (1.79)
Indigenous democracy with               -3.97          -4.49*       -4.79*       -2.90       -3.32
  complexity level < 7                 (2.46)          (2.57)       (2.58)      (2.31)      (2.57)
Notes. All models include a constant term. Baseline controls refers to controls for latitude, timing
(the average year to which the ethnographic information in a country pertains), and average
societal complexity in a country. The models in Panels B and C are identical to those in Panel A,
except that Panel B controls for country size (log). The model in column (5) excludes
the 194 societes for which the information in the Ethnographic Atlas refers to years before 1860.
Column (6) excludes the 54 societies with information from after year 1950.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                                 47
                   Table 8. Controlling for Alternative Drivers of Democracy
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)
Panel A                                      Political influence proxied by economic activity
Indigenous democracy                       2.29*     2.94** 2.96**                2.35*
                                          (1.36)     (1.34)     (1.48)           (1.28)
Indigenous democracy x light density 1.15**          0.95*      1.17*            1.04**
                                          (0.48)     (0.50)     (0.65)           (0.49)
GDP per capita                             0.96*
                                          (0.56)
Protestant share                                      0.86
                                                     (4.50)
Muslim share                                          -2.95
                                                     (2.23)
Ethnic fractionalization                                         -1.33
                                                                (3.52)
Linguistic fractionalization                                      1.74
                                                                (3.30)
Religious fractionalization                                      -0.84
                                                                (2.33)
Oil (1000 barrels)                                                              -0.73**
                                                                                 (0.30)

R-squared                                0.50        0.50      0.49             0.52
Panel B                                 Political influence proxied by proximity to the capital

Indigenous democracy within             3.92*** 4.33*** 4.71***                 4.20***
  400 km. of capital                     (1.44)     (1.39)    (1.46)             (1.32)
Indigenous democracy outside              -3.25      -1.37     -1.86              -2.68
  400 km. of capital                     (2.22)     (2.48)    (2.72)             (2.40)
Panel C                                    Political influence proxied by societal complexity

Indigenous democracy in                   3.35*     3.38*     3.80**             3.20*
  compact or complex soc                 (1.71)     (1.85)     (1.87)            (1.70)
Indigenous democracy in                   -3.46      -1.81      -3.23             -3.64
  less than compact soc                  (2.38)     (2.62)     (3.13)            (2.42)
Regional FE                                Yes        Yes        Yes               Yes
Observations                               101        102        99                102
Notes. All models include controls for latitude, timing (the average year to which
the ethnographic information in a country pertains and the average societal complexity
in a country. All models include a constant term (not reported). Robust standard errors in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.




                                              48
                   Table A1. Summary statistics of main variables
Variable                                               Obs   Mean     Std.Dev.   Min      Max

Polity IV                                              106   2.787     5.570       -10     10
Indigenous democracy                                   106    0.263    0.350        0       1
Distance to capital city                               106    589.2    703.4      8.32    3946
Share of societies within 400 km of capital            106    0.563    0.389        0       1
Indigenous democracy within 400 km of capital          106   0.159     0.316        0       1
Indigenous democracy outside 400 km of capital         106   0.103     0.208        0       1
Societal complexity                                    106    5.540    1.665        1       8
Share of societies compact or complex                  106    0.575    0.351        0       1
Indigenous democracy in compact or complex societies   106    0.120    0.338        0       1
Indigenous democracy in less than compact societies    106   0.065     0.165        0       1
(log 1+) Light density at night                        106   -1.342    2.000     -4.605   2.932
Year                                                   106   1878.9   191.123     654     1958




                                            49
