                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CAUSAL EFFECTS OF MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT ON EDUCATION OUTCOMES
                  FOR YOUTH IN THE JUSTICE SYSTEM

                                        Alison Evans Cuellar
                                          Dhaval M. Dave

                                        Working Paper 21206
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21206


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2015




This study was supported by a grant from the MacArthur Foundation Models for Change Initiative
and from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Alison Evans Cuellar and Dhaval M. Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Causal Effects of Mental Health Treatment on Education Outcomes for Youth in the Justice
System
Alison Evans Cuellar and Dhaval M. Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 21206
May 2015
JEL No. I1,I21

                                              ABSTRACT

This study assesses whether mental health interventions can improve academic outcomes for justice-involved
youth. Only a limited number of studies have linked justice policies to outcomes beyond crime, particularly
education, which carries large monetary and non-monetary benefits. The current study relies on detailed
administrative data and unique policy rules under which youth are assigned to behavioral treatment
programs. The administrative data allow for a rich set of controls for observed family- and youth-specific
heterogeneity. In addition, the treatment assignment rules create a discontinuity among youth who
are deemed eligible or not eligible for treatment, rules which the study exploits empirically to address
the non-random selection bias in estimating plausibly causal effects of treatment eligibility and treatment
receipt. Estimates indicate that certain types of intensive mental health intervention can lower dropout
and increase high-school completion for justice-involved youth. Effects on grades are negative or
not significant, possibly due to the greater retention of less academically-skilled students. We also
assess heterogeneity in the treatment effects, and find that the effects on dropout tend to be greater
among youth believed to be less academically engaged prior to treatment.


Alison Evans Cuellar
Department of Health Administration and Policy
George Mason University
4400 University Drive, MS 1J3
Fairfax, VA 22030
and NBER
aevanscu@gmu.edu

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
I.     Introduction



       In 2010 juveniles accounted for 1.6 million non-traffic related arrests, ranging from

curfew violations to violent crimes (Sickmund and Puzzanchera, 2014). Youth in the juvenile

justice system typically are at least 10 years old and most are age 16 or 17. They have, by

definition, exhibited antisocial behaviors that lead them to the attention of the justice system. A

variety of adolescent intervention programs have been created which target criminal and

antisocial behaviors (Greenwood, 2008; Cuellar 2015). These programs stand in contrast to

broad, primary prevention approaches which target young children often before significant

problems emerge. In part, the debate surrounding the most effective policies centers on whether

adolescence is too late to improve the trajectory of anti-social behaviors or academic

achievement (Cook, et al. 2014).

       For youth with relatively significant mental health and behavior problems, who may have

a lengthy history of serious behavior and family troubles, particular programs have been

developed called multi-systemic therapy (MST) and functional family therapy (FFT). These

intervention programs are relatively intensive and costly, as much as $7,000 per treated youth.

Yet they have the potential to reduce social costs across a variety of dimensions, not only those

related to violent and property crimes, but also those associated with substance abuse, early teen

births, and low educational outcomes.

       Although MST and FFT can reduce criminal recidivism, their high cost has impeded

widespread program availability in the justice system, even to youth who would meet the

relatively stringent eligibility criteria based on individual mental health and social factors. One

possible reason is that the full extent of societal benefits from these programs has not been


                                                                                                      2"
"
explored. Broader and durable societal benefits could be achieved if MST and FFT affected

outcomes such as high school dropout and completion rates. Such improvements would have

long-lasting effects on employment, income and participation in social programs and, thus,

modify any cost-benefit calculus of the interventions.

       Multi-systemic Therapy (MST), Functional Family Therapy (FFT) and to a lesser extent

Aggression Replacement Training (ART) are among the most studied programs for youth in the

justice system. With these programs justice agencies seek to reduce recidivism and potentially

criminal behavior that could persist into adulthood. Thus, the focus of research on MST and FFT

has been largely on criminal outcomes. Indeed, there is some evidence that these programs

achieve reductions in recidivism. However, less well studied is their impact on academic success.

       This study assesses the short and medium-run academic benefits of mental health

treatment among a population of youth in the juvenile justice system, using rich administrative

data from Washington State and a unique policy rule under which youth are assigned to these

treatment interventions. We have extensive data on each youth allowing us to control for

observed differences in family and youth characteristics. In addition, the treatment assignment

rules in Washington create a discontinuity among youth who are deemed eligible or not eligible

for treatment, rules which we exploit empirically to address the non-random selection bias in

estimating plausibly causal effects of treatment eligibility. We are then able to deploy our rich

data and compare secondary education outcomes for these high-risk youth. Among education

outcomes we are able to observe secondary school completion, transfers, dropouts, suspensions,

and average grades, allowing us to assess the impact of mental health treatment across a range of

important measures of human capital acquisition.




                                                                                                    3"
"
       We find consistent evidence that FFT and MST, the more intensive mental health

treatment programs, have broader spillover benefits among high-risk youth. Specifically, both

the intent-to-treat and the treatment-on-the-treated effects for both of these programs are

significantly in the direction of reducing dropout rates and raising secondary school completion.

Assessment of heterogeneity in these treatment effects further confirms that these programs

improve educational outcomes even among the higher-risk individuals – those who had weaker

school engagement prior to their treatment screening.

       The rest of the study is laid out as follows. Section 2 reviews the previous literature

regarding mental health treatment for youth in the justice system and experiments to improve

their educational outcomes. Section 3 discusses our data and Section 4 outlines our empirical

approach in exploiting the natural experiment afforded by WA’s discontinuous eligibility

guidelines. The results are discussed in Section 5, followed by some policy implications in the

concluding section.

2.     Background

       Measuring the causal link between mental health treatment and education is a challenging

task, as a result of which many researchers have resorted to small-scale randomized trials of

treatments. We review relevant strands from two literatures, the first on several treatments that

have focused on youth in the justice system. In addition, we include studies that have focused on

educational outcomes among high-risk adolescents where behavior problems are also prevalent.

       Among the most intensive and costly programs for justice-involved youth is Multi-

Systemic Therapy. The Blueprints for Violence Prevention Initiative estimates the year-one cost




                                                                                                    4"
"
of two MST teams which could serve 132 families at $933,000 or $7,068 per family.1 MST

combines family-based and cognitive-behavioral therapies with a range of individualized support

services. MST therapists intervene with the family, peers, schools, and other treatment agencies

over a period lasting from 4 to 6 months. Treatment involves weekly home visits and typically

includes parent-focused behavior management and communication skills training as well as

collaborative links between families and school (Henggeler, et al, 1998). There is some

experimental evidence that MST reduces arrests and convictions relative to treatment as usual

(Littell, et al, 2005).

             Another intervention for youth with behavioral problems, conduct disorder, delinquency

and substance abuse is Functional Family Therapy, which although multi-faceted it is not as

intensive as MST (Littell, et al 2007). The Blueprints estimate for the year-one cost of FFT is

$1,679,000 or $2,080 per youth or family served.2 Families are trained to modify

communication that contributes delinquency and dysfunction, to negotiate more effectively, and

to set clear rules and responsibilities. The FFT intervention is highly structured and typically

lasts 3 months. It is designed to prevent further delinquency and violence by promoting

communication and enhancing support within the family. While longer term goals include lower

reduced recidivism, substance abuse and sibling criminal involvement, school outcomes are not

explicitly part of the formal intervention model3 although one might posit that greater problem-

solving and communication skills could lead to improvements in at least some education

outcomes. While earlier trials of FFT found reductions in reoffending, a more recent trial found

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
1"These estimates were accessed at
http://www.blueprintsprograms.com/programCosts.php?pid=cb4e5208b4cd87268b208e49452ed6e89a68e0b8"
2"These estimates were accessed at
http://www.blueprintsprograms.com/programCosts.php?pid=0a57cb53ba59c46fc4b692527a38a87c78d84028"
3"A logic model is provided by the Blueprints for Violence Prevention group at
http://www.blueprintsprograms.com/factSheet.php?pid=0a57cb53ba59c46fc4b692527a38a87c78d84028"

                                                                                                      5"
"
no differences between FFT and the control group with respect to reoffending (Sexton and

Turner, 2010).

       Separately, a natural experiment-based study of FFT was conducted in Washington State

which examined a specific sub-population of justice-involved youth, those who had been

incarcerated (Lucenko, et al 2011). A policy change occurred under which youth were released

from commitment facilities and received FFT in one year, but in the following year youth who

were released no longer received FFT due to budget cuts. Both groups were observed for 12

months after release from incarceration. The study used propensity score matching to compare

incarcerated youth before and after the program cut and finds that arrest rates declined, while

employment rates increased. The change in arrest and employment is attributed to FFT.

However, the study is not able to control for secular trends in youth crime or employment.

Potentially, a recession that led to both the JRA programmatic cut and lower availability of jobs

could confound the employment results while cuts in police or probation workforces could have

led to less crime detection over time and confounded the arrest results. Education outcomes were

not measured.

       Aggression Replacement Training (ART) has less empirical support than either MST or

FFT, but it is also less intensive, relies on a group therapy format, and last only 10 weeks

(Washington State Institute for Public Policy, 2004). ART teaches youths how to control their

angry impulses and take perspectives other than their own through moral reasoning with the goal

of reducing aggressive behavior and violence (Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency

Prevention). There is no explicit academic component or educational goal, although improved

peer and teacher relationships in school could conceivably lead to greater school success. One

study among justice-involved youth used a waiting list comparison and found a 16% lower rate


                                                                                                    6"
"
of felony recidivism among those treated with ART. A second, small study examined ART in

school settings and found that parents and teachers reported improved social skills, including

such dimensions as self-control and cooperation, as well as improvements in problem behaviors

(Gundersen and Svartdal, 2006).

       All three mental health interventions, MST, FFT and ART, use mental health therapy to

address youth conduct problems, but it is not clear whether this is sufficient to remediate

academic problems specifically. Other interventions for at-risk adolescents attempt to directly

target school achievement, for example, through school-based interventions or tutoring. In some

cases the intervention combines mental health treatment and academic components. Often the

academically focused interventions target adolescents in high-risk schools, not specifically youth

in the justice system.

       Using an exclusively school-based approach, a study conducted by Fryer (2011)

introduced instructional change with a math tutoring component. The study finds significant

improvements on math achievement scores from the intervention highlighting the possibility of

significant improvements in math skills at relatively late stages, i.e., among 6th and 9th graders. In

contrast, the Pathways to Education Program was broader (Oreopoulos, Brown, and Lavecchia,

2014). It was offered in a housing project in Toronto and spanned case management, intensive

tutoring, group activities, and financial support for school, college, and transportation expenses.

Although it is not possible to unpack the effect of these different components, the Pathways

study found improved grades, large increases in high school graduation rates (rising from 38% to

58%) as well as higher college entry.

       Another intervention took place with males in 7th through 9th grade in Chicago Public

Schools and focused on crime and school outcomes (Heller, et al, 2013). The study randomized


                                                                                                      7"
"
over 2,700 youth to school as usual, a group-based mental therapy program called “Becoming A

Man (BAM)” offered in school, BAM offered with after-school programming, or after-school

programming only. There was no tutoring group in this particular study. The BAM groups

performed better on their grade point averages, but not on drop-out by year end or on average

days of school attendance.

         Finally, Cook and colleagues (2014) conducted a study among 10th and 11th grade inner-

city boys, using both group therapy and academic remediation in the form of math tutoring.4

While the pilot reports no statistically significant differences in disciplinary incidents in school

or in days suspended out of school between those who received treatment and those who did not,

it does find significant effects on math achievement.

         Our study addresses key knowledge gaps and makes contributions along several

dimensions. First, our study bridges the two literatures reviewed above, the first studying the

effects of mental health interventions on crime outcomes among justice involved-youth and the

second studying the effects of academically-focused interventions on educational outcomes

among high-risk youth. Virtually all of the prior work on non-academic behavioral interventions,

targeted at justice-involved youth, have understandably focused on first-order effects – studying

criminal and conduct outcomes, which these interventions were intended to improve.

Furthermore, virtually all of the literature on adult and juvenile crime has also understandably

focused on the effects of justice policies and interventions on crime.5 We add to the very sparse

literature linking crime-based policies to domains other than crime. In the process, we provide

some of the first causal evidence on whether, and the extent to which, these often-endorsed
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
"
5One   recent exception in the juvenile justice literature is Aizer and Doyle (2013), who use random judge assignment
in Chicago to study the effects of juvenile incarceration on schooling and future adult crime. They find that juvenile
incarceration results in large decreases in the likelihood of completing high school and large increases in the
likelihood of being incarcerated as an adult."

                                                                                                                    8"
"
behavioral treatment programs, some of which do not have an explicit academically-focused

component, nevertheless have broader spillover benefits on human capital development through

educational acquisition. Given the vast literature linking education to improvements in health

behaviors, morbidity, and mortality, reduction in future crime and delinquency, and other non-

monetary benefits, an unbiased cost-benefit calculus of any intervention would need to account

for any positive (or negative) effects on educational attainment. Second, the school-based

studies above included students attending school and by design excluded youth who had dropped

out. In our study, we start from a population of youth in the justice system and examine whether

mental health intervention improves their academic achievement using several measures, two of

which are dropping out of secondary school and completion since our sample is not selected on

current students. Third, the focus on justice-involved youth – an inherently high-risk sample of

adolescents – is particularly salient to the debate on primary versus secondary prevention, and

our study contributes evidence on whether behavioral interventions can be effective in affecting

positive change among older youth who have already started to exhibit delinquent behaviors.

Fourth, much of the juvenile justice debate has also centered on the effectiveness of harsher

sentencing such as detention and confinement. However, most juvenile offenders are not

incarcerated, and states differ in terms of how to deal with these offenders who are released back

into the community.6 Our study thus adds to the sparse literature on the causal effects of

alternatives targeted at youth who are not sentenced to confinement, and provides valuable

policy guidance on whether behavioral interventions provide any benefits over other less-costly

local sanctions comprising probation, small fines, or some community restitution.

3.            Data
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
6"Among 112,766 offenders entering the juvenile justice system in WA between 2004-2009, about 4,211 unique
offenders were confined in a Juvenile Rehabilitation Center at some point over this period (authors’ calculations
from the administrative data)."

                                                                                                                    9"
"
Administrative Data from WA

             In order to perform detailed analyses of how mental health treatment in the justice system

affects education outcomes, data were received from two agencies in Washington State, the

state-wide juvenile justice system and the statewide school system. These person-level

administrative data were linked using last name, first initial, and date of birth. The justice data

include all youth who were screened or assessed for treatment services from January 2004 to

April 2009. Our observation is a person and screening date pair. We exclude youth who ever

appear in the data as deceased. We also exclude youth who ever report being incarcerated in

long-term commitment facilities because these youth would receive education in those facilities

and not through the regular education system.

             The justice-system screening instrument captures criminal and social risk factors, as well

as ratings of aggressive behavior and problems with family and living situation. Together these

elements define eligibility for the treatment programs as described below. The screening

instrument also captures youths’ history of mental health, alcohol and drug abuse problems,

academic problems, and prior employment. In addition, the justice data capture whether a youth

was deemed eligible for treatment by treatment type (MST, FFT, or ART), whether they were

referred for treatment, and reasons why the services may not have been received, such as lack of

available openings or refusal.

             The school data capture enrolled youth for the 2004/5 through 2008/9 academic years.

These monthly data include information on the school district code7, demographics (age, gender,

race/ethnicity), details on participation in school programs (free lunch, special education, reading




""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
7
    There are 295 school districts in Washington.

                                                                                                     10"
"
or math assistance), enrollment status (graduation or transfer), as well as grade point averages for

youth in higher grades.

             Because the data include detailed monthly school information, we are able to construct

multiple outcomes each measured over the 12 months after the youth was screened for treatment

eligibility. We constructed four dependent variables: 1) indicator for whether a given youth

dropped out of school; 2) an indicator for whether a youth transferred schools, which captures

general disruptions in the youth’s academic experience; 3) a broad indicator for being absent,

which captures whether the youth dropped out of school, was suspended, or just did not show up

to school; and 4) grade point average. In order to assess whether any potential benefits realized

from not dropping out of school are persistent, we also assess high school or GED completion

over the 24 months after the youth was screened for treatment eligibility. After merging the

screening and treatment data with the school data, our sample includes 35,020 observations over

the 2004-2009 period.

Treatment Allocation Rules

             Our study relies on a unique natural experiment afforded by discontinuous treatment

allocation rules, which we exploit along with the rich information in the administrative records to

identify the causal effects of treatment. In our study context, Washington State, treatment

services are delivered to youth in the juvenile justice system based on fixed criteria. Youth are

assessed after referral to the justice system, which is analogous to an adult arrest. Based on their

assessment scores youth are deemed eligible for MST, FFT, or ART.8 Although the agency

refers designated justice-involved teens for treatment, the treatment itself is delivered in the



""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
8
 Some low-risk youth also are offered a low intensity program called Coordination of Services (COS)
which we do not study here. Youth who receive COS services are excluded from our analyses.

                                                                                                      11"
"
community. Even when youth are found to be eligible, not all youth are assigned to treatment as

they may refuse to participate or treatment slots may not be available.

       Eligibility for each treatment type is determined by scores calculated from the youth

assessment instruments in several key areas. The key dimensions on the assessment instrument

are broader categorizations of criminal risk and social risk, and the component domains of family

living situation, and aggression-related domains. Criminal risk and social risk together capture a

youth’s recidivism risk level. Criminal risk scores (ranging from 0-31) are calculated from a

series of questions related to prior offending, including the age at which the youth first

committed an offense, the types of previous offenses, and any prior incarcerations. Social risk

scores (ranging from 0-18) are calculated from questions about difficulties in school, history of

voluntary or court-ordered placement out-of-home, such as in foster care, relationships with

peers, whether a parent is serving time in jail, parent control problems, and history of abuse,

neglect, and mental health problems. Criminal and social risk are combined to determine whether

a youth is considered low, moderate or high risk, as shown in Figure 1.

       One component of social risk, family living arrangements, summarizes questions on

whether the child is living with his or her parents, whether the family is supportive of the youth,

whether there are sibling problem behaviors, whether the parents exercise appropriate

supervision and control over the youth and whether reward and punishment behavior is

appropriate and consistent. Deficits in these areas signify family instability and are fundamental

to the appropriate allocation of FFT and MST therapies.

       Another component domain, aggression, includes specific questions related to aggression,

including tolerance for frustration, hostile interpretations of actions and intentions of others,

belief in verbal and physical aggression as a legitimate means to resolve conflicts, and reports of


                                                                                                    12"
"
past aggression problems. In addition, there are questions about pro-social attitudes and

behaviors, such as attitudes about past crimes, optimism, empathy, impulsiveness, and respect

for authority figures and others. Finally, there are questions related to skills, including goal

setting, consequent thinking, basic social skills and dealing with emotions. Deficits in these

areas are indicative of a need for ART.

       Figure 2 summarizes how scores in these domains result in treatment eligibility. To be

eligible for treatment, youth must first meet the appropriate criterion for recidivism risk, and

second must meet cut-off scores for either family instability or aggression (Figure 2). For MST

eligibility a youth must be rated high-risk and have a score of at least an 8 out of 34 on family

instability. For FFT, the family instability situation criterion is the same (8 out of 34), but the

youth must be at moderate recidivism risk or greater. For ART, the youth must be of at least

moderate recidivism risk, in addition to having aggression problems (2 on a scale of 13), or

attitude problems (5 on a scale of 23), or skills problems (4 on a scale of 18). We utilize these

eligibility thresholds, essentially comparing youth on either side of the threshold who are

otherwise similar on all other observed measures of risk, in order to assess the causal effects of

the treatment interventions, as detailed below.

4.     Analytical Framework

       The objective of this study is to assess the causal impact of behavioral interventions on

educational outcomes for justice-involved youth. We frame this question, and the empirical

methodology, within an intent-to-treat analysis. Consider the following education production

function relating eligibility for a particular treatment to post-treatment educational outcomes.

(1)    !!"#!! = ! + !!!"#$!" + !!"#!! Φ + District ! Ψ + !"#$!!! Ω + ! !!" + !!"!!




                                                                                                      13"
"
Specifically, educational outcome (E; for instance, dropping out of school, GPA, or high school

completion), for the ith juvenile offender in school district s, realized over some period k beyond

their intake at time t, is a function of their eligibility (Elig) for treatment subsequent to their

offense and arrest. The outcomes are related to the three mental health behavioral interventions

described above: ART, FFT, and MST. All models control for district-level fixed effects

(District), to account for any stable heterogeneity across the 295 school districts in WA (for

instance, related to services offered, district-specific policies and enforcement, district-level

demographics and peer groups, and quality of educational inputs), and year fixed effects (Time),

to account for statewide trends in schooling outcomes (for instance, related to state-level policy

changes or general economic conditions affecting all school districts). We estimate models for

dichotomous outcomes (for instance, dropout, transfer, school completion) via probit regression

and models for continuous outcomes (for instance, GPA) via OLS.9 Standard errors are adjusted

for arbitrary correlation in the error term (ε) for a given individual over time.

             The parameter of interest is β, which captures the causal intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of

making an offender eligible for a given treatment program on their schooling outcomes. This

parameter expressly identifies the reduced-form impact of the initial treatment eligibility, and as

such is distinguished from the structural effect of the “treatment on the treated” (TOT), which

would capture the impact of actually receiving the treatment. The ITT analysis is meaningful for

three reasons. First, it provides valuable information on the likely direct effects of an important

policy tool. State juvenile justice programs can manipulate the criteria determining treatment

diversion and thus expand eligibility. However, eligibility does not necessarily translate into

treatment receipt due to attrition and also because the treatment program may be unavailable in

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
9
 Results are not sensitive to alternate estimation methods and specifications, including logit and OLS
models for dichotomous outcomes, and log-linear models for GPA.

                                                                                                         14"
"
the district or there are no slots available. Thus, the ITT is informative in gauging the “real

world” policy response to expanded treatment diversion after accounting for offenders who may

fail to start the program for various reasons or dropout prior to completion.

       Second, structural estimation of the TOT is problematic since actual treatment receipt is

endogenous. Offenders who actually receive their assigned treatment are not a random subset of

all offenders, and even among those eligible for diversion into a specific behavioral intervention,

starting and completing the program are likely correlated with the offender’s unobserved traits

such as effort, risk and time preference, own- and family-based motivation, parental supervision,

peer support, and expectations. In focusing on the ITT, however, we are able to bypass non-

random selection into treatment diversion by exploiting discrete discontinuities and cut-offs in

the eligibility criteria, which are plausibly orthogonal to such unobserved offender-specific

heterogeneity (μ). With detailed information on the offenders’ social and criminal history,

discontinuous differences in eligibility around the various cut-offs and thresholds within fine

homogeneous cells can be exploited for credible identifying variation to bypass selection bias

(described below).

       Third, with the ITT in hand and using the information on average take-up rates for the

behavioral interventions, the ITT estimates can be scaled upwards to impute the TOT effect of

starting treatment. Alternately, the TOT can also be derived from an instrumental variables (IV)

estimation of the structural equation directly relating treatment take-up to educational outcomes.

       The empirical models proceed in a stepwise manner in order to address and inform these

and other specific issues. First, we estimate a parsimonious version of equation (1), controlling

for basic offender demographics along with district and year fixed effects. These models

establish the potential selection bias at play. Given that eligibility for treatment diversion is


                                                                                                    15"
"
limited to relatively higher-risk youth who have significant family difficulties and problems with

their aggression, attitude, and coping skills – factors which would also predict poor school

performance and enrollment – these naïve estimates of the ITT are expected to be biased

downwards (upwards) for positive (negative) measures of school performance. We therefore

expand this specification to further control for lagged schooling outcomes prior to the treatment

screen, capturing the offender’s GPA, whether he was suspended, was eligible for

accommodations and services under Section 504, and their special education status (Model 2).10

Such pre-treatment measures may partly account for selection bias from unobserved student- and

family-specific factors (Angrist and Pischke 2009; Dave and Colman 2012). Comparing

estimates across these two specifications can inform the likely direction of this bias, though the

lagged controls are not expected to bypass all unmeasured selection.

             Hence, in the next set of specifications, we specifically exploit variation in eligibility as

driven by the discontinuous thresholds, within increasingly finer cells of homogeneous offenders.

Model 3 non-parametrically controls for the criminal history score (ranging from 0-31) and the

social history score (ranging from 0-18), and also adds linear and quadratic forms of the

respective component scores that drive eligibility for ART, FFT, and MST.11 Identification in

this specification (3) is driven by the discontinuous jump in eligibility around the respective

component score (for instance, the family instability score threshold used to determine treatment

through FFT and MST), within groups of offenders who alternately have either the same total
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
10
   Section 504 is a part of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 that prohibits discrimination based upon disability.
Each district generally addresses students’ needs and services under Section 504 differently, which
would be captured by the district-specific fixed effects. Examples of such accommodations include
highlighted textbooks, extra textbooks for home use, rearranged schedules, extended time on tests and
assignments, preferred seating in the classroom, frequent feedback, peer assistance with note taking,
oral exams in lieu of written exams, taping class lectures, and computer-aided instruction.
11
   We assessed sensitivity of all estimated effects to higher-order polynomials (cubic and quartic) for the
component scores. Results (available upon request) are not materially affected. Also see Gelman and
Imbens (2014), who recommend against controlling for higher-order polynomials in such regression
discontinuity-based models."

                                                                                                           16"
"
criminal history risk score or the same total social risk history score. However, there still may

exist considerable heterogeneity across offenders even with the same criminal or social history

scores. In contrast to a conventional regression discontinuity design, wherein the discontinuity

exists on a single forcing variable, with respect to the treatment diversion programs that we are

studying, several discontinuous thresholds are relevant. Hence, the next three models attempt to

exploit the discontinuities within progressively finer sub-cells of offenders who are more

homogeneous in terms of their observables and presumably also on their unobservables.

        Model 4 includes indicators for various key component measures that form the criminal

history and social history scores, other than those in the component score used to determine

treatment eligibility. For instance, the family instability score (which is part of the offender’s

broader social history) is based on measures such as the offender’s current living arrangements,

household income, problem history with parents and siblings, family support, parental

supervision, and criminal history of other household members. This score governs eligibility

into FFT or MST treatment (see Figure 2). Models do not control for these components

separately as they are subsumed in the family instability score (which we control for through a

second-order polynomial). However, we can control for a rich vector of other offender-specific

characteristics from their social history and criminal history risk scores such as age of first

offense, prior misdemeanor and felony arrests, prior detention and confinement, mental health

and substance abuse history, peer relationships, and history of other abuse and neglect. Model 5

expands the specification to further include indicators for each of the nine cells in Figure 1,

interacting low, moderate, and high social history risk with similar gradations in criminal history

risk.




                                                                                                     17"
"
       Model 6 is the fully-saturated model and is our preferred specification. It adds indicators

for interactions between each score for social history and criminal history risk (31 x 18 = 558

indicators). The identification in this model is driven by individuals who are identical in terms

of both their social and criminal histories (that is, they have exactly the same combination of

social and criminal history scores), have similar pre-treatment educational outcomes, have

similar histories with respect to peer and gang relationships, mental health, substance abuse, age

at first offense, prior misdemeanors and felony arrests, prior detention and confinement, and

various other component measures noted above, but differ only in being on either side of the

eligibility score threshold, after accounting for a smooth second-order effect of this score. The

thought experiment underlying this model to compare two youths from the same school district

and period, both the same with identical social and criminal history scores, similar prior

educational outcomes, and similar mental health, substance abuse, and offending history. The

only observable difference relates to both youth being on either side of the eligibility threshold,

thus making one eligible for treatment and the other ineligible.

       Comparison of the estimates across models 1-6 provide valuable information on the

direction of the selection bias, and whether this bias is being attenuated as the identifying

variation is arguably becoming more credible.

       Estimates from Models 1-6 represent the ITT effect averaged over the entire juvenile

justice population in WA. Model 7 presents a robustness check by excluding those risk-groups

who would not be eligible for a particular behavioral intervention; for instance, low-risk

offenders are not eligible for diversion into ART and FFT, and both low- and moderate-risk

offenders are not eligible for MST (see Figure 2). Thus, excluding these groups, as appropriate to




                                                                                                  18"
"
the intervention being studied, should increase the magnitude of the estimated ITT, in the spirit

of a dose-response check.

       With the overall ITT effects in hand, we next assess heterogeneity in these effects across

gender as well as across prior school performance measures reflected in the offenders’ initial

screening assessment. Specifically, we explore whether program effectiveness varies across

measures of academic performance (grades), attendance, and the interviewer’s assessment of the

likelihood that the offender will stay in and graduate from high school. It should be noted that

these performance measures are predetermined and predate the treatment. These analyses are

important towards understanding whether the treatment interventions can improve schooling

among those who are at the greatest disadvantage and at a relatively higher-risk of reoffending.

       Finally, we supplement the ITT analyses with some evidence on the effects of the

“treatment on the treated”. Based on observed take-up of the programs conditional on being

eligible, the ITT can be rescaled to derive an estimate of the implied TOT. Alternately, as a

robustness check and point of comparison with the rescaled estimates, the TOT can also be

directly estimated via an instrumental variables (IV) strategy. Eligibility for treatment diversion,

in the context of the discontinuities noted above, would constitute a plausibly valid IV for

treatment take-up. Additionally, many offenders are unable to commence their assigned

treatment program because the particular program is not available in their area at the time or

because all slots in the program are filled. These supply-side constraints can also be used as an

additional IV in the structural estimation of the TOT.

5.     Results

       Table 1 presents means for key variables over our analysis sample. The average juvenile

offender is 16 years of age, male (76% of the sample), and White (60% of the sample). Given


                                                                                                   19"
"
the high-risk nature of this sample of justice-involved youth, school performance measures are

expectedly low. Over the one-year period after screening in the juvenile justice system, the

school dropout rate is relatively high at 27.6%, with about 51.5% suspended or leaving school

this period, and the average GPA is 1.53. Among offenders ages 17 or above, only about 23.4%

complete high school or their GED over the two-year period after screening. Columns 2 and 3

present means for offenders stratified across their eligibility status for treatment with FFT, and

the final two columns present means based on eligibility for MST. Youths who are eligible for

these intensive treatment programs are not a random subset of all justice-involved youths. About

68% of FFT-eligible youth had low grades prior to their treatment diversion and only 18.1%

attended school regularly. This compares with FFT-ineligible youth, among whom 43.1% had

low grades and 52.7% attended school regularly. Furthermore, youth who are eligible for

treatment services are relative higher-risk in terms of both their criminal history as well as their

social history, and more likely to have experienced family problems. These systematic

differences are also expected to confound post-treatment schooling outcomes, which on average

are generally worse among the eligible youth. For instance, the one-year school dropout rate is

32.8% among those who are FFT-eligible, compared with 23.9% among those who are ineligible.

The multivariate models presented below address this non-random selection bias.

       Table 2 presents estimates of the ITT effect of ART eligibility on schooling outcomes,

measured over a period of 12 months subsequent to treatment screening. Column 1 presents

estimates from a parsimonious version of equation (1), controlling only for the offender’s socio-

demographics in conjunction with district and year fixed effects. Across all outcomes, these

estimates suggest that eligibility for diversion into ART is associated with worse school

performance (significantly higher dropout and lower GPA) and bring to light the substantial


                                                                                                     20"
"
selection bias at play. Observed and unobserved risk factors underlying the youth’s social and

criminal history, which are key drivers of eligibility into the behavioral therapy program, are also

predictive of poor school outcomes. Thus, these naïve estimates are biased towards showing that

the intervention is less effective in improving schooling than may be the case. Models 2-7 add

richer controls to account for this selection, while exploiting more selective variation

surrounding the discontinuous eligibility cut-offs within increasingly finer cells of like youth.

Comparing estimates across specifications 1-7 suggests that the bias is attenuated in the expected

direction as we employ more credible identifying variation. However, estimates from our

preferred specification (model 6) do not show any significant effects on these measures of

education.

       It should be noted that ART is implemented through group therapy format, and is the

least intensive of the three mental health interventions, lasting only 10 weeks. While ART

teaches youths to control their angry impulses and aggression, and develop their moral reasoning

skills, there is no explicit educational goal. In this case, we do not find that ART leads to any

discernible academic improvements over a one-year follow-up.

       Tables 3 and 4 present the estimated ITT effects for the more intensive of the treatment

programs, FFT and MST respectively. Specifically, Panel A of Table 3 assesses how eligibility

for FFT affects a broad measure of school absentee status, which includes both dropping out of

school as well as suspensions. As before, models 1 and 2 suggest that eligibility is associated

with a higher likelihood of dropping out, an association that is largely driven by the positive

selection bias. This bias diminishes, and effect sizes shift towards becoming more negative as

successive models exploit more credible variation. Our preferred specification (model 6)

controls for all criminal and social risk factors non-parametrically and controls for the third


                                                                                                    21"
"
component risk factor (family instability score) parametrically. By specifying the third factor

parametrically we achieve identification from the discrete jump in eligibility at the cut-off for

this domain.

             Here we find that the ITT effect of a 100% increase in FFT eligibility is to reduce the 12-

month dropout rate by about 3.1 percentage points (about 5% relative to the baseline mean),

though this effect is imprecisely estimated (p-value of 0.18) due to reduction in sample size and

the variation being exploited.12 In model 7, the sample size is limited only to those youth who

are classified as moderate or high risk. It is validating that excluding the low-risk individuals

from the sample, who are not eligible for FFT, causes the magnitude to increase from 3.1 to 4.0

percentage points (p-value of 0.13). We do not find any significant or meaningful effects of FFT

eligibility on the probability of being suspended.13 Thus, all of the effects on the broad measure

of absentee status are driven by decreases in the likelihood of dropping out of school. Panel B of

Table 3 confirms this, suggesting that a 100% increase in FFT eligibility reduces the propensity

to drop out of school over the next 12 months by about 5 percentage points (about 18% relative

to the sample mean).

             Panels C and D suggest slight negative effects on both GPA (by about 0.03 index points)

and the likelihood of transferring to another school (by about 1.3 percentage points). Though

none of these estimates are statistically significant in the saturated model, they are consistent

with the reduction in dropout. The lower likelihood of transfers is potentially less disruptive and

may promote the likelihood of school retention. Prior work on other educational inputs has also

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
12
   As models become progressively richer, we lose observations due to missing information on the pre-
screen. The observations with missing information on the pre-screen are not significantly different
(beyond a Type I error) with respect to all other observable characteristics relative to the full sample. We
further confirm that the progression of the direction and magnitude of the effects across models 1-6 is not
driven by the reduction in sample size; the patterns and magnitudes are quite robust to estimating all
models for the most limited sample utilized in model 6.
13
   Results are not reported for economy of space, and available upon request.

                                                                                                         22"
"
generally been hard pressed to find positive beneficial effects on GPA and academic

achievement (Cullen, et al 2013). In our case, the greater selection of higher-risk and lower-

achieving students staying in school may be responsible for the slight negative effects on GPA.

       The ITT effects for MST, which is the most intensive of the behavioral mental health

interventions, are presented in Table 4. Generally, these effects mirror those for FFT (in Table

3), suggesting significant decreases in the likelihood of dropping out of school. The effect

magnitudes for the overall sample are quite similar to those estimated for FFT eligibility – on the

order of 3-4 percentage points decrease in dropout – though when the sample is restricted to only

the high-risk youth (low- and moderate-risk youth are not eligible for MST) in model 7, the

magnitudes expectedly increase. The last column suggests an 8-10 percentage point decrease in

the probability of dropping out of school due to a 100% increase in MST eligibility. This higher

ITT effect may reflect both the greater intensity of the intervention as well as a differentially

larger effect due to the more higher-risk individuals being targeted for this treatment. In later

stratified analyses, we further explore this question of heterogeneous treatment effects based on

schooling-related risk measures.

       The analyses thus far suggest that the intensive interventions, FFT and MST, increase the

likelihood of staying in school in the short term. Table 5 assesses whether these effects are

persistent and translate into a greater likelihood of completed secondary school or its equivalent

through the GED. As before, models 1 and 2 suggest that there is strong negative selection bias

leading to higher eligibility being associated with a lower likelihood of graduation/GED

completion. This selection bias is attenuated in models 3-7, however, which exploit the

discontinuities and fully saturate the non-parametric controls for interactions between social risk

and criminal history risk. These models suggest an increase in the probability of completing


                                                                                                    23"
"
secondary school on the order of 3-5 percentage points (10-15 % relative to the mean). The

effect sizes are higher in the final specification (5-10 percentage points), when the sample is

restricted to only those risk-levels which pass the first stage of eligibility requirements for FFT

and MST.

       Justice-involved youth are predominantly males, about 75% of the sample. Furthermore,

a large literature suggests differences in problem behaviors and coping mechanisms across boys

and girls. Thus, Table 6 explores heterogeneity in the ITT effects across gender (columns 1 and

2). In general, we find that both FFT and MST eligibility are effective in reducing dropout for

males and females; however, due to inflated standard errors, we cannot rule out that there is no

difference in the ITT effects, though the ITT effect for MST is several orders of magnitude

higher for females than for males. A larger ITT effect may reflect either an increase in take-up

rates and/or an increase in the effectiveness of actually receiving the treatment (TOT). Over the

sample period, the take up rate for MST is not significantly higher among females, and thus the

suggestively higher ITT effect for MST for females may reflect a greater effectiveness of the

program for this group.

       Given that FFT and MST diversion appears to be effective in raising school retention and

graduation in general among those who are made eligible, an important question is whether these

interventions are effective for those youth whose educational prospects are among the weakest –

those youth who are at higher risk of dropping out of school and recidivating. Models 3-8 assess

heterogeneity in the ITT effects based on predetermined schooling outcomes and assessment,

measured prior to the treatment screening. In general, higher eligibility for both FFT and MST

impart a positive benefit for students, regardless of their prior school performance and attendance.

Even among students who previously were performing poorly in school (low grades and/or poor


                                                                                                  24"
"
attendance record), the ITT effect for both interventions is to reduce the likelihood of dropping

out of school. The policy relevance of these effects is particularly prominent in columns 7 and 8.

The prescreen included the interviewer’s assessment, based on the various domains and their

own impressions of the youth, his/her family, and the surroundings, on how likely is the youth to

graduate from high school. While the effects are slightly weaker, there is evidence that these

interventions can impart important positive educational spillovers to at-risk youth whose

prospects of graduating from high school were particularly poor.

       We note that the effects discussed thus far are intent-to-treat effects, measuring the

effects of eligibility rather than the effects of actual treatment receipt (TOT). The two diverge

since take-up rates of the treatment interventions are far less than 100%. Given the credible

reduced-form effects of eligibility on education, we can nevertheless derive the structural TOT

through two alternate methods. First, based on the observed program take-up rates, the ITT can

be scaled upwards by an appropriate factor to inform the magnitude of the TOT (Corman et al.

2014). With respect to MST, the unconditional take-up rate is about 20% and the conditional

take-up rate (from a first-stage model relating eligibility to take-up; see Table 7) is about 30%.

This means that between 20-30% of MST-eligible youth actually start the program; the rest do

not receive the treatment for various reasons, related to the program not being offered in the area,

no slots being available, or refusal to enter the program. Thus, the ITT needs to be scaled

upwards by a factor of 4 in order to derive the structural effect of entering the program on

educational acquisition. Doing so implies that actually starting FFT for a youth who is made

eligible, by being just across the score threshold, reduces the likelihood of dropping out of school

by about 12-20 percentage points, and raises the likelihood of completing secondary school by




                                                                                                     25"
"
about 11-19 percentage points.14 Take-up rates for MST are far lower, about 4-8% (based on

first-stage models presented in Table 7), mostly because program participation is quite intensive

and also because of greater supply-side constraints; significantly more eligible youth do not enter

MST because the program is not offered in their area or because of no available slots relative to

FFT-eligible youth. Thus the ITT effects for MST would need to be rescaled upwards by a

factor of about 16 to impute the TOT. This process implies that starting the MST program

reduces the probability of dropping out of school (over the next 12 months) by about 42-45

percentage points, and raise the probability of completing high school by about 24-41 percentage

points. Implicit TOT effects rescaled in this manner should be interpreted with caution since

small changes in the denominator (in this case, the FFT and MST program take-up rates) and the

underlying ITT estimates can lead to large differences. Nevertheless, these findings are

consistent with the IV-based models presented in Table 7, which directly estimate the TOT.

             In the fully-saturated model, eligibility for the particular treatment program under study

and an indicator for whether the youth did not start the program due to supply-side constraints (it

was not offered in the area, or there were no available spots) are plausible IVs for program take-

up. Indeed, the first-stage estimates reported in Table 7 confirm this, and show that eligibility

significantly and positively predicts program take-up while supply-side constraints significantly

reduce take-up. Particularly for ART and FFT, the IVs strongly predict take-up, with the F-

statistic on the excluded instruments ranging from 107 to 564. The IVs are jointly significant at

the 1-percent level for MST take-up, though the F-statistic is lower (ranging from 13 to 32) due

to the weaker take-up rate of the program among eligible youth.15 The overidentification test

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
14
   These estimates are based on the ITT effects reported in models 5 and 6.
15
   This is due to the reasons noted in the text. There is a higher rate of refusal because the MST program
is intensive and requires a significant level of participation and effort from the youth and their families;
also, supply constraints are more binding given the intensive resources required for offering MST.

                                                                                                         26"
"
also supports the orthogonality of the IVs from the structural error; while this is statistically

validating, we note that the test should be interpreted with caution since the two instruments

(eligibility and supply constraints) are likely working at different margins with heterogeneous

treatment effects across these margins.16

             Columns 1-3 present the TOT effects for ART take-up on dropout and high school

completion (over 12- and 24-months post screening). Consistent with the weak to null ITT

effects, we do not find any significant or meaningful effects of ART take-up on drop-out or

graduation over the short-term. Column 3 is suggestive of some positive cumulative effect on

completion rates over a 24-month period. Columns 4-6 report the TOT effects of FFT take-up,

which are fully in line with the earlier-report ITT effects. Take-up of FFT reduces the likelihood

of dropping out of school by about 9 percentage points and raises the likelihood of graduating by

about 5-8 percentage points. It is validating that these directly estimated TOT magnitudes are

similar to the lower-bound TOT effects derived by rescaling the ITT effects above. The final

three models present the TOT estimates for MST participation. These also confirm that MST

take-up reduces the likelihood of dropping out of school by about 24 percentage points and

increases the likelihood of completing secondary school by between 25-53 percentage points –

estimates which are again consistent with the ITT effects and the rescaled TOT effects. That is,

while most youths who are eligible for MST do not enter treatment, those who do significantly

benefit from it in the form of greater educational attainment.

6.           Conclusions

             The study adds to the sparse literature linking justice policies to outcomes other than

crime – most notably, education acquisition – which has important benefits both monetarily and


""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
     The Hausman test also confirms that program take up is expectedly endogenous."
16



                                                                                                       27"
"
non-monetarily. Our analyses suggest that intensive behavioral interventions, such as FFT and

MST, can have positive impacts on academic achievement for troubled teens. The evidence is

consistent with improvements in school completion rates for justice-involved youth. Moreover,

the results suggest that the effects may be larger for girls and for youth who are believed to have

worse education prospects. The evidence to support ART, a less intensive intervention, is not as

strong.

          According to the Blueprints Initiative, FFT costs $2,800 and MST costs $7,068 per youth.

Our estimates suggest that actual FFT take-up reduces drop-out by about 10 percentage points,

and MST take-up reduces drop out by about 24% (based on the IV estimates). The average

high-school dropout earns $20,241 (U.S. Census) annually. The return to an extra year of

education, even if this person does not finish high school is 7-8% (Angrist and Krueger, 1991).

Hence, an extra year of schooling is predicted to raise earnings by about $1,500. FFT

participation will therefore, on average, raises earnings by about $150/year ($1,500*0.075) and

MST participation will raise earnings by about $375 ($1,500*0.24). In present value terms, the

lifetime increase would more than compensate for the cost of both FFT and MST, even at the

conservative benefit levels of just reducing dropout (not even counting high school completion).

          The results of this study are important because they suggest that interventions for youth

in the justice system have broad societal benefits outside the health care and juvenile justice

sectors. Consequently, a strong argument could be made for making these interventions much

more widely available through education-system investments.

          We conclude that mental health treatment interventions offered by the justice system can

have important impacts on human capital development. Consistent with other recent studies, we

find evidence that intervention programs can make an academic difference for adolescents Our


                                                                                                  28"
"
results show that these interventions are effective even among the highest-risk youth with poor

schooling prospects. Future work should focus on interventions modified for adolescents with

other problems, such as substance abuse.




                                                                                               29"
"
References

       Angrist, J. D. Krueger, A.B. “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 106 (1991): 979-1014

     Angrist, J.D. and J.S. Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton and Oxford.

       Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist. 2000. How large are human-capital externalities? Evidence
from compulsory-schooling laws. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 15 (2000), pp. 9-59.

       Colman, G. and D. Dave “Physical Activity and Health,” International Journal of Arts
and Sciences, 5, No. 6 (2012), 29-45.

       Cook, Philip J. and colleagues. The (Surprising) Efficacy of Academic and Behavioral
Intervention with Disadvantaged Youth from a Randomized Experiment in Chicago. Institute for
Policy Research, Northwestern University (2014).

       Corman, H., D. Dave, and N. Reichman. “Effects of Welfare Reform on Women’s
Crime,” International Review of Law and Economics, 40, (2014), 1-14.

       Cuellar, Alison “Preventing and Treating Child Mental Health Problems” Future of
Children issue on Policies to Promote Child Health, forthcoming

       Cullen, JB, Levitt, S, D. et al, “What Can Be Done To Improve Struggling High Schools?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, no. 27 (2013): 133–152

       Fryer, Roland G, “Injecting Successful Charter School Strategies into Traditional Public
Schools: Early Results from an Experiment in Houston,” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working
Paper No. 17494, 2011

        Gelman, A and G. Imbens, “Why High-order Polynomials should not be used in
Regression Discontinuity Designs,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series, No. 20405, August 2014.

       Greenwood, P. (2008). "Prevention and intervention programs for juvenile offenders.”
The Future of Children, 18(2), 185-210
       Gundersen, Knut K., and Frode Svartdal. 2006. “Aggression Replacement Training in
Norway: Outcome Evaluation of 11 Norwegian Student Projects.” Scandinavian Journal of
Education Research 50(1):63–81.

        Heller, Sara B. and colleagues. “Preventing youth violence and dropout: A randomized
field experiment.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper #19014 (2013)




                                                                                              30"
"
       Henggeler,"S.W.,"Schoenwald,"S.K.,"Borduin,"C.M.,"Rowland,"M.D.,"and"Cunningham,"
P.B."(1998)."Multisystemic"treatment"of"antisocial"behavior"in"children"and"adolescents."
New"York":"Guilford"Press.

       Lipsey, M. W., Howell, J. C., Kelly, M. R., Chapman, G., and Carver, D. (2010).
Improving the effectiveness of juvenile justice programs: A new perspective on evidence-based
practice. Center for Juvenile Justice Reform, Georgetown University

      Littell, Julia H, Margo Campbell, Stacy Green, and Barbara Toews. “Multisystemic
Therapy for social, emotional, and behavioral problems in youth aged 10-17” Cochrane
Database Systematic Review. 19, no. 4 (2005)

       Littell, Julia H, Aina Winsvold, Arild Bjørndal, Karianne T Hammerstrøm. 2007.
Functional Family Therapy for families of youth (age 11-18) with behavior problems. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews Issue 2.

        Barbara A. Lucenko, Lijian He, David Mancuso, and Barbara Felver, Effects of
Functional Family Parole on Re-Arrest and Employment for Youth in Washington State:
Technical Appendix RDA Report 2.24A (Olympia, WA: Department of Social and Health
Services, September 2011)
https://www.dshs.wa.gov/sites/default/files/SESA/rda/documents/research-2-24.pdf

       OJJDP Model Programs Guide: Aggression Replacement Training (ART),” U.S.
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention (OJJDP) accessed at http://www.crimesolutions.gov/ProgramDetails.aspx?ID=254

      Oreopoulos, P, R.S. Brown, and A.M. Lavecchia. “Pathways to Education: An Integrated
Approach to Helping at-risk High School Students,” NBER Working Paper 20430 (2014).



       Sexton, Thomas and Charles W. Turner . “The effectiveness of functional family
therapy for youth with behavioral problems in a community practice setting.” Journal of Family
Psychology. 24, no. 3(2010):339-348

       Sickmund, Melissa, and Puzzanchera, Charles (eds.). 2014. Juvenile Offenders and
Victims: 2014 National Report . Pittsburgh, PA: National Center for Juvenile Justice

        Washington State Institute for Public Policy. 2004. Outcome Evaluation of Washington
State’s Research-Based Programs for Juvenile Offenders. Olympia, Wash.: Washington State
Institute for Public Policy. http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/rptfiles/04-01-1201.pdf

       Wolff, Jennifer C. and Thomas H. Ollendick. 2006 “The Comorbidity of Conduct
Problems and Depression in Childhood and Adolescence,” Clinical Child and Family
Psychology Review 9 (3/4): 201-220


                                                                                                31"
"
                                                         Figure 1

                                   Recidivism Risk-level definitions based on
                                Criminal History and Social History Risk Scores

                                                                    Social History Risk Score
       Criminal History Risk Score
                                                       0–5                    6–9                 10 – 18


                    0–2                                Low                    Low                Moderate


                    3–7                                Low                  Moderate                High


                    8 – 31                          Moderate                  High                  High



                                                         Figure 2


                                        Treatment Eligibility Determination


Treatment Type                Risk-level                                    Other

Multi-systemic Therapy       High            Family Instability:
(MST)                                        Risk Factor Score of at least 8 out of 34 on specific measures of
                                             family instability within the Social History component
Family Functional            Moderate        Family Instability:
Therapy (FFT)                                Risk Factor Score of at least 8 out of 34 on specific measures of
                                             family instability within the Social History component
Aggression                   Moderate        Aggression, Attitude, or Social Skills Problems:
Replacement Training                         Risk Factor Score ≥ 2 (out of 13) on the Aggression component
(ART)                                        domain of Social History risk
                                             Risk Factor Score ≥ 5 (out of 23) on the Attitudes/Behavior
                                             component domain of Social History risk
                                             Risk Factor Score ≥ 4 (out of 18) on the Skills component domain of
                                             Social History risk




                                                                                                            32"
   "
                                              Table 1
                                           Sample Means
                     Matched Intervention-Education Records from WA, 2004-2009

                                                 1               2               3               4                 5
                                                                                                                 MST
                                                               FFT             FFT             MST
Variable                                         All                                                          Not Eligible
                                                              Eligible      Not Eligible      Eligible

Age                                             15.92           15.80          16.00           15.79             15.97
Male                                           0.7557          0.7576         0.7545          0.7765            0.7470
White                                          0.6004          0.5702         0.6208          0.5523            0.6205
Black                                          0.1145          0.1313         0.1032          0.1440            0.1022
Asian                                          0.0342          0.0260         0.0397          0.0244            0.0382
Hispanic                                       0.1574          0.1637         0.1531          0.1649            0.1542
Race/Ethnicity missing                         0.0936          0.1087         0.0833          0.1144            0.0849

Absent (Dropout, Suspended or No-show)         0.6362          0.7614         0.5483          0.7848            0.5721
(1-year)
Dropout (1-year)                               0.2756          0.3276         0.2391          0.3336            0.2505
Transfer (1-year)                              0.8844          0.9135         0.8640          0.9184            0.8697
Suspended or Left (1-year)                     0.5147          0.6464         0.4222          0.6783            0.4440
GPA (1-year)                                   1.5319          1.2676         1.7041          1.2483            1.6450
High School / GED Completion (2-year)
                                               0.1013          0.0560         0.1342          0.0495            0.1248
(all ages)
High School / GED Completion (2-year)
                                               0.2338          0.1170         0.2985          0.0979            0.2804
(ages 17+)

                                             0.6332          0.9831            0.3963          0.9905           0.4839
ART Eligible
FFT Eligible                                 0.4037             1                 0               1             0.1545
MST Eligible                                 0.2948          0.7302               0               1                0
Social History Score                         6.6363          9.2985            4.8337         10.2517           5.1250
Criminal History Score                       7.7280          9.9231            6.2417         11.0925           6.3215
Risk Level – Low                             0.3396             0              0.5696             0             0.4816
Risk Level – Moderate                        0.2543          0.2698            0.2437             0             0.3605
Risk Level – High                            0.4061          0.7302            0.1867             1             0.1579
Family Dysfunction Score                     7.0578         13.3640            2.7878         13.9146           4.1914
Family Dysfunction Score ≥ 8                 0.4245          0.9865            0.0440          0.9887           0.1887
Low Grades – GPA ≤ 2.0 (Pre-Treatment)       0.5326          0.6823            0.4312          0.7103           0.4583
Attended School Regularly – Few or No
                                             0.3874          0.1809            0.5272          0.1386           0.4914
Unexcused Absences (Pre-Treatment)
Interviewer's assessment: Very likely that
the youth will stay in and graduate from     0.1694          0.0957            0.2193          0.0593           0.2155
high school or equivalent (Pre-Treatment)
    Notes: Maximum number of observations is 35,020; sample size is lower for some variables due to missing
    information (see text).




                                                                                                                   33"
    "
                                              Table 2
     Effects of Aggression Replacement Training (ART) Eligibility on 12-month School Outcomes
Model                                          1              2              3               4              5              6              7

Panel A                                  Outcome: Absent (Dropout, Suspended, or No-show)
Eligibility - ART                        0.2421***    0.1823***        0.0333       0.0382*              0.0425          0.0463        0.0564
                                          (0.0075)     (0.0115)       (0.0230)      (0.0232)            (0.0374)        (0.0382)      (0.0393)
Observations                               23389         10385          7339          7305                7305            7076          5688

Panel B                                  Outcome: Dropout
Eligibility - ART                        0.0837***    0.0431***            0.0221         0.0247         0.0241          0.0264        0.0487
                                          (0.0067)     (0.0100)           (0.0209)       (0.0209)       (0.0332)        (0.0333)      (0.0332)
Observations                               23311        10268               7295           7262           7262            7031          5701

Panel C                                  Outcome: GPA
Eligibility - ART                        -0.3645*** -0.0296***            -0.0238        -0.0225         0.0109          0.0152        0.0172
                                          (0.0157)    (0.0103)            (0.0195)       (0.0191)       (0.0319)        (0.0317)      (0.0335)
Observations                                19728      10191                7244           7210           7210            7210          5875

Panel D                                  Outcome: Transfer
Eligibility - ART                        0.0390***     0.0575***          -0.0195        -0.0155        -0.0235         -0.0208       -0.0090
                                          (0.0045)      (0.0082)          (0.0127)       (0.0126)       (0.0198)        (0.0218)      (0.0216)
Observations                               23117         10189              7056           7023           7023            6421          5104

District indicators                          Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Year indicators                              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Pre-screening school outcomes                No              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Relevant Score(s) / Score-squared            No              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Crim. History Score indicators               No              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Social History Score indicators              No              No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Detailed components of Criminal &            No              No             No             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
Social History
Interactions: Social History Risk             No             No             No              No             Yes            Yes            Yes
Level * Crim. History Risk Level (9
cells: see Fig. 1)
Interactions: Social History Score *          No             No             No              No             No             Yes            Yes
Criminal History scores (558 cells:
see Fig. 1)
Sample                                        All            All            All             All            All            All          Moderate
                                                                                                                                        or High
                                                                                                                                         Risk
Notes: Marginal effects from probit regression models are presented for absent, dropout, and transfer; coefficients from OLS models are
presented for GPA. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, and reported in parentheses. Youth who receive FFT, MST or COS
are excluded from the sample. All models control for socio-demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity), and district and year fixed effects.
Pre-screening school outcomes include GPA, suspension, eligibility for Section 504 services, and special education. “Relevant score(s)” and
“score-squared” refer to the family instability and other scores, which determine eligibility for the particular treatment program, as denoted in
Figure 2. Detailed components of criminal and social history include indicators for age of first offense, categorical indicators for the number
of prior misdemeanor referrals and for prior felony referrals, indicators for the number of prior sexual misconduct misdemeanor referrals and
for prior such felony referrals, categorical indicators for prior detention and for prior Juvenile Rehabilitation Administration (JRA)
confinement episodes, history of and current pro-social/anti-social friends/peers, history of and current involvement in gangs, history of
truancy/running away, history of neglect, history of court-ordered out-of-home placement, and history of mental health problems, alcohol and
drug problems, and abuse. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 < p-value
≤ 0.10.


                                                                                                                                               34"
"
                                               Table 3
        Effects of Functional Family Treatment (FFT) Eligibility on 12-month School Outcomes
Model                                      1            2             3              4            5            6          7

Panel A                                                     Outcome: Absent (Dropout, Suspended, or No-show)
Eligibility - FFT                      0.2007***    0.1370***     -0.0329       -0.0393*      -0.0312        -0.0314   -0.0398
                                        (0.0072)     (0.0113)     (0.0218)      (0.0221)      (0.0226)      (0.0235)   (0.0265)
Observations                             22179         9925         9923          9890          9890          9659       5823

Panel B                                                                    Outcome: Dropout
Eligibility - FFT                      0.0866***    0.0368***    -0.0509*** -0.0581*** -0.0501***         -0.0517***   -0.0573**
                                        (0.0072)     (0.0103)     (0.0173)      (0.0174)    (0.0178)       (0.0179)     (0.0266)
Observations                             22107         9805         9805          9773        9773           9542         5807

Panel C                                                                       Outcome: GPA
Eligibility - FFT                      -0.3370***   -0.0405***    -0.0340*        -0.0293      -0.0296      -0.0298    -0.0419
                                        (0.0166)     (0.0121)     (0.0198)       (0.0199)      (0.0206)     (0.0208)   (0.0284)
Observations                              18739        9729         9729           9696          9696         9696       5968

Panel D                                                                      Outcome: Transfer
Eligibility - FFT                      0.0346***    0.0497***     -0.0138         -0.0074      -0.0056      -0.0132    -0.0114
                                        (0.0042)     (0.0075)     (0.0149)        (0.0147)     (0.0149)     (0.0160)   (0.0168)
Observations

District indicators                       Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Year indicators                           Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Pre-screening school outcomes             No           Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Relevant Score(s) / Score-squared         No           No           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Crim. History Score indicators            No           No           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Social History Score indicators           No           No           Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Detailed components of Criminal &
                                          No           No            No             Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Social History
Interactions: Social History Risk
Level * Crim. History Risk Level (9       No           No            No             No           Yes          Yes        Yes
cells: see Fig. 1)
Interactions: Social History Score *
Criminal History scores (558 cells:       No           No            No             No           No           Yes        Yes
see Fig. 1)
Sample                                                                                                                 Moderate
                                          All          All           All            All          All          All      or High
                                                                                                                        Risk
Notes: See Table 2. Youth who receive ART, MST or COS are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                               35"
"
                                                 Table 4
             Effects of Multi-systemic Therapy (MST) Eligibility on 12-month School Outcomes
    Model                                1            2             3              4            5          6           7

    Panel A                                              Outcome: Absent (Dropout, Suspended, or No-show)
    Eligibility - MST               0.2031***     0.1333***    -0.0456**    -0.0497**      -0.0323      -0.0373     -0.0834**
                                     (0.0080)      (0.0130)     (0.0225)     (0.0228)     (0.0264)      (0.0278)     (0.0343)
    Observations                      20299          9269         9267         9236         9236          9010         3060

    Panel B                                                                Outcome: Dropout
    Eligibility - MST               0.0747***     0.0278**      -0.0291*       -0.0346**    -0.0259     -0.0282     -0.0991**
                                     (0.0085)     (0.0118)      (0.0167)        (0.0168)    (0.0203)    (0.0205)     (0.0420)
    Observations                      20197         9150          9150            9120        9120        8890         3130

    Panel C                                                                 Outcome: GPA
    Eligibility - MST               -0.2991***     -0.0283*     -0.0425**       -0.0298  -0.0569**      -0.0610**   -0.0562
                                     (0.0198)      (0.0145)      (0.0213)      (0.0214)   (0.0267)       (0.0271)   (0.0469)
    Observations                       17227         9090          9090          9059       9059           9059       3314

    Panel D                                                                Outcome: Transfer
    Eligibility - MST               0.0370***     0.0533***     -0.0212         -0.0171      -0.0153    -0.0202      0.0064
                                     (0.0048)      (0.0084)     (0.0163)        (0.0161)     (0.0186)   (0.0203)    (0.0234)
    Observations                      20036          9080         9066            9035         9035       8456        2693

  District indicators                   Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Year indicators                       Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Pre-screening school outcomes         No          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Relevant Score / Score-squared        No           No            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Crim. History Score indicators        No           No            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Social History Score indicators       No           No            Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  Detailed components of Criminal
                                        No           No             No          Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes
  & Social History
  Interactions: Social History Risk
  Level * Crim. History Risk Level      No           No             No           No            Yes        Yes         Yes
  (9 cells: see Fig. 1)
  Interactions: Social History
  Score * Criminal History scores       No           No             No           No            No         Yes         Yes
  (558 cells: see Fig. 1)
  Sample                                All          All           All           All           All         All      High Risk
Notes: See Table 2. Youth who receive ART, FFT or COS are excluded from the sample.




                                                                                                                               36"
"
                                                 Table 5
               Effects of FFT & MST Eligibility on 24-month High School / GED Completion
Model                                  1              2              3              4              5              6              7

Panel A
Eligibility - FFT                 -0.0666***     -0.0599***        0.0257         0.0249         0.0261       0.0476***        0.0479
                                   (0.0057)       (0.0106)        (0.0199)       (0.0200)       (0.0199)       (0.0080)       (0.0372)

Panel B
Eligibility - MST                 -0.0631***     -0.0480***      0.0433**        0.0395*         0.0247         0.0144       0.1052***
                                   (0.0061)       (0.0106)       (0.0229)        (0.0225)       (0.0244)       (0.0405)       (0.0294)

District indicators                   Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Year indicators                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Pre-screening school outcomes         No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Relevant Score / Score-squared        No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Crim. History Score indicators        No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Social History Score indicators       No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Detailed components of
                                      No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Criminal & Social History
Interactions: Social History
Risk Level * Crim. History Risk       No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes
Level (9 cells: see Fig. 1)
Interactions: Social History
Score * Criminal History scores       No             No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes
(558 cells: see Fig. 1)
Sample                                                                                                                        FFT:
                                                                                                                            Moderate or
                                                                                                                            High Risk
                                      All            All            All            All            All            All
                                                                                                                             MST: High
                                                                                                                                 Risk
Notes: See Tables 2-4. Observations range from 10137 to 1541 as models include more detailed information on social and criminal history.




                                                                                                                                      37"
"
                                                                   Table 6
                                                              12-month Dropout
                                   Heterogeneity across Gender and Prior (Pre-screening) School Performance
 Model                                        1                 2                3                 4                5                 6                7            8
                                                                                                                                                  Assessment:
                                                                                                                                                                Assessment:
 Sample                                                                                                         Irregular         Regular         Uncertain /
                                            Males           Females         Low Grades       High Grades                                                         Likely to
                                                                                                               Attendance        Attendance       Unlikely to
                                                                                                                                                                 Graduate
                                                                                                                                                   Graduate
 Panel A
 Eligibility - FFT                       -0.0613***         -0.0529         -0.0771***         -0.0516*         -0.0588*          -0.0458*         -0.0406*       -0.0498
                                          (0.0223)          (0.0416)         (0.0286)          (0.0263)         (0.0339)          (0.0239)         (0.0208)      (0.0442)
 Observations                               7075              1947             4606              3485             3639              4472             7920          1173

 Panel B
 Eligibility - MST                         -0.0245         -0.1028**          -0.0314         -0.0814**          -0.0182          -0.0448           -0.0302      -0.0482
                                           (0.0244)         (0.0431)          (0.0311)         (0.0268)          (0.0364)         (0.0292)          (0.0227)     (0.0592)
 Observations                                6593             1785              4232             3273              3330             4202              7404         1038

 District indicators                         Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Year indicators                             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Pre-screening school outcomes               Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Relevant Score / Score-squared              Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Crim. History Score indicators              Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Social History Score indicators             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Detailed components of Criminal
 & Social History                            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 Interactions: Social History Risk
 Level * Crim. History Risk Level            Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 (9 cells: see Fig. 1)
 Interactions: Social History Score *
 Criminal History scores                     Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes         Yes
 (558 cells: see Fig. 1)
Notes: See Tables 2-4. Sample stratified across school performance utilize predetermined measures which refer to the period prior to the treatment screening.
                                                                      Table 7
                                            TOT Effects of Treatment Take-up on Dropout and Completion
                                                                   IV Estimation

Treatment Intervention                                     ART                                              FFT                                             MST
Outcome                                                   School          School                           School         School                           School          School
                                        Dropout –                                       Dropout –                                       Dropout –
                                                       Completion      Completion                       Completion     Completion                       Completion      Completion
                                        12 months                                       12 months                                       12 months
                                                       - 12 months     – 24 months                      - 12 months    – 24 months                      - 12 months     – 24 months

TOT Effect of Treatment Take-up           0.0341         -0.0004         0.1142**        -0.0901*        0.0479*          0.0761         -0.2390          0.2469         0.5250**
                                         (0.0541)        (0.0313)        (0.0554)        (0.0498)        (0.0287)        (0.0587)        (0.4847)        (0.2292)        (0.2582)

First-stage: Instruments
Eligibility                             0.4178***       0.4424***       0.4378***       0.3164***       0.3229***       0.3090***       0.0384***       0.0426***       0.0761***
                                         (0.0208)        (0.0179)        (0.0424)        (0.0123)        (0.0109)        (0.0226)        (0.0068)        (0.0063)        (0.0164)
Treatment not available / Capacity     -0.1534***       -0.1604***      -0.1921***      -0.0942***      -0.1022***      -0.1223***      -0.0148***       -0.0167        -0.0251***
constraint                               (0.0071)        (0.0060)        (0.0165)        (0.0066)        (0.0058)        (0.0148)        (0.0027)        (0.0025)        (0.0067)

F-statistic on Excluded IVs             373.27***       563.54***       110.07***       352.17***       485.35***       106.74***        21.39***        32.36***        13.01***

District indicators                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Year indicators                            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Pre-screening school outcomes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Relevant Score(s) / Score-squared          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Crim. History Score indicators             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Social History Score indicators            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Detailed components of Criminal &
                                           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Social History
Interactions: Social History Score *
Criminal History scores                    Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
(558 cells: see Fig. 1)

Observations                             8240            11026             2919          11401            14937             3540            11401           14937           3540
Notes: Coefficients from models estimated via two-stage least squares are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, and reported in parentheses. See Table 2
for the full list of control variables.
