NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME (SSI) PROGRAM
Mark Duggan
Melissa S. Kearney
Stephanie Rennane
Working Paper 21209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21209

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

This chapter was prepared for the 2015 volume of Means Tested Programs in the U.S., edited by Robert
Moffitt. The authors are grateful to Robert Moffitt, David Autor, David Wittenburg, Kathy Ruffing,
Donna Pavetti, Paul Van de Water, and participants at the NBER Means Tested Program authors’
conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mark Duggan, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Program
Mark Duggan, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane
NBER Working Paper No. 21209
May 2015
JEL No. H51,H53,J18
ABSTRACT
The SSI program provides cash assistance to some of the nation’s most vulnerable elderly, blind, and
disabled residents. In this paper, we briefly summarize the history of the SSI program and present
descriptive evidence on caseload composition and trends. We discuss relevant conceptual issues and
empirical evidence focused on four key issues. First, we describe the advantages and disadvantages
of categorical eligibility requirements and we show that the SSI caseload has become increasingly
comprised of difficult-to-verify conditions, namely pain and mental disabilities. Second, we describe
systematic disincentives to accumulate earnings and assets inherent in the SSI program design, but
emphasize that the more relevant set of questions for the SSI population are related to the full disability
requirement for eligibility. Third, we describe the questions and research about long-term benefits
and costs to program participants, in terms of whether the program adequately and appropriately serves
the needs of disabled individuals and their family members. And fourth, we present information and
evidence about program spillovers, both across programs and across federal and state levels of government.
Throughout the paper we make numerous explicit references to areas where further study is warranted
and open research questions remain. SSI is an important part of the U.S. safety net, but particular features
of the program raise questions about whether there is a more effective way to provide income support
for individuals with work-limiting disabilities and families with disabled the children. Our goal for
this paper is to systematically present the issues for scholars and policy-makers to consider and explore.

Mark Duggan
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
mgduggan@stanford.edu
Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Stephanie Rennane
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115N Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
rennane@econ.umd.edu

I.

Introduction
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is a federally-administered, means tested program

that provides cash – and typically Medicaid -- benefits to low income individuals who meet a
categorical eligibility requirement of age or disability status. SSI essentially operates three programs
for distinct populations: blind or disabled children, blind or disabled non-elderly adults, and
individuals 65 and older (without regard for disability status). The program has a federally
determined set of income, asset, and medical eligibility criteria and maximum benefit levels that
do not vary across states. Nearly one-third of states supplement the federal benefit with state SSI
benefits (paid for entirely by the individual states) though these payments account for just 6 percent
of total SSI benefits paid.
In 2013 the federal government paid $54 billion in SSI cash benefits and in December 2013
there were 8.4 million SSI recipients. An additional $133 billion was paid for SSI recipients’
1

Medicaid benefits in 2011. More than half of SSI recipients in December 2013 received the
maximum federal benefit of $710 per month (or more if supplemented by the state) with the
rest having their benefits partially phased out due to relatively higher income. Approximately
one-in-six current SSI recipients are under the age of 18, one-in-four are 65 or older, and
the remaining 60 percent are between the ages of 18 and 64. The corresponding shares 25 years
ago were 6, 44, and 50 percent, respectively, reflecting the substantial increase in SSI enrollment
among children and non-elderly adults during this period. Total federal benefits paid for SSI
disabled children and non-elderly adults nearly tripled over a 25-year period, rising from $14.6
billion in 1988 to $44.4 billion dollars in 2013 (SSA 2014f, all figures in real 2014$).

1

This is the most recent year for which Medicaid spending data by eligibility category are available. CMS reports $223
billion for 14.1 million aged and disabled Medicaid recipients. Because this exceeds the number of SSI aged and
disabled recipients, we scale this down by the ratio of SSI aged and disabled to CMS aged and disabled.

1

The SSI program has become an increasingly important part of the social safety net,
especially for non-elderly adults and children. For the elderly, the SSI program typically
supplements social security (OASDI) benefits for low-income individuals and households,
providing a transfer of income intended to assist individuals with very low levels of income. The
fraction of elderly individuals receiving SSI benefits has fallen steadily since the early 1980s, with
this trend primarily driven by a corresponding increase in Social Security benefits.2 In 2013,
approximately 1-in-22 elderly individuals received SSI benefits versus 1-in-15 thirty years earlier.
For non-elderly adults, the SSI program provides cash income to disabled individuals with
limited earnings history. The rationale for these income transfers is to provide an income floor to
individuals with disabilities who are unable to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA). Nearly
one-in-four SSI disabled adults also qualify for benefits through the Social Security Disability
Insurance (SSDI) program, which requires 10 or more years of earnings history, while the rest do
not have sufficient work history to qualify for SSDI. Both programs are administered by the U.S.
Social Security Administration (SSA) and have an identical set of medical eligibility criteria. The
fraction of non-elderly adults receiving SSI benefits has increased substantially over time, from 1.5
percent in 1988 to 2.5 percent by 2013.3 In the 2000 Means Tested Programs volume, Burkhauser
and Daly make the important observations that (1) “disability” is neither a precise nor a static
concept and (2) societal expectations about work for those with disabilities have changed over time
as, for example, reflected in the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act. These observations raise the
issue of labor supply disincentives inherent in the SSI program, a point to which we return below.
SSI also provides benefits to low-income children with disabilities. The fraction of children
2

The primary reason for this growth is that Social Security benefits are indexed to wages.
This 1.0 percentage point increase is less than half the corresponding enrollment change for the SSDI program. This
difference is likely driven by the growth in labor supply among women over time, which has made more of them
eligible for SSDI benefits and their level of SSDI benefits higher as well (Duggan and Imberman, 2007). Because
SSDI phases out SSI benefits one-for-one, an increase in SSDI benefits will tend to reduce SSI enrollment.
3

2

receiving SSI has increased by a factor of four since the late 1980s, from 0.4 percent in 1988 to
1.8 percent in 2013). This enrollment growth was primarily driven by two 1990 policy changes
that expanded the program’s medical eligibility criteria (Duggan and Kearney, 2007, GAO
1994). There is considerable overlap between the households with children served by this program
and those served by the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program.4
But unlike TANF, SSI is a federal program and is not explicitly “temporary.” The
motivation for why families with a disabled child should get additional income, as compared to a
family with a healthy child and the same level of income, is not explicit in the program. One
could rationalize that such families might have additional child care needs to support parental
employment or additional health care costs for the child. Or, one could argue that families with
a disabled child have a need for occupational services, designed to help a child improve and
excel in school. But in practice, the program taxes parental earnings and it does not explicitly tie
benefits to child care or health care costs. Furthermore, if a child’s condition improves, the
family risks losing their SSI benefits. All of these observations raise questions about the
incentives of the program and whether it is optimally designed to serve families with disabled
children. We return to these points below.
When considering SSI alongside the panoply of means-tested cash transfer programs,
we note four defining features of the program. These are features that stand in contrast to
typical features of other means-tested income support programs in the U.S., including the Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC), TANF, the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP),
and Medicaid. First, as we have noted above, for the non-elderly the SSI program includes a
categorical requirement of demonstrated disability, specifically, a disability that hinders labor

In 2001, households with at least one child on SSI were more than three times as likely as households with children not
on SSI to receive some income from the TANF program (Duggan and Kearney, 2007).
4

3

market or educational performance. Second, the program’s benefit levels are relatively generous,
especially compared to TANF cash benefit awards in low-benefit states, and are indexed to
inflation. Third, SSI benefits are paid for with federal dollars, which can amount to large net
transfers to states with a disproportionate share of low-income Americans. Fourth, the program is
not intended to be temporary, so any distortions in behavior resulting from the program can
potentially be long lasting.
These four features raise a particular set of theoretical issues. First, the categorical
disability requirement is a form of “tagging”, so named in the seminal work of Akerlof (1978), in
which the government imposes certain eligibility requirements to target funds to groups with
especially high needs. The existence of a tag allows the government to redistribute more than if all
individuals were potentially eligible for the benefit. It also may provide an incentive for some
individuals to overstate the severity of their medical conditions in order to qualify for the program.
Second, there exists the standard trade-off between income protection and distortions to the
labor supply and savings decisions of benefit recipients. Third, the federal nature of this
program raises the possibility of spillover effects to state and local programs such as TANF. In the
pages that follow, we review these issues in more depth and describe the relevant empirical
evidence.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section two we provide a brief summary of
the history of the SSI program and discuss the most important features of the program today.
Section three presents information about the caseload and caseload trends. Section four describes
economic issues particular to the design and practical application of this program as well as a
discussion of relevant empirical evidence. A final section concludes.

4

II.

Origins and Structure of the SSI Program
The federal Supplemental Security Income program began paying out benefits in January,

1974 and replaced a combination of approximately 1350 different state and local programs
that provided benefits to low-income aged, blind, and disabled individuals (Berkowitz and DeWitt
2013). Many of these programs had been partially funded by the federal government, and the size
of benefits varied across states (Wiseman, 2010). In some cases, the uniform federal SSI benefit
amount was lower than what had been paid by the previous programs. Because of this, a system
of state supplements was introduced during the transition to SSI to ensure that no individual would
receive lower benefits from the SSI program than they were already receiving from their state or
local welfare program. Relatedly, because there was variation across geographic areas in the
medical and income eligibility criteria, recipients already enrolled in state programs by early 1973
were grandfathered in to SSI, though anyone who enrolled in a state program after July 1973
would have their SSI eligibility determined according to the uniform medical eligibility standards in
effect throughout the U.S.
Since its inception, the SSI program has been administered by SSA, perhaps partly
because of the overlap in the populations served by the OASDI and SSI programs.
Supporters of the program also argued that there would be less stigma from receiving SSI benefits
if it were administered by SSA instead of local welfare offices. And because SSA already had a set
of medical eligibility criteria defined for the SSDI program, it was well-positioned to apply these
same criteria to SSI applicants. The two programs have used the same medical eligibility criteria
for disabled adults during the last 40 years. By December of 1974, there were 4.0 million U.S.
residents receiving SSI benefits and more than 60 percent of SSI recipients were aged 65 or older.
Most of these elderly SSI recipients qualified solely due to low income and assets after reaching
65, though a substantial number also qualified initially due to a disability and remained on SSI

5

after reaching age 65. Legislation that took effect in the summer of 1974 required that SSI benefits
be indexed to the consumer price index (CPI).
In contrast to SSDI, SSI has always paid benefits to disabled children.5 In the first full
year of the program, 71,000 children received SSI benefits; over the next 10 years this number
tripled to 212,000. During the debate that took place in both houses of Congress in the early
1970s as SSI legislation was considered, there was little discussion of whether children should
receive benefits from the SSI program and what the medical eligibility criteria for them should
be. Evidence from the historical record suggests that a congressional staffer inserted a phrase
about benefits for disabled children into the 1971 version of the House bill. This phrase
remained in the final version that passed both houses of Congress and that was sent to President
Nixon for his signature (Berkowitz and DeWitt 2013).
The shifting age distribution of SSI recipients over the last four decades is striking. As
incomes among the elderly have risen during that time period, a smaller share has been eligible
for the program. The fraction of U.S. residents aged 65 and up receiving SSI stood at 11 percent
in 1974 and has trended steadily down to 4.7 percent by 2013. In contrast, the fraction of children
and of non-elderly adults receiving SSI benefits has grown substantially during that same period.
Perhaps the most important factor causing this growth has been an expansion in the program’s
medical eligibility criteria, a subject to which we now turn.
A.

Disability Determination
We begin our review of the structure of the SSI program with a discussion of the

program’s disability determination process, considering first the process as it applies to adult
applicants and subsequently to applicants under age 18. Income-eligible applicants over the age of
SSDI does pay benefits to children but only as dependents of disabled workers. See Autor and Duggan (2006) for
more background on the SSDI program.
5

6

65 do not need to demonstrate the existence of a work-limiting disability. If they satisfy the income
and asset tests, they are eligible for SSI. This discussion about disability determination therefore
6

only applies to those under the age of 65. In addition, individuals can meet the categorical
requirement for SSI through blindness if they have 20/200 vision or less with the use of a
correcting lens in their better eye, or if they have tunnel vision of 20 degrees or less (SSA
2014a). These objective standards stand in contrast to the more subjective criteria employed to
determine eligibility under the disabled criteria, as described below.

1.

Disability determination for Adults
Non-elderly adults typically apply for SSI benefits through an SSA field office.

Employees there determine whether the applicant meets non-medical requirements including
sufficiently low income and assets. If monthly earnings exceed SSA’s definition of SGA, the
7

applicant is deemed categorically ineligible. Applications that pass this initial screen are then
forwarded on to a state agency, where the disability determination process is usually carried out by
a two-person team. The first person is a state disability examiner, who assembles both medical
and non-medical evidence and requests a consultative exam when the medical evidence is not
sufficient to make a disability determination. The examiner also prepares (or assists in
preparation for more complicated cases) an assessment of the applicant’s residual functional
capacity. The second person on the team is a medical consultant who reviews the available
medical evidence provided by the applicant and acquired through one or more additional
consultative exams. The examiner prepares the final determination, which is then signed by the
6

About 45 percent of elderly SSI recipients first qualified for the program because of blindness or a disability. More
specifically, in December 2013 there were 2.11 million SSI recipients aged 65 and up but there were only 1.16 million SSI
recipients in the “Aged” category.
7
The monthly substantial gainful activity amount increased from $500 to $700 in 1999 and has been indexed to inflation
since. See http://www.socialsecurity.gov/oact/cola/sga.html for more information.

7

medical consultant.
A non-elderly adult applying for SSI benefits must demonstrate that he or she has a
medically determined physical or mental disability that limits his or her ability to engage in SGA
and further demonstrate that this disability will last at least 12 months or result in death. The
federal guidelines are the same across states and are identical to those used by the SSDI program.
In practice, there is variation in award rates, as the determination of disability status is made
by individual examiners and often inevitably involves subjective judgments. Indeed, recent
research (Maestas et al, 2013; French and Song, 2014) has shown that there is considerable
variation across examiners in the disability determination even after controlling for the
characteristics of applicants.
The SSA’s disability determination process considers whether a medical impairment is
severe and is expected to last for at least 12 months or to result in death. If the impairment
passes this threshold and is on SSA’s list of medical impairments, then the applicant passes
the disability determination. If the impairment is not on this list, then SSA considers whether
the applicant can perform labor market tasks that he/she previously performed. If this is possible,
then the applicant is found to be categorically ineligible. If the applicant is unable to do past work,
then SSA considers whether there are other occupations in the economy that he/she could
perform. In this case, the examining team considers not only the applicant’s medical condition but
also his/her age, education, and work experience.

8

Applicants who are initially rejected may appeal the decision. A first round appeal
involves the application being considered by a second team of examiners. Applicants denied at this
stage have the option to appeal to an administrative law judge (ALJ). When appearing before an

8

See Wixon and Strand (2013) for a more detailed explanation of this process.

8

ALJ, the applicant is often joined by a lawyer or some other representative. The hearings are
somewhat unusual in that only one side is represented – SSA does not have anyone there
explaining the reason for the initial decisions. Here too there is an element of significant variation
across judges. On this point, a paper by French and Song (2014) shows systematic variation in
denial rates across SSA appeals judges. Applicants denied through that second appeals stage
can try again by appealing to the Social Security Appeals Council and then to their district court.
In 2009, approximately 1.662 million individuals applied for SSI and met the initial
income and asset screens. From this group, approximately 31.1 percent received an SSI award at
this first stage. Of the 1.145 million rejected applicants, more than half (51.3 percent) appeal the
decision. Only 10.2 percent r e c e i v e an award at the next stage, suggesting that employees
at the state Disability Determine Services rarely overturn the decisions made by their colleagues.
However, that is not the case for ALJs. Of the 413 thousand rejected applicants appealing to an
ALJ, the majority (57.9 percent) receive an award from the ALJ or at a subsequent stage. The
large number of appeals substantially increases the SSI award rate among non-elderly adults
from 31.1 percent (considering just the first stage) to 49.6 percent.9 Put another way, more than
1-in-3 SSI awards to non-elderly adults are made on appeal. The average time from initial
application to the first decision is four months while those appealing to the ALJ level or higher
typically wait more than two years for the decision (OIG 2008).

2.

Disability Determination for Children

The process of determining categorical disability eligibility for children has undergone substantial
change since the program’s inception. Like adult applicants, in order to be eligible for

9

Left out of this calculation are the 14,189 applications still in process in the most recent data.

9

the program, a child has to be determined to have a disability lasting at least 12 months or
resulting in death. Initially this was done by establishing that a child applicant had a medical
impairment that appeared on the SSA list of qualifying medical conditions.
Two policy changes in the early 1990s introduced a greater emphasis on a child’s
functioning rather than a strict focus on medical conditions alone. First, the landmark legal case of
Sullivan versus Zebley – full case name Louis Wade Sullivan, Secretary of Health and Human Services
v. Brian Zebley, et al., 493 US 591 -- resulted in the addition of a functional assessment for
children. In this case, the Supreme Court ruled on the side of the plaintiff’s, finding that SSA’s
listing-only methodology for determining SSI child claims was inconsistent with the statutory
standard of “comparable severity” for adult limitations set forth in the Social Security Act. The
argument was that the current program rules did not provide SSI child claimants with an
individualized functional assessment similar to the functional analysis considered in many adult
claims. Second, prompted by the Zebley decision, in December of 1990, SSA issued new regulations
in accordance with the Disability Benefits Reform Act (DBRA) of 1984 that revised and expanded
SSA’s medical listings for childhood mental impairments. The new medical listings for mental
impairments provided more detailed and specific guidance on how to evaluate mental disorders in
children as compared to the former regulations, which were put into place in 1977 (GAO, 1995.)
Over the early 1990s, use of the individual functional assessment (IFA), as well as the new
DBRA criteria emphasizing functioning in determining mental disabilities, led to a large
expansion in the number of children determined to be categorically eligible for SSI, many of
whom had less severe disabilities than previous generations of SSI child recipients. In the three
years prior to this change, the number of children receiving SSI benefits was growing by about 3
percent per year, from 241 thousand in 1986 to 264 thousand by 1989. In the seven years
following these changes, the number of children on SSI increased from 265,000 in 1989 to

10

955,000 in 1996, an increase of 260 percent. In terms of the percent of children age 0 to 17
receiving SSI benefits, this increase reflects an increase from 0.4 percent to 1.4 (Duggan and
Kearney, 2007).
In response to this caseload expansion, Congress revised the SSI eligibility rules for
children as part of the 1996 welfare reform legislation. The revised provisions eliminated the IFA,
but preserved the spirit of the functional limitation idea: to be determined categorically eligible, a
child must demonstrate “a medically determined physical or mental impairment which results in
marked and severe functional limitations, which can be expected to lead to death or which has
been or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months” (SSA
2014c). This change resulted in nearly 100,000 children being terminated from the program in
1997, and the share of children receiving SSI remained at 1.2 percent from 1997 through 2000.
The new provisions further required children reaching age 18 to be re-evaluated to
determine whether a child SSI recipient would continue to receive benefits as an adult. As a result,
the current determination process for children is less restrictive than it was during the “listingonly” paradigm in effect before the Zebley decision, but more restrictive than it was during the
early 1990s (Berkowitz and Dewitt 2013; Wittenburg 2011; and Wiseman 2010). Despite this, SSI
enrollment has grown steadily since 2000, with 1.8 percent of children receiving SSI benefits in
2013.

10

In practice, the change in child disability determination since the early 1990s has led to
a situation where a child’s disability status is frequently determined by a subjective
determination about his performance in school, relative to peers his age. This has led to concerns

During this same 2000 to 2013 period, the fraction of children in families with incomes below the poverty line also
increased, from 16.2 percent to 19.9 percent. While this may have contributed to the increase in child SSI enrollment,
recent research suggests that changes in poverty do not have a significant effect on SSI enrollment (Aizer, Gordon, and
Kearney, 2014).
10

11

about how the program’s eligibility criteria may increase the chance that a child is labeled with a
learning disability, placed on medication in an effort to be deemed disabled, or receives (or not)
inappropriate treatment therapies (Wen 2010; Wittenberg 2011). On the point of medication, a
report by GAO found little evidence to suggest that medication use increased the chance that a child
would be awarded SSI benefits (GAO, 2012). These are issues to which we return later in the
chapter.
3.

Continuing Disability Reviews
Continuing disability reviews (CDRs) have been required by law since the beginning of

SSI. In practice, the frequency and stringency of CDRs have not been consistent over time, in
many cases due to administrative backlogs and budget constraints (GAO 2006, 2014). The
frequency with which SSA is expected to conduct CDRs on a disability beneficiary is set at the
time the individual begins receiving benefits. The frequency is categorized into one of three groups,
according to the likelihood that the individual’s condition will improve: “improvement expected”
(CDR every 6-18 months); “improvement possible” (CDR every 3 years); and “improvement
not expected” (CDR every 5-7 years) (GAO 2006). For children, CDRs are required to be
conducted every three years, except for benefits awarded for low birth weight, where CDRs
should be conducted every 12 months (GAO 2012). Reviewers are required to conduct CDRs
beginning with a neutral opinion about the beneficiary’s disability status, rather than presuming the
beneficiary still has a disability.
CDRs are conducted at two levels in order to maintain cost-effectiveness and efficiency: a
mailer survey to all beneficiaries asking about their condition, and a full examination for select
beneficiaries. SSA uses a statistical “profiling” method based on age, condition, and previous CDR
results in order to predict how thoroughly to conduct the CDR. If a beneficiary is unlikely to
improve, they are more likely to receive just the mailer. If the information about the
12

respondent’s medical condition on the mailer suggests improvement, then SSA will conduct a full
medical examination. If not, the mailer completes the CDR requirement. Certain cases skip the
mailing process and are subject to a full medical examination from the beginning (GAO 2006). As
of 2014, the mailer process was not used for children (GAO 2014). When SSA determines that
an individual’s benefits should be terminated, the beneficiary has a three-month grace period
during which she can appeal the decision.
In addition to budgetary challenges that have prevented all CDRs from being completed
on time, it is often difficult for state DDS offices to determine medical improvement,
particularly in cases where the original disability determination was decided on appeal, indicating a
less conclusive disability. Despite attempts to clarify the definition of a medical improvement in
1984, the standards of improvement for disability is often unclear (GAO 2006). This is particularly
true when an individual’s improvement is contingent on Medicaid benefits received as a result of
participation in SSI. Despite these challenges, however, an SSA quality assessment of CDRs in
2005 found a 95% accuracy rate in CDR decisions.
When faced with budget constraints that limit the number of CDRs that SSA can conduct
in a given time frame, SSA prioritizes CDRs in the following manner: (1) maintaining CDR
currency; (2) age 18 redeterminations; and (3) cost-effectiveness. The priority on cost
effectiveness often means that SSA prioritizes SSDI CDRs over SSI CDRs, since SSDI
beneficiaries on average receive larger benefits than SSI beneficiaries. While potentially more
cost effective in the short run, SSA has acknowledged that focusing on CDRs for children
and younger beneficiaries may yield higher savings in the long run (GAO 14-492T 2014). As of
August 2011, approximately 435,000 children on SSI were overdue for CDRs, more than one-third
of the total child caseload (GAO 12-497 2012). In September 2011, SSA’s inspector general
estimated that “$1.4 billion in SSI benefits (had been paid) to approximately 513,000 recipients

13

under age 18 who should have not received them” (GAO 14-492T 2014).
Additionally, since 1996, child SSA cases have been required to be re-evaluated at the
th

child’s 18 birthday according to adult eligibility rules. Following the Zebley decision, child cases
have been determined based on the child’s ability to function at a comparable level to nondisabled children, while adult cases have always been determined based on an individual’s ability to
work, or participate in SGA (Hemmeter 2012). In many cases the transition from child to adult
benefits leads to many terminations, and continuing beneficiaries are often re-assigned to a
different diagnosis category. In 1997, just following the introduction of age 18 redetermination, 54
percent of 18–year olds lost their benefits. This number fell to 46 percent by 2006
(Hemmeter and Gilby 2009). Additionally, 30 percent of 18-year olds who kept their benefits
were assigned to a new diagnosis group (Hemmeter 2012).
While children whose benefits are terminated may be able to work, recent research finds
that their income earned from work does not fully replace the income from benefits they would
have earned. Deshpande (2014b) finds that young adults whose benefits were terminated earned
only one- third of what they would have received in benefits, and suggests that these former
beneficiaries experience significant volatility in their earnings over time.
B.

Means Testing and Benefit Levels
To qualify for the SSI program, individuals must have sufficiently low income and assets.

In the case of children, a portion of parental and sibling income affects both SSI eligibility and
the potential benefit if a person is eligible. For married adult applicants and beneficiaries,
spousal income is considered in eligibility and award determination. Other family members’
income and assets are counted toward an applicant’s income and assets through a process
called deeming. As deemed income and assets increase, a person’s potential SSI benefits decline,

14

and we discuss the specifics of this below. This raises the standard incentive concern – that an SSI
recipient and his/her family members may have a lower incentive to work and save due to
program rules (Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1995).
In 2015, the federal benefit rate (FBR) – which is the maximum monthly benefit level –
was $733 for individuals and $1100 for couples. While the federal benefit rate is the same for
recipients of all ages, the average actual monthly benefit amount varies substantially across age
groups. In December 2014, the average benefit was $633 for child beneficiaries, $550 for nonelderly adult beneficiaries, and $426 for elderly beneficiaries. An SSI recipient’s monthly benefit
falls below the FBR if the recipient or a family member has earned or unearned income. The
FBR is adjusted for a cost of living adjustment (COLA) using the consumer price index (CPI-W)
each year. However, the value of the earned and unearned income exclusions for the SSI
recipient – which define the threshold at which benefits begin to phase out - have not changed
since the program began (Burkhauser and Daly, 2003) and the asset limits were last updated in
1989.
1.

Adults age 18-64
The means-testing eligibility for SSI is based on income – both earned and unearned –

as well as assets. In order to be eligible for SSI, a non-elderly adult must not have assets
exceeding $2,000 if filing as an individual, or $3,000 if filing as a couple. The value of the
individual’s home and the value of one vehicle, as well as several small assets including grants
and scholarships for educational purposes, personal effects (e.g. wedding rings), and life
insurance policies, are excluded from the calculation of assets.
In terms of income, an eligible adult’s benefit amount is equal to the difference between
the maximum Federal Benefit Rate (FBR) and “countable income”. In general, if an applicant is

15

determined to have countable income greater than or equal to the maximum benefit of $733
a month, then the applicant is not eligible for an SSI award. Similarly, if an SSI recipient’s
countable income rises above $733 in a month, his/her SSI benefit for that month falls to
zero and his/her benefits may be terminated if this persists.
Countable income for a single adult SSI recipient is approximately equal to the sum
of unearned income and one-half of earned income. There is a general (either earned or
unearned) income exclusion of $20 per month and an earned income exclusion of $65 per
month. Thus an adult SSI recipient with $300 per month in unearned income but no earned
income would have countable income of $280. An adult SSI recipient with $300 per month in
earned income but no unearned income would have countable income of $107.50. In other
words, unearned income phases out the SSI benefit one-for-one while there is a (lower) 50
percent marginal tax rate on earned income. In principle, the adult SSI recipient’s income would
need to exceed $1500 per month to fully phase out the SSI benefit. Under the Section 1619
waivers enacted in 1987, beneficiaries may be eligible to receive cash payments until the SSI benefit
is fully phased out, even after earnings exceed the SGA. In practice, this is relatively rare: BenShalom and Stapleton 2015 finds that 10.4 percent of the 2001 SSI award cohort were allowed to
earn above SGA for at least one month over a six year period from 2001 to 2007. Over the same
time frame, 8.4 percent had earnings exceeding the phase-out threshold in at least one month, but
maintained eligibility for Medicaid due to a Section 1619(b) waiver.11
The share of SSI recipients with earned income is quite small: in 2013, less than 5 percent
of the non-elderly adult beneficiary population reported having earned income (SSA, 2014b).
This makes clear that earned income is not generally the reason for benefit amounts falling
See https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0502302010 for more details on section 1619 waivers. In practice, these
waivers have a similar purpose as the Trial Work Period for SSDI, allowing beneficiaries to test their work ability while
maintaining eligibility for benefits and Medicaid temporarily.
11

16

below the FBR. Main sources of unearned income include transfer payments from Social
Security, Unemployment Insurance or a household TANF award, as well as income brought into
the household from other family members. Income from tax refunds and grants or scholarships
are not counted towards qualifying unearned income; nor are non-cash benefits such as food
assistance through the SNAP program. 12 In addition to the standard exclusions for earned and
unearned income there is also a student income exclusion, which allows full time students to
exclude a substantial amount of earned income from being counted towards SSI. In 2015,
students aged 18-22 could exclude up to $1,780 per month from their own earned income.
When an adult SSI recipient is married, the spouse’s income may “deemed” to the SSI
recipient. Thus even if the SSI recipient has no income, if his/her spouse has substantial
income, then this can substantially lower the SSI benefit. There is a 50 percent tax rate on the
earnings of the spouse in the phase-out range and spousal earnings can be substantial before
the SSI recipient’s benefits begin to phase out. More specifically, if the applicant has no income,
the spouse of an SSI recipient could earn $819 per month in 201513 before the SSI benefit
begins to decline, and the spouse’s earnings would have to exceed $2,285 per month before the
SSI benefit would be fully phased out. Given a federal poverty level of $15,930 for a two-person
family, this suggests that the family’s income could reach almost 175 percent of the FPL before SSI
benefits would be fully phased out.
If there are one or more ineligible children in the household, then earnings of the spouse
can be even higher before SSI benefits are taxed. In 2015, the spouse of an SSI recipient can
earn $1,186 per month, rather than $819 per month, before the phaseout of benefits begins if
12

For more information, see http://www.ssa.gov/ssi/text-income-ussi.htm.
The spouse receives the same $85 income exclusion ($65 earned and $20 either earned or unearned) that the SSI
recipient would. Additionally, SSI benefits are calculated as the lower of the amount that the person on SSI would
receive if the spouse’s income was ignored and the amount that the couple would both receive if both were on SSI and it
was included.
13

17

there is one child present in the household. Figures A1-A4 provide several examples of the
thresholds at which SSI benefits start to phase out in several different income and family
situations.

2.

Children less than age 18
Child applicants are, by definition, under age 18, and not married or a head of

household. If these conditions are not met, the applicant is evaluated as an adult. As with adults,
the means testing involved in child eligibility determination is based on both assets and income.
Child eligibility is based on the same asset limit as individual adult eligibility ($2,000), and
includes both assets in the child’s name and parental assets deemed to the child for the sake of
eligibility determination. Applicants may subtract the amount of the adult income asset limit -$2,000 for a single parent, $3,000 for a married couple -- from total parental assets, the remaining
balance of parental assets is deemed to the child. This means that children in households where a
single parent has more than $4,000 or a married couple has more than $5,000 in assets – net of
excludable assets including a house, one vehicle, or educational grants, among others -- are
ineligible for SSI. 14
Countable income for child applicants is based in part on parental income deemed to
the child. This specified deeming process is somewhat different from the deeming of spousal
income discussed above for adult recipients. If a child applicant’s parent(s) would be eligible for
SSI based on their own income, then none of the parental income is deemed to the child. But if
parental income exceeds the threshold for adult SSI eligibility, any income that is not used to
“exhaust” the parent’s hypothetical eligibility for SSI is deemed to the child as unearned

14

Source: http://www.socialsecurity.gov/ssi/text-resources-ussi.htm, last accessed November 11, 2014

18

income. 15 The unearned and earned income exclusions are applied to parental income, as well as
any deductions for other children in the household who are not receiving SSI or TANF benefits.
If there is more than one SSI-eligible child in the household, the remaining income to be deemed
is divided equally among all eligible children in the household.
The deemed income from parents is added to any additional earned or unearned income
the child may have. Any public income maintenance payments made to other members of the
household are not included in countable income. 16 Then, the standard earned and unearned
exclusions are applied, and the remaining countable income amount is compared to the FBR.
An eligible child’s SSI benefit amount is determined as the amount by which the FBR exceeds
countable income. 17
As was true for adult SSI recipients, there is an effective 50 percent marginal tax rate on
SSI benefits in the phase-out range. However, parental earnings can be substantial before a
child’s SSI benefits begin to phase out. Consider a family with one parent and one child on SSI.
In 2015, he parent’s earnings must exceed $1,591 per month before the child’s SSI benefits
begin to phase out. If there are two parents with one child on SSI, parental earnings must exceed
$2,322 per month before the phase-out begins. This represents a very high level of earnings
before benefit phase-out begins relative to SSI adults or other means-tested transfer programs
such as TANF or food stamps.
According to data from SSA, more than two-thirds of children on SSI were living with only
one parent in December 2013. An additional 12 percent reside with no parents, with most of these
children likely living with other relatives or in foster care. Of the 1.163 million children on SSI

15

The deeming rules changed in 1992 in such a way that led to a more generous treatment of parental income for
deeming purposes. See Hannsgen and Sandell 1996, SSA bulletin.
16
Source: cite: https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0501320100, last accessed November 11, 2014.
17
Source: https://secure.ssa.gov/poms.nsf/lnx/0500820510, last accessed November 11, 2014

19

residing with one or both parents, parental earnings was non-zero for 479 thousand (41 percent)
and average parental earnings for this group was $1,789 per month. However, given the
relatively generous income exclusions described above, these earnings resulted in deemed income
for just 160,000 children. SSI benefits were actually reduced more frequently because of the
child’s own (usually unearned) income from absent parents, Social Security, or some other source.
C.

Citizenship and Residency Requirements
Since passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act in

August 1996, resident aliens are only eligible for SSI if they were living in the U.S. prior to
August 1996 and (1) receiving SSI prior to August 1996; (2) are blind and disabled, or (3) are on
active duty or a veteran of the armed forces. If they arrived after August 22, 1996, refugees,
asylees and certain other small categories of immigrants are eligible for benefits during their first
seven years in the U.S. with refugee/asylee status. 18 Lawfully admitted permanent residents
(LAPRs) with substantial work history (40 quarters of work) may be eligible to apply for SSI after
five years. If the applicant is an LAPR and does not have sufficient work history, but their
spouse does, this work history could count for determining eligibility. 19 Similarly, a LAPR child
is eligible if her parents have sufficient work history.
As a result of these restrictions, noncitizen beneficiaries declined by nearly half, from 12.1
percent of the SSI population in 1995 to 6.7 percent in 2013. Throughout this period,
noncitizen beneficiaries have been disproportionately elderly. Noncitizen beneficiaries accounted for
nearly 31.8 percent of all aged beneficiaries in 1995, declining to 22.6 percent in 2013. The
corresponding fractions for blind and disabled SSI recipients were 6.3 percent and 4.2

18
19

Source: https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/lnx/0500502100, last accessed November 11, 2014.
Source: https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/lnx/0500502135.

20

percent, respectively (SSA 2014b).
D.

State Supplementation of SSI Benefits
In 2011 – the most recent year for which state supplement data is available for all states --

all but six states (Arizona, Arkansas, Mississippi, North Dakota, Tennessee, and West Virginia)
supplemented the federal SSI benefit for at least some of their SSI recipients. 20 Of the remaining 45
states, most administer the optional SSI supplements themselves, though the federal government
administers the supplement for almost one-third of the states. As shown in Table 1, states vary
substantially with respect to the fraction of SSI recipients with a state supplement. For example, in
Texas and New Mexico, just 0.3 percent and 0.1 percent of beneficiaries, respectively, received a
state supplement in January 2011. In contrast, in a handful of states, including California,
Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New York, among others, more than 95 percent of SSI recipients
receive a state supplement. In some states – for example, Alaska -- there are actually more
recipients of state supplements than federal benefits, because the federal benefit was fully
phased out but the person still had sufficiently low income to receive the state supplement. In
January 2011, there were 3.4 million individuals receiving state SSI supplements. Given that there
were 7.66 million total SSI recipients, this suggests that about 4-in-9 of those on SSI have a state
supplement.

20

Four of these six states do supplement the benefit for the small number of SSI recipients enrolled since 1973. Several
states – such as Michigan and Pennsylvania - are a mix in that the state administers the supplement for some recipients
and the federal government for others

21

Table 1: Percentage of state SSI caseload receiving a state supplement
State
Alaska
Alabama
Arkansas
Arizona
California
Colorado
Connecticut
District of Columbia
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Iowa
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Maryland
Maine
Michigan
Minnesota

Share
138.6%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
97.9%
42.0%
17.3%
5.5%
4.0%
2.6%
1.2%
10.8%
10.8%
50.5%
9.7%
2.8%
15.8%
2.1%
2.5%
98.2%
3.1%
101.7%
88.8%
47.7%

State
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
Nevada
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
Washington
Wisconsin
West Virginia
Wyoming

Share
10.5%
0.0%
20.5%
54.8%
96.0%
0.1%
24.3%
95.7%
0.5%
93.0%
2.4%
84.5%
96.5%
3.4%
27.3%
0.0%
0.3%
8.2%
3.4%
96.8%
23.3%
101.3%
0.0%
48.6%

Notes: Data from SSA 2011.

States also vary with respect to the generosity of the supplement. California’s average
supplement of $167 per month is about twice as high as New York’s ($77 per month) and
Massachusetts’ ($79 per month) and more than three times the average in New Jersey
($46), Vermont ($54), or Rhode Island ($45).21 The other six states with a federally
administered SSI supplement provide it to less than one-in-four of their SSI recipients. In 2011,
federally administered state supplements accounted for 6 percent of total federally administered
SSI expenditures. Because 70 percent of SSI recipients with a supplement receive it from SSA,

21

The average benefit amount is not readily available for the 33 states that administer the state supplement directly.

22

we estimate that total SSI supplements are 8 to 9 percent of total SSI expenditures.

E.

Interactions with Other Government Programs
The vast majority of SSI recipients obtain health insurance through the Medicaid

program. While most states automatically grant Medicaid coverage to all of their SSI recipients,
enrollment is not 100 percent for two reasons. First, some eligible enrollees do not complete
the necessary paperwork to enroll in the program. Second, twelve states have different and
potentially more restrictive Medicaid eligibility requirements so that some SSI recipients are
ineligible for Medicaid. Despite this, a recent study that used administrative data from SSA and
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services showed that more than 85 percent of SSI
recipients are also enrolled for health insurance through Medicaid (Riley and Rupp, 2012).
Approximately one-in-three SSI recipients received Social Security (OASDI) benefits in
2013. As discussed above, Social Security benefits phase out SSI benefits one-for-one. Thus an
SSI recipient with a $300 monthly Social Security benefit but no other income would receive an SSI
benefit that is $280 lower ( recall the $20 income exclusion) than the maximum SSI benefit.
More than half (56 percent) of elderly SSI recipients receive Social Security benefits and the
average monthly Social Security benefit among those who do receive it is $493 per month. Thirty
percent of non-elderly adult SSI recipients also receive Social Security benefits, and virtually all of
these benefits are paid through the SSDI program. The average monthly SSDI benefit among
those SSI recipients with income from both programs was $534 monthly in December 2013.
Only 7.5 percent of SSI- enrolled children also received Social Security benefits in that same
month, with most obtaining this as a dependent of a retired, disabled, or deceased worker.
SSI and Medicaid also play an important role for many SSDI awardees who must wait for
five months from the onset of their disability before their SSDI benefits “kick in” and 29 months

23

before their Medicare benefits take effect (Riley and Rupp, 2012). Some individuals awarded
SSDI will receive retroactive SSI benefits for the first five months after the onset of disability and
then SSDI benefits take effect in month 6 and lower (often to zero) the SSI benefit. As a result,
the number of individuals exiting the SSI rolls each year is artificially high, because many are on
just temporarily until SSDI payments begin.
Participation in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is especially high
among SSI recipients. According to recent data from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation, approximately 3-in-5 households with some SSI income also receive SNAP benefits.
In contrast, only 8 percent of SSI households have any income from TANF and just 4 percent
have any unemployment insurance benefits. As SSI benefits increase, a household’s SNAP benefits
will typically decline. Adult SSI recipients living alone are categorically eligible for SNAP benefits,
though things become more complicated when there are additional household members.
Much

previous

research

has

examined

the

relationship

between

SSI

and

AFDC/TANF (Garrett and Glied, 2000). While some households have income from both
programs, an individual cannot receive benefits from both. Thus if one of two children in a oneparent family is on SSI, the relevant family size for AFDC/TANF benefit computation would
be just two. TANF is administered by states and benefit levels vary dramatically across states,
with for example the maximum benefit in California more than five times greater than in
Mississippi. Previous research has shown that SSI enrollment is much higher in states with low
AFDC/TANF benefits, no doubt partly because these states tend to have a higher fraction of
people in or near poverty. The growth in SSI enrollment during the 1990s cushioned the effects
of the dramatic decline in AFDC/TANF enrollment during the same period. Data from the
SIPP indicate that children are now twice as likely to reside in a household with some SSI
income as in a household with some TANF income (6.9 percent versus 3.4 percent).

24

III.

Program Caseloads
There have been substantial changes in SSI caseload growth and the composition of the

SSI caseload since the program began in 1974. While SSI initially primarily paid benefits to the
elderly, their share of the caseload has declined throughout the life of the program. Nonelderly adults’ share of the SSI caseload started to increase rapidly in the mid-1980s following a
liberalization of the program’s medical eligibility criteria that we discuss in more detail below.
The number of children on SSI also increased rapidly during the early 1990s as a result of
similar expansions in the medical eligibility criteria, and while welfare reform temporarily reduced
the rate of child participation in SSI, the growth in child participation has increased again over the
past decade. In addition to changes in numbers of participants, there is significant variation in
participation across states and disabilities in each of these three age groups.

A. Caseload trends
Figure 1 shows the trends in total caseload over time for each of the three age groups
during the last forty years. The total caseload actually declined somewhat during the first ten
years of the program, though it has more than doubled since 1983, increasing from 3.9 million
in that year to nearly 8.4 million in 2013. However, the elderly caseload has remained fairly stable at
about 2 million beneficiaries, declining from approximately 60 percent of the total caseload in 1974
to less than one quarter of the total caseload in 2013. Over the same time frame, non-elderly
adults increased from less than 40 percent of the total caseload to nearly 60 percent of the
caseload, and children on SSI increased from less than 2 percent of the total caseload to over 15
percent of the total caseload.

25

Figure 1: Total SSI Caseload, 1974-2013

Notes: Data from SSA 2014b.

These changes in the percentage of the SSI caseload are mirrored by similar trends in
SSI participants as a percentage of the total population in their age group. Figures 2a shows the
steady decline in the elderly SSI population as a percentage of the total population aged 65 and up
and Figure 2b shows the substantial increase in SSI enrollment among non-elderly adults and
children. The increase for non- elderly adults started in the mid-late 1980s and for children in the
early 1990s. Additionally, Figure 2b demonstrates that while participation has increased for nonelderly adults of all ages, younger adults ages 18-49 have experienced a larger relative increase in
participation. Enrollment growth for all non-elderly groups slowed in the mid-1990s, though has
picked up - and especially for children – since 2000. By 2013, SSI enrollment among children,
adults 18-49, adults 50-67, and the elderly stood at 1.8 percent, 2.0 percent, 3.6 percent, and 4.7

26

percent, respectively.22 The fraction of individuals living in a household with one or more SSI
recipients is of course substantially higher. For example, according to data from the Survey of
Income and Program Participation, more than 6.5 percent of children are either on SSI or have a
family member on the program.
Figure 2a: Percent of Elderly Population on SSI, 1975-2013

Part of the increase in SSI enrollment among non-elderly adults during this period reflects the aging of the baby boom
generation. However, there were substantial increases in enrollment even within age groups. For example, the share of
adults aged 30 to 49 on SSI increased from 1.0 to 2.0 percent during the 1985 to 2013 period and the increases were
similar for the 18 to 29 (0.8 to 2.0 percent) and 50 to 64 (2.3 to 3.6 percent) age groups.
22

27

Figure 2b: Percent of Non-elderly Population on SSI, 1975-2013

Notes: Data from SSA 2014b and U.S Census Bureau 2014.

Because the child caseload has increased so significantly, in particular since 2000, we
devote special attention to examining trends in the child caseload. While increases in the caseload
during the early-mid 1990s were driven by loosening medical eligibility criteria in the wake of
the Zebley decision, the more recent caseload growth occurred after the eligibility criteria for
children were tightened during welfare reform. Furthermore, there have been no significant
changes in eligibility criteria for children since then. Figures 1 and 2b show that even during a
period of constant SSI eligibility criteria for children, the child caseload increased 43 percent
between 2002 and 2012, growing from 915 thousand to more than 1.3 million beneficiaries.
Separating the caseload into physical disabilities, intellectual disabilities and other mental
disabilities (e.g., autism, ADHD), reveals that the caseload growth has been driven predominantly
by the mental disability caseload. The caseload for mental disability diagnoses increased from
340 thousand in 2002 to more than 700 thousand in 2012. Over the same period, the physical
disability caseload increased by only 24 percent (from 337 thousand to 416 thousand). The

28

number of SSI-enrolled children with intellectual disability as the primary diagnosis declined by
47 percent, falling from 240 thousand in 2002 to 127 thousand in 2012. While the number of
children receiving SSI for intellectual disabilities declined over the decade, this decline was not
enough to offset the increases in the mental caseload (Aizer, Gordon, Kearney, 2013). This
change likely partially reflects a change by SSA in the definition of intellectual disability relative
to other conditions.
While growth in the caseload has been driven by non-elderly participants, SSI still
supports a substantially larger share of elderly adults in the total population. For example, less than
one percent of children under age 5 are on SSI, and approximately two percent of children 5 to
17 and adults between 18 and 49 are on SSI. However, the share of adults over 50 on SSI
increases significantly, with approximately 3.6 percent of adults ages 50-64 participating on SSI, and
more than 4 percent of adults over 65 on SSI. The share of enrollees who are males also varies
substantially by age. Among children, boys are about two times more likely than girls to be enrolled
in SSI. However, enrollment rates are approximately equal among adults in their thirties, forties,
and fifties. And there are about twice as many elderly women as elderly men on SSI, though
this partially reflects the longer life expectancy of women.
Table 2 examines award rates by age in 2013 and reveals a more nuanced picture. Among
children, award rates are highest among those under the age of 5, with nearly 50 percent of
applications for children under 5 being accepted, compared to 30 percent of applications for
children 13-17. Award rates are relatively low among adults in their twenties and thirties
approximately 20 percent of applications being accepted. However, award rates increase
substantially for applicants in their forties and fifties, with the award rate in the 50-59 age range
nearly twice that in the 22-29 age range. This sharp increase could partially reflect the role of
education and vocational factors in the disability determination process, which makes it somewhat

29

easier to qualify when an applicant reaches age 50 (Chen and van der Klaauw, 2008).
Table 2: Percent of applications awarded benefits by age category, 2013
Total
Award rate
Applications
Under 5
157,736
49.8%
5-12
219,915
32.5%
13-17
80,965
30.8%
18-21
134,823
35.9%
22-25
109,576
23.7%
26-29
110,090
22.9%
30-39
314,498
23.8%
40-49
451,106
27.9%
50-59
598,354
43.3%
60-64
160,883
39.6%
Notes: Data from SSA 2014d.

B. Trends in qualifying diagnoses
The composition of disabilities shows substantial variation across age groups. Figure 3
shows that more than half of beneficiaries in the youngest and oldest age groups are eligible
primarily on the basis of a physical disability – 70 percent of children under age 5 and 65 percent
of adults age 60-64. In contrast, less than 30 percent of recipients in the age bins ranging from 512 to 30-39 had a physical disability as their primary diagnosis.

30

Figure 3: Percent of 2013 SSI disability caseload diagnosed with a physical disability

Notes: Data from SSA 2014d..

Mental and intellectual disabilities accounted for 57 percent of the total working age adult
caseload in 2013.23 As shown in Table 3, intellectual disabilities constitute the largest category of
non-physical disabilities for adults in 2013, representing approximately 19 percent of the total nonelderly adult caseload. Mood disorders and schizophrenic disorders comprise the majority of
the remaining mental disability caseload, accounting for 16 and 9 percent of the total caseload,
respectively. The main categories of physical disabilities for adults include musculoskeletal
conditions, which constitute 13 percent of the total caseload and over 20 percent of the total
caseload for adults over 50. Nervous system/sensory disorders account for approximately 8
percent of the total caseload and have higher concentrations among younger adults, accounting for
over 10 percent of the total caseload for adults ages 18-29.

23

By comparison, new awards for mental and intellectual disabilities accounted for only 30 percent of adult
awards (SSA 2014d), suggesting that the average duration of SSI enrollment is higher for beneficiaries with these
conditions.

31

Table 3: Distribution of Disability Diagnoses by Age, 2013
Primary Diagnosis
% Age 0-17
Congenital anomalies
5.5%
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases
0.7%
Infectious and parasitic diseases
0.1%
Injuries
0.5%
Mental disorders (subtotal)
68.3%
Autistic disorders
10.2%
Developmental disorders
21.2%
Childhood and adolescent disorders not
elsewhere classified
19.5%
Intellectual disability
9.1%
Mood disorders
3.2%
Organic mental disorders
2.2%
Schizophrenic and other psychotic disorders
0.3%
Other mental disorders
2.6%
Neoplasms
1.2%
Diseases of the—
Blood and blood- forming organs
1.1%
Circulatory system
0.5%
Digestive system
1.3%
Genitourinary system
0.3%
Musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
0.8%
Nervous system and sense organs
7.8%
Respiratory system
2.8%
Skin and subctaneous tissue
0.2%
Other
7.2%
Unknown
1.9%

% Age 18-64
0.8%
2.6%
1.3%
2.6%
57.4%
1.8%
0.7%
1.0%
18.9%
16.4%
3.9%
8.9%
5.7%
1.3%
0.4%
4.3%
1.0%
1.0%
13.2%
7.7%
2.1%
0.2%
0.3%
3.6%

Notes: Table 35, SSA 2014b.

For children, non-physical disabilities comprise approximately 68 percent of the 2013
caseload, with developmental, autistic, and other adolescent disorders accounting for 21, 10 and
19 percent of the total caseload, respectively. Another 9 percent of children have an intellectual
disability as their primary condition. The largest categories of physical disabilities are congenital
anomalies and nervous system/sensory disorders, representing approximately 5.5 and 8 percent,
respectively, of the total caseload (SSA 2014b).
In addition to variation by age, diagnoses and caseload also vary substantially by gender
and race. In 2013, men accounted for 47 percent of the working age adult caseload. Adult
men and women were equally likely to receive SSI on the basis of a mental or intellectual

32

disability, with 59 and 56 percent of male and female recipients respectively receiving SSI for
mental or intellectual disabilities. By contrast approximately two-thirds of the child caseload in
2013 was male, and 73 percent of boys received SSI for a mental or intellectual disability,
relative to 58 percent of girls. Based on estimates from the Survey on Income and Program
Participation (SIPP), 54 percent of child SSI beneficiaries were minorities in 2013, as compared
to approximately 25 percent of non-beneficiaries. Slightly less than 40 percent of adult and elderly
SSI beneficiaries were minorities in 2013, compared to approximately 20 and 13 percent of nonelderly adult and elderly non-beneficiaries, respectively. 24
In terms of raw counts, boys are disproportionately likely to have a mental disorder as
their primary condition. However, the rate of growth in the mental disability caseload was similar
for girls and boys over the past decade. The caseload for boys increased by 110 percent, from 6.7
cases per 1000 in 2002 to 14.1 cases per 1000 in 2011. The caseload for girls increased by 116
percent, from 2.5 cases per 1000 in 2002 to 5.4 cases per 1000 in 2011. Perhaps as a result of the
similar rates of growth across gender, the composition of the mental caseload for children has
remained relatively constant across the age and gender distribution over the past decade. In
both 2002 and 2011, approximately two-thirds of the child SSI mental disability caseload was
comprised of boys ages 6-17. Girls 6-17 made up another quarter of the caseload, with the
remainder of the mental caseload composed of the youngest girls and boys (Aizer, Gordon, and
Kearney 2013).
Despite the growth in the child SSI caseload over the past decade, new SSI allowances
for children with mental disabilities have remained relatively constant. While applications to
child SSI increased between 2002 and 2011, there were approximately 104,000 initial allowances
for mental disabilities among children in 2002 and approximately 106,000 in 2007 (Aizer,
24

Author’s calculations are from the 2008 Survey on Income and Program Participation, wave 15 (2013 data).

33

Gordon, Kearney 2013). While the number of allowances increased to nearly 132,000 in 2011,
applications also increased by nearly 100,000 over the decade. As a result, the allowance rate for
mental disabilities declined from 48 percent in 2002 to 41 percent in 2011 (GAO 2012). These
trends suggest that caseload growth is likely driven by fewer children exiting the program, rather
than more children entering SSI.
Another important determinant of the size and growth of the SSI caseload is the rate of
exit from SSI. In 2013, the median duration of SSI participation among non-elderly adults was
approximately 9 years (SSA 2014d). In 2013, the exit rate for non- elderly adults was
approximately 10 percent. Among the 10 percent who left SSI, 60 percent left because of excess
income or assets 25, 22 percent left due to death, and approximately 7 percent left due to no longer
meeting the disability criteria. Among children, the exit rate was only 5 percent of the caseload.
Approximately 37 percent of children exiting SSI left due to excess income, 6 percent left due to
death, and approximately 27 percent left due to no longer meeting the eligibility criteria (SSA
2014d).
Additionally, while CDRs have been required by law since the beginning of the program,
in practice the frequency and thoroughness of CDRs has not been consistent over time, in
many cases due to administrative backlogs and budget constraints (GAO 2006, 2014). Between
2001 and 2011, the number of annual adult CDRs fell from 584,000 to 179,000, and the
number of annual child CDRs fell from 150,000 to 45,000 (GAO 2014). As of January 2014, SSA
estimated that it had a backload of approximately 1.3 million CDRs (GAO 2014). The low rate of
program exit due to disability eligibility in both adult and child caseloads has been an issue of
increasing concern for administrators and policymakers.

This component of the exit rate may be artificially high because it may include some SSI recipients who switch to SSDI
after the five-month waiting period.
25

34

C. Geographic Variation in SSI Enrollment
The fraction of people enrolled in SSI varies substantially both across and within states,
ranging from a low of one percent in North Dakota to a high of greater than five percent in
West Virginia. Some of this is accounted for by differences across states in income levels,
which we do not attempt to adjust for in the figures that follow. Figure 4 groups states into
quartiles of the non-elderly adult participation rate distribution. The map reveals that states with
the highest rates of SSI enrollment tend to be in the South while many of those with low
enrollment are in the West. Appendix Table A1 lists the fraction of non-elderly adults enrolled in
SSI by state.
Figure 4: Non-elderly adult SSI population as percent of state adult population, 2013

Notes: Data from SSA 2014e and U.S. Census Bureau 2014. Colors on the map represent quartiles of the participation
distribution.

There is also substantial variation within states in SSI enrollment. For example, in the state
of California, in which 2.6 percent of non-elderly adults receive SSI benefits. This state average
masks considerable variation across counties: 1.0 percent of non-elderly adults in San Mateo County
receive SSI benefits, as compared to 8.3 percent of their counterparts residing in Del Norte County
(source data from SSA 2014e and ARHF 2013). Exploring within-state variation to determine how
much is driven by population characteristics versus factors such as program awareness or disability

35

determination procedures would be a useful research endeavor.
Participation in the child SSI program also exhibits substantial geographic variation, as
displayed in Figure 5. While most of the states with high adult participation also have high child
participation, there are some differences. For example, while Texas is in top quartile of child SSI
participation, it is below the median for non-elderly adult SSI participation.
Figure 5: Child SSI population as percent of state child population, 2013

Notes: Data from SSA 2014e and U.S. Census Bureau 2014. Colors on the map represent quartiles of the participation
distribution.

The elderly caseload – mapped in Figure 6 -- has a similar range and geographical
pattern with the exception of two outliers: California and New York. In these two states, the
elderly SSI caseload was approximately 13 and 9 percent of the total elderly population, respectively,
which are the two highest state-specific enrollment rates. This likely reflects the more generous
supplementation of SSI benefits in these states so that Social Security benefits are less likely to fully
phase out the SSI benefits.

36

Figure 6: Elderly SSI population as percent of elderly adult population, 2013

Notes: Data from SSA 2014e and U.S. Census Bureau 2014. Colors on the map represent quartiles of the participation
distribution.

In addition to variation in SSI enrollment rates across states, there is significant variation
in caseload growth across states. While the majority of states with high caseload levels also
experienced high growth, this is not true for all states. For example, consider the child SSI
caseload. Texas had a relatively small child caseload in 2002 of approximately 9 cases per 1000
children, compared to a high of 32 cases per 1000 children in the District of Columbia and a low of
4 cases per 1000 children in Hawaii. However the child caseload in Texas increased by
approximately 120 percent between 2002 and 2011, while it grew by approximately 50 percent in
the District of Columbia and approximately 30 percent in Hawaii (Aizer, Gordon, Kearney 2013)
In an attempt to understand how the drivers of this growth relate to state
characteristics, Strand (2002) examines variation in application and allowance rates across states for
adult DI and SSI applications, and finds that approximately half of the variation in allowance
rates can be explained by economic, demographic and health factors. Similarly, Rutledge and
Wu ( 2013) find that poor health is a significant predictor of the state SSI caseload and
application rate. By contrast, Aizer, Gordon, and Kearney (2013) examine state-level variation in
the child SSI caseload and do not find a significant relationship between caseload growth and
state-level variation in population diagnosis rates, health insurance coverage, poverty, or

37

unemployment rates. They find some evidence that participation in special education is positively
related to child SSI caseload growth.

D. Enrollment in Other Government Programs and Intergenerational Connection in
SSI Receipt
An examination of data from 2008 SIPP reveals that many SSI recipients also obtain
benefits from other safety net programs. Table 4 shows that more than half of child, adult and
elderly SSI beneficiaries receive food assistance from SNAP. Approximately 67 percent of children
receiving SSI also receive SNAP, compared to just 22 percent of children not on SSI. Similarly,
58 and 56 percent of non- elderly adult and elderly beneficiaries receive SNAP, compared to 11
and 5 percent of non- beneficiaries, respectively. Nearly all beneficiaries in each age group receive
health insurance through Medicare or Medicaid. The fact that not all beneficiaries receive
benefits through Medicaid may partially reflect the fact some states have additional eligibility
and enrollment requirements for SSI beneficiaries to receive health benefits. The high rates of
participation in other means-tested programs are reflected in the income of households with SSI
beneficiaries. Between 50-60 percent of all SSI households have incomes at or below 150% of the
poverty line, compared to approximately 25 percent of non-beneficiary households. 26
Furthermore, a significant fraction of the SSI caseload participates in other Social
Security programs, either disability (SSDI) or retirement (OASI). Approximately thirty percent of
adult SSI beneficiaries also receive SSDI, while two-thirds of elderly adults on SSI in the SIPP also
report receiving OASI retirement benefits. 27
Comparing households with a beneficiary in a given age category reveals substantial

Author calculations from the 2008 Survey on Income and Program Participation
According to the SSA Statistical Supplement, approximately 56 percent of aged SSI beneficiaries also receive OASI.
The higher dual participation rate reported in the SIPP could reflect respondents confusing the two programs.
26
27

38

overlap in SSI participation across ages, in particular between non-elderly adults and children. For
example, nearly 30 percent of households with a child on SSI also have a non-elderly adult on
SSI. Similarly, 22 percent of households with an adult SSI beneficiary include a child on SSI,
conditional on also having a child in the household.

39

Table 4: Individual SSI beneficiaries compared to others in the age cohort, 2013
Child < 18
No SSI
SSI
SSDI (ages 18-64)
SS Retirement (ages 62+)
Medicaid
Medicare
SNAP
TANF
WIC
UI
Any non-cash benefit
Any cash benefit
Any housing benefit
Obs (unweighted)
% of total pop (weighted)
% of age category pop (weighted)

Adults 18-64
No SSI
SSI
0.03
0.29
0.31
0.21

Adult 65+
No SSI
SSI
0.85

0.67

0.35
0.00
0.22
0.03
0.07
0
0.52
0.08
0.06

0.83
0.00
0.67
0.06
0.15
0
0.99
1.00
0.31

0.08
0.03
0.11
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.31
0.05
0.03

0.93
0.29
0.58
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.97
1
0.25

0.04
0.97
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.15
0.03
0.03

0.95
0.99
0.56
0.01
0
0
0.98
1
0.36

16387
0.232
0.982

302
0.004
0.018

41932
0.604
0.968

1509
0.020
0.032

11782
0.133
0.958

562
0.006
0.042

Notes: Data from wave 15 of the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation. Statistics calculated using SIPP
reference month person weights (wpfinwgt). All respondents are in only one category above.

Section IV: Economic Issues
A.

Conceptual Issues
The SSI program for non-elderly adults provides a transfer of income targeted to

disabled individuals who are presumed to have limited capacity to obtain financial security through
their own paid employment. The SSI program for children provides a transfer of income to
families who have to contend with the burden of caring for a disabled child. As outlined in the
introduction, there are four sets of theoretical issues that are of primary importance when it
comes to the SSI program. First, there are conceptual questions related to the advantages and
disadvantages of categorical eligibility requirements. Second, there are issues related to
systematic disincentives to accumulate earnings and assets inherent to most means-tested
transfer programs. Third, there are questions about long-term benefits and costs to program

40

participants, in terms of whether the program adequately and appropriately serves the needs of
disabled individuals and their family members. And fourth, there are important issues about
program spillovers, both across programs and across federal and state levels of government. In this
section, we describe each of these sets of issues. We review empirical evidence on these issues later
in the chapter.

1.

Categorical eligibility
SSI eligibility is based in part on an applicant’s successful demonstration of a disability

that renders the individual unable to perform adequately in the labor market. But defining what it
means to be unable to work or work at a sufficient level of earnings is not a precise concept.
The ideal design of an income support program balances the social benefit of income
redistribution against the social costs of labor supply disincentives. A key justification for a
program with a categorical disability requirement is that by targeting such individuals, the program
can transfer more resources to truly “needy” individuals, achieving greater targeting efficiency at a
lower cost of productivity efficiency.
Akerlof (1978) and Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982) showed that by requiring a
categorical “tag”, an income redistribution program can more effectively screen out individuals
who would “masquerade” as being in need of government assistance when they simply have a
high disutility of work, but not an actual impediment to work. When a tag works as it should, the
likelihood of Type II errors is reduced, meaning that fewer “undeserving” individuals will qualify,
which leaves more resources available for those who are truly in need of income assistance. This
comes at a trade-off with Type I errors, whereby some individuals who truly do need income
assistance are erroneously labeled as not sufficiently disabled, or as Kleven and Kopczuk (2011)
point out, are discouraged from applying.

41

In their seminal paper on the design of optimal disability insurance, Diamond and
Sheshinski (1995) aptly noted that “any attempt to evaluate abilities to work will be subject to two
types of error- admission of people ideally omitted and exclusion of people ideally admitted”
(page 10). The authors describe how in the design of a disability benefit program, the challenge of
balancing income redistribution and labor supply disincentives is even more complicated than
in a typical income maintenance program because of the imperfect nature of defining disability.
They note that blindness automatically qualifies an individual for a disability benefit in the U.S.,
even though many blind people choose to work instead. So the challenge is not simply that the
severity of the medical condition is difficult to measure, but rather that the medical problem alone
is not a sufficient guide to the disutility of work. They show that in a scheme where health status is
costlessly but imperfectly observable, it is still optimal to provide a disability benefit program
that screens on the basis of health such that the probability of being accepted onto the program
increases with level of disability.
Parsons (1996) extends this framework to consider the optimal benefit structure of social
insurance programs in the presence of two-way misclassification error whereby some members of
the target group do not have the tag and some members of the non-target group do. This leads to a
four-way payment system, in contrast to the three-way payment system of Diamond and Sheshinski
(1995). Parsons concludes that a dual-Negative Income Tax system is optimal, with transfer
payments that are more generous for non-workers with the tag as compared to those without, and
with a premium paid to program-eligible individuals who work. Parsons further observes that the
design of social insurance programs in the U.S. omits one of these prices, namely, work incentives
for individuals assessed as program-eligible.
Kleven and Kopczuk (2011) develop a model that builds on the Diamond and Sheshinski
(1995) model by considering what happens to the optimal benefit design when it is costly to

42

observe health status. Their model explicitly considers complexity in social programs as a
byproduct of costly efforts to screen between deserving and undeserving applicants. The
authors observe that while a more rigorous screening technology may have desirable effects on
targeting efficiency, the associated complexity introduces transaction costs into the application
process and may induce incomplete take up.
An additional, related problem not addressed in the Diamond and Sheshinski framework
is that the link between a medical condition and labor supply will vary with economic conditions.
For example, consider an individual with limited education and a verified condition of extreme
back pain. Such an individual might not be able to perform physical labor, but could perform a
desk job. However, the availability of desk work for an individual with limited education will
depend crucially on local economic conditions. How should the design of SSI or SSDI
requirements respond to these varying linkages between health status, economic conditions, and
ability to work? This is an issue that warrants focused attention and to date, has not received a
thorough treatment, either theoretically or empirically.
Another important consideration relevant to the categorical eligibility requirement is
the possibility that disability status is mutable, and individuals might distort their behavior to select
into the “disabled” category. To the extent that individuals distort their health or behavior so
as to qualify as disabled – or to have their child labeled as disabled -- the loss in social welfare
might exceed the benefits of the income transfer to such individuals. As the SSI caseload has
become increasingly comprised of difficult-to-verify conditions, namely pain and mental
disabilities, the possibility of less precise categorical labeling has increased. Furthermore, because
the program is not meant to be temporary, any distortions in behavior resulting from the
program can potentially be long lasting.
2.

Work and savings disincentives
43

As is common to all income-support programs that establish benefits to be a
decreasing function of earnings and assets, there is the trade-off between income protection and
distortions to the labor supply and savings decisions of benefit recipients. As described above,
SSI enrollment affects the incentive to work through an increase in the effective marginal tax rate
in the phase-out region. This effect is not limited to the SSI recipient but can extend to other
family members including spouses and parents. Of course, a program that is predicated on the
concept of inability to work wouldn’t have labor supply disincentives if that inability to work
was a fixed or precise concept. For this reason, when one considers the effects of the SSI
program on non-elderly adult beneficiaries, the issue is perhaps more appropriately considered an
issue of imperfect categorical labeling than a typical labor supply disincentives issues.
When it comes to the child SSI program, we return to the paradigm of more typical labor
supply disincentives. In that program, there is a question about whether other members in
the household are discouraged from earning income, since additional income can cause a child
in the family to lose SSI eligibility, and because SSI child benefits are a function of family
income. This leads to the classic labor supply disincentives introduced by any means-tested
income transfer program. The large income exclusions described above may substantially reduce
the efficiency costs for families with children on SSI.
In addition, SSI has asset eligibility requirements for all three groups – children, nonelderly adults, and the elderly. The concept of asset limits raises the possibility that individuals are
discouraged from saving or accumulating assets in order to apply for the program. Hurst and
Ziliak (2006) provide a recent examination of this theoretical possibility in the context of welfare
reform policies that relaxed asset restrictions in the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF) programs, finding no evidence of savings responses in response to relevant policy

44

changes. We review the evidence on savings and the SSI program below, which focus primarily on
the incentives for adult SSI recipients. The reduced incentive to save may be especially harmful for
children on SSI. Consider a family that wants to save for future educational or health care costs
for a disabled child. Even a modest amount of savings by the parents can lead to the
termination of the child’s SSI benefits.

3.

Benefits and Costs to Participating Individuals
The typical benefits of a short-term means-test income support program, such as

unemployment insurance, is consumption smoothing. By providing income support through
a period of temporary economic struggle, a transfer program allows an individual or family to
maintain a floor and a smoother trajectory of consumption. But SSI is different than a
typical program in that it is explicitly not intended to be temporary. The more relevant question for
benefits of the program is what would an individual’s income and consumption be in the
absence of this explicit disability benefits program? In addition, are there health benefits that
accrue to an individual who qualifies for SSI that would not be obtained if income were
obtained through other means, either through work or other sources of unearned income? In this
subsection, we raise a number of other conceptual issues related to the benefits and costs of
program participation.
First, when considering the benefits of the SSI program to families with a child SSI
recipient, one returns to the issue of j u s t i f y i n g the payment of additional income to lowincome families with a disabled child. One potential justification is that the presence of a disabled
child in a family makes it more difficult for a parent to work outside the home. An empirical
examination by Powers (2001) confirms this to be true. Using data from the School Enrollment
Supplement to the October 1992 Current Population Survey, the author finds large negative effects

45

of having a disabled child on the probability that a wife or female head of household
participates in the labor force, controlling for family and individual level characteristics. The
size of the effect is substantial, comparable to having a child under the age of five in the house.
Another possibility is that families with a disabled child incur more health care expenses.
Related research by Buescher et al (2014), Stabile and Allin (2012), and Rupp and Ressler (2009)
further suggests that parents of children with disabilities confront substantial financial costs and
additional challenges in the labor market.
These observations raise two important questions. First, is the income received from the
SSI program sufficient to make up for the income losses and higher expenses experienced by
families with a disabled child? Second, do families use the additional income received from SSI to
pay for goods or services that lead to improved parental work outcomes or improved health
conditions for the disabled child? Both of these questions are open for research.
A second conceptual issue is whether the current structure of SSI is optimally designed
to serve families with disabled children. Recall from Section II above that conditional on
qualification, the level of SSI benefits is the same for disabilities with different severities. It is
therefore plausible that the income support from the program more than offsets potential losses of
income experienced by individuals (or families of children) with a fairly mild disability, but is not
sufficient to support individuals (or families of children) with a severe disability. Furthermore,
an individual or a child only maintains SSI eligibility if his condition does not show dramatic
signs of improvement. This raises the possibility that individuals do not pursue paths to
improvement or that parents withhold intervention treatments from their children in order to
maintain eligibility.
A third issue that is especially relevant to a child’s experience on SSI or experience trying
to qualify is whether the labeling of the disability has positive or negative consequences. On the

46

one hand, the existence of the SSI program provides a financial incentive for families and
administrators to evaluate a child for a disability and label that child with the qualifying
diagnoses. 28 For children whose limitations might otherwise have gone unrecognized, this could
have a beneficial effect of awareness and treatment. On the other hand, the label itself could
lead to hindered educational opportunities or a reduced sense of urgency on the part of the
parent or older child to overcome the limitation. These are conceptual considerations, with little
rigorous empirical evidence.
A fourth and final issue is that SSI enrollment may lead to long-term dependency, both
for children and non-elderly adults. Perhaps some qualifying individuals, with the proper
individualized attention, would overcome a less severe disability. But one consequence of the SSI
program is that parents and family advocates might be inclined to hold onto that label, in order to
maintain eligibility for program benefits. This is an interesting question for future research to
explore.

4.

Program Spillovers
The federal nature of the SSI program serves a broad redistribution purpose, but it also

imposes fiscal externalities between state and federal governments and programs. Benefit levels of
the federal SSI program are relatively generous, especially compared to TANF cash benefit
awards in low- benefit states. Thus, the award of SSI can amount to large transfers of federal
dollars to individual states. Researchers have considered the extent to which individuals and states
substitute SSI program benefits for state-funded transfer programs and how program features

28

The notion that rates of child disability diagnoses would vary with financial incentives is not to be dismissed. Cullen
(2003) presents evidence from school districts in Texas showing that a 10 percent increase in the supplemental revenue
received by a district for having a disabled student leads to an approximately 2 percent increase in the fraction of
students classified as disabled. As would be expected, she finds that this responsiveness is larger for disability categories
that are milder and less precise, such as learning disability and speech impairment.

47

make this shifting more or less likely. We review this evidence below.

B.

A Review of the Evidence

1.

The Impact of Child SSI Participation on Short-Term Outcomes
There is some evidence that the receipt of child SSI income leads to a net increase in

family income and a decrease in poverty rates. Duggan and Kearney (2007) consider how a child’s
enrollment in the SSI program affects short-term family outcomes including poverty,
household earnings, and health insurance coverage. The authors make use of the longitudinal
nature of the Survey of Program Participation (SIPP) to identify a change in household outcomes
at precisely the time that the household begins receiving child SSI benefits, controlling for
unobserved differences across households and observed outcomes in these same household in the
months leading up to and immediately following a child's first enrollment in SSI. They find that
child SSI participation increases total household income by an average of approximately $316 per
month, or 20 percent. The estimates suggest that for every 100 dollars in SSI income transferred
to a family, total income increases by more than 72 dollars. The enrollment of a child in the SSI
program appears to lead to a small offset of other transfer income but very little, if any, impact on
parental earnings.
Duggan and Kearney (2007) additionally find that for every 100 children who enroll in
SSI, 22 children and 37 people are lifted out of poverty and an additional 28 people see their
incomes increase to more than twice the poverty line. These results suggest that the increase in
child SSI enrollment over recent decades has potentially played a large role in lowering child
poverty rates below what they otherwise would have been. Providing further evidence of the antipoverty effects of the SSI program, Schmidt, Shore-Sheppard, and Watson (2013) find that SSI
program participation leads to a reduction in the likelihood that a family reports being food
48

insecure.
In a more recent investigation of the parental labor supply effects of child SSI
participation, Deshpande (2014a) estimates the effect of removing children from the SSI
program on parental earnings and household income. She does this using administrative data
from the Social Security Administration and a regression discontinuity design and a
difference-in-difference design that exploits SSA budget cuts for child medical reviews.
Her estimates suggest that a loss of $1,000 in a child’s SSI payment is fully offset by increases in
parental earnings, driven entirely by intensive margin responses. The large earnings response is
somewhat at odds with previous estimates from the welfare literature that suggest smaller
parent labor supply elasticities with respect to child benefits, in particular the SSI results of
Duggan and Kearney (2007) described above. Deshpande suggests that the discrepancy might
reflect asymmetric responses to benefit gains – which is what Duggan and Kearney (2007)
observe – and benefit losses – which is what Deshpande (2014a) observes.
An additional finding of the study by Deshpande (2014a) is that the removal of a child
from the SSI program leads to lower rates of DI applications among parents and siblings. This
finding is consistent with recent work by Dahl, Kostol, and Magstad (2014) demonstrating
family spillovers in the likelihood of applying for Disability Insurance; those authors find that
in the context of Norway, individuals are more likely to apply for DI if they have a parent on the
program.
A remaining question for future research is how families use the additional income that
they receive from the SSI program and to what effect. There is some evidence from other
programs, but not specifically for SSI. For example, Meyer and Sullivan (2004) explore the
effect of changes in welfare reform and tax policy on measures of consumption; Dahl and
Lochner (2012) examine the impact of EITC receipt on educational outcomes for children; Evans

49

and Garthwaite (2013) examine the impact of EITC on maternal mental health. To the best of
our knowledge, there has been virtually no work of this kind specific to SSI. Future research
should consider how families make use of the additional income brought into the home by
SSI and whether they are spent disproportionately on the recipient child. To fully understand
the benefits of the SSI program, it would be useful to know whether the resources are used to
fund additional consumption or parental leisure, to purchase market-provided childcare that
allows parents to work outside the home, or whether the additional income leads to
investments in education or health at either the child or family level.
Future research is also needed on the extent to which the incentives that the SSI
program creates for families to obtain a disability diagnosis for their child leads to beneficial
outcomes – say, by raising the parents’ awareness of need and ability to pursue helpful
interventions. We also need evidence about the extent of harmful reactions to this incentive. For
example, the 2010 Boston Globe series written by Patricia Wen described with compelling and
troubling anecdotes an unintended side effect of SSI the overmedication of children with
psychotropic drugs in order to qualify for SSI benefits. However, the more systematic study by the
GAO suggests that overmedication is not a widespread phenomenon among SSI recipients.
2.

The Impact of Child SSI Participation on Long-Term Outcomes
To better appreciate the normative implications of SSI participation among children

with disabilities, we need an understanding of the long-term outcomes for SSI recipients. One
way to learn about this issue is to study the transition to adulthood for child SSI recipients. Do we
see that relatively many child SSI recipients are able to productively transition into employment
after age 18? Or do they remain dependent on government transfer programs, either SSI or
another program? Does SSI participation enhance, impede, or have no impact on their long-term

50

opportunities and human capital development?
Loprest and Wittenberg (2005) provide a descriptive look at the transition experiences
of child Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipients just prior to and after age 18. They use
year 2000 data from the National Survey of Children and Families (NSCF) to study the work
preparation activities and family circumstances of a pre-transition cohort of youth age 14 to 17
and a post- transition cohort of individuals age 19 to 23, comparing income, work, personal and
family circumstances of those on SSI benefits after age 18 to those who no longer receive these
benefits. The data indicate that only a minority of pre-transition SSI recipients had ever
participated in vocational training or vocational rehabilitation (VR) and many had never heard of
SSI work incentive provisions. Their findings for the post-transition cohort show that those who
no longer receive SSI at age 18 tend to be in better health and are more likely to be working than
those who continue on benefits. They also find that among those who are removed from the SSI
program at age 18, most continue to have incomes below poverty and about one-half dropped
out of school and a third have been arrested. As the authors note, these findings are relevant to
ongoing efforts to improve the transition process for child SSI recipients and to understand some
of the circumstances of young people after the age 18 redetermination.
Additional descriptive evidence from Rupp et al. (2015) examines the long-term receipt of
SSI and DI among child SSI recipients from a variety of award cohorts. They find that in general,
child recipients from more recent cohorts receive benefits for a shorter period of time. They find
that ten years after the SSI award, approximately 45 percent of the 2000 child SSI award cohort
receives neither SSI nor DI, compared to only 25 percent of the 1980 cohort. They note a sharp
break in the trends in transitions off disability benefits between cohorts who likely were not
affected by the introduction of age 18 redeterminations and other eligibility restrictions in 1996
(i.e., cohorts from the 1980s and early 1990s) with cohorts who likely were affected (i.e., 1995

51

award cohorts and later). The authors also conduct a decomposition analysis that is consistent with
their hypothesis that the change in trends is likely driven by policy changes rather than observed
changes in characteristics of the child SSI caseload over time. Additionally, they find that relatively
few SSI child recipients transition to DI as adults: ten years after the award, approximately 9
percent of the 1980 cohort received DI alone or concurrently with SSI, but this fraction falls to 3
percent for the 2000 cohort.29
Deshpande (2014b) builds on this descriptive work with a carefully designed empirical
analysis. Her empirical approach exploits a policy change that increased the number and
stringency of medical reviews for 18-year-olds, implemented as part of the 1996 PRWORA
legislation. The law was written such that children with an 18th birthday after the law’s enactment
on August 22, 1996 experienced a discontinuous increase in the probability of being removed
from the program, as compared to his counterpart with an earlier 18th birthday. This sets up the
conditions for a regression discontinuity empirical approach to examining the relationship
between program removal and subsequent outcomes. To conduct her analysis, Deshpande makes
use of confidential SSA files. She links data from the Supplemental Security Record (SSR), which
provides demographic information on SSI children, to the CDR Waterfall File, which gives
information on all medical reviews for children and review. She links these child records to longterm outcomes using several additional SSA data sets, including the Master Earnings File
(MEF) and the Master Beneficiary Record (MBR).
Deshpande (2014b) finds that SSI youth who are removed from the program earn on
average $4,000 per year, an increase of $2,600 relative to the earnings of those who remain on the
program, and not enough to make up for the $7,700 lost in annual SSI benefits. She finds that those
While fewer cohorts can be compared over longer time frames, the fraction of recipients continues to increase over
time. For example, 23 and 18 percent of the 1980 and 1995 cohorts received DI benefits twenty years after their initial
child SSI award.
29

52

who were removed from the program spend on average nearly 16 years (the entire posttreatment period observed) with observed income below 50% of the poverty line, as compared to
five years for those who are not removed from SSI at age 18. Importantly, these average effects
mask heterogeneous responses. For some individuals, the removal from the program spurs
increased work effort. The likelihood of maintaining earnings above $15,000 is 11 percent higher
among those removed from the program, and this difference grows over time. An additional
important finding is that income volatility is increased for those who do not maintain program
eligibility.
The insight gained from Deshpande’s work is important to understanding the
economic hardship faced by SSI recipients who are terminated from the program at age 18. But, an
important limitation to this work is that it does not answer the question of how those individuals
would have fared if they had not spent earlier years on SSI. There exists the possibility that a child
who is raised on SSI, or spends their teenage years receiving SSI, develops a different set of
aspirations and invests less in human capital accumulation. Alternatively, the additional income
from SSI could lead to more investment in the child and better educational outcomes. Either scenario
would likely have an effect on long-term outcomes. What we learn from the Deshpande (2014b)
evidence is that individuals who are removed at age 18 are not readily able to transition into
stable employment. One potential policy implication from this is that more transition support
programs and work training programs for individuals with (mild) disabilities would be beneficial.
But the question of whether those individuals would have had improved long- term outcomes if
they had not received child SSI income at all or for some length of time remains an open
question. 30

30

Coe and Rutledge (2013) use data from the National Health Interview Survey linked to social security administration
data to compare short and long-term outcomes of children who enrolled in the SSI program during three eras that they

53

A related question to the issue just raised is how SSI participation as a child impacts
the likelihood of government transfer receipt as an adult. Does participation in this long-term
form of assistance foster dependency on government transfers? Research is needed that both
describes the associations between SSI program participation and later outcomes, but also
empirically identifies the causal impact of child SSI receipt on later life program participation.
Another way to pose this question is to consider whether a child with a similar condition who
received TANF instead of SSI is less likely to “graduate” into government assistance at age 18?
And importantly, how does any such difference translate into differences in labor force
participation, future educational investment, and total earnings and economic well-being? Of
course, this presents a significant challenge for researchers because the selective process by
which individuals apply for, receive, and continue to receive SSI benefits suggests they are quite
different from those not on the program.
3.

SSI and Boys
An important demographic issue that arises in the context of the child SSI program is

the disproportionate medical qualification of boys, minority boys in particular. Duggan and
Kearney (2007) examine pooled SIPP data from 1992, 1993, 1996, and 2001 to explore the
predictors of SSI participation, and how these compare to the demographic predictors of
AFDC/TANF enrollment. They

find

that

family

structure,

parental

education,

and

race/ethnicity relate to program participation in similar ways between the two programs. In
particular, children from single-parent families and less educated parents are more likely to
defined as pre-Zebley (1987-1990), Zebley (1991-1996), and post-Zebley (1997-1999). They observe that recipients are less
likely to report care limitations as a child, to accumulate more work experience and less time on welfare as adults, and to
be slightly less likely to have health insurance as adults. It is hard to draw strong conclusions from this analysis, however,
since these differences presumably reflect (to some unknown degree) differences in sample composition. It is not
surprising that children who entered SSI during the “lenient” years would be less disabled on average, and thus
ultimately experience better outcomes.

54

enroll in both SSI and AFDC/TANF, as compared to children from two-parent families or
higher educated parents. Black children are more likely to enroll than either Hispanic or white
children, other characteristics held constant. A notable departure between the two programs is that
conditional on other background characteristics, families with relatively more boys are significantly
more likely to participate in the SSI program. This is consistent with the disproportionate presence
of boys among the SSI caseloads, and the disproportionate likelihood that boys are diagnosed with
mental disabilities and behavioral disorders.
What should we make of the disproportionate participation in SSI of boys and
minority black boys in particular? Does this reflect under-, over-, or accurate placement? Is
the system “optimally” diagnosing boys? The biological and medical literatures provide
overwhelming evidence that boys are more likely to have mental and behavior disorders,
something economists have recently come to research in terms of a “non-cognitive deficit”.
What metrics would we use to evaluate whether the extent of medical and disability
determinations are accurate, or medically, rather than socially based? In other words, to what
extent are boys with social or behavioral issues being diagnosed as medical problems, and what
does this imply for the optimal design of the SSI program?
A separate question is whether the SSI program is particularly important for boys
from single-parent, low-income homes, and whether enhanced program features would have even
greater benefits for qualifying boys. Bertrand and Pan (2013) build on the literature about
the importance of non-cognitive skills for educational and labor market success and the deficit that
boys appear to experience along this dimension. The descriptive picture they present about the
“trouble with boys” (from the title of their paper) is based mainly on data from the Early
Childhood Longitudinal Study – Kindergarten cohort. They document that boys do especially
poorly in broken families and that the early school environment has little impact on the non-

55

cognitive functioning of boys, in contrast to girls. They further demonstrate that boys appear to be
particularly responsive (in a negative way) to the lack of parental resources experienced in a single
parent home. An important question is to what extent does and could the SSI program mitigate
these challenges facing boys from single-parent, low-income homes?
4.

Program Interactions: Child SSI
Low-income individuals with a qualifying disability or with a child with a qualifying

disability will often have a financial preference for the SSI program over TANF. As noted
above, the SSI program is not time-limited and does not involve work requirements. In states
with low levels of cash benefits for TANF, this financial incentive is relatively larger.
Furthermore, states have a financial incentive to shift TANF recipients or applicants to the SSI
program, since SSI benefits are paid for by the federal government. The gap between TANF and
SSI benefits has tended to grow over time, since SSI benefit levels are automatically adjusted for
cost-of-living changes, and TANF benefits are not, and have been declining in real terms.
Existing research has documented significant interactions between SSI and the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program in the years prior to welfare reform.
Garrett and Glied (2000) find that in the early 1990s, states with the highest AFDC benefits saw the
smallest increase in SSI participation among children. Kubik (1999) finds that families who were
likely to receive higher levels of cash benefits from other programs were less likely to apply for
SSI. Schmidt and Sevak (2004) demonstrates that single-women living in states that were early
adopters of welfare reform policies were more likely to report SSI receipt. This set of findings
across papers implies that individuals respond to differences in benefits across programs in a
way consistent with utility maximizing behavior.
There is an additional, perhaps even more interesting, dimension to the shifting of

56

AFDC and TANF caseloads to the SSI program: this shift moves the financial burden of benefit
payments from states to the federal government. Recall that SSI benefits are paid for entirely by
the federal government, except in the case of state supplementation. In contrast, the cost of
AFDC benefits were shared between states and the federal government, with this difference now
amplified because states are essentially given block grants for their TANF programs. This
means that states would benefit financially from shifting the AFDC caseload onto the federal
SSI program. In a paper that confirms that states respond to that financial incentive, Kubik (2003)
shows that states experiencing unexpected negative revenue shocks experienced larger increases
in the size of their SSI caseload relative to their AFDC caseload. This finding can be
interpreted as evidence of fiscal spillovers between different levels of government and has
implications for the optimal design of programs in terms of state and federal cost sharing.
There are two other potentially important program interactions relevant to the child
SSI caseload – interactions with Medicaid and health insurance more generally, and interactions
with special education programs. Work by Anna Aizer (2009) shows that gaining access to health
insurance through state-level expansions of the Children’s Health Insurance Program has a
sizable impact on the likelihood of a child reporting a mental disorder diagnosis and treatment.
This raises questions about how access to health insurance affects the likelihood that a child will
gain access to a qualifying SSI determination. Whereas Duggan and Kearney (2007) consider how
SSI participation affects health insurance coverage rates, it would be useful to explore the reverse
relationship of how health insurance access affects SSI participation. Aizer, Gordon, and
Kearney (2013) find little relationship between state-level changes in health insurance coverage
and SSI caseload growth, but additional exploration of this potential relationship is warranted,
especially following implementation of the Affordable Care Act.
In addition to the link with health insurance, it is important to understand how the

57

SSI program and the educational system interact in terms of establishing disability, school needs,
and SSI and special education eligibility. As reported in Table 3, a striking 68 percent of the child
SSI caseload has a primary diagnosis of a mental disorder. Given this diagnostic composition of
the SSI caseload, it stands to reason that SSI eligibility determinations overlap with special
education determinations. Such conditions often show up in the educational system as
learning disabilities or behavioral problems, often recognized by poor classroom performance.
Survey data indicate that approximately 70 percent of child SSI recipients participate in
special education at some point during their school years (Rupp et al, 2006).
As an empirical matter, it is difficult to disentangle the causal pathway from special
education assignment to SSI participation, versus the causal relationship running from SSI
enrollment to special education assignment. An unpublished 2007 working paper by Jessica
Cohen presents evidence suggesting that increases in the SSI caseload brought about by the Zebley
decision led to a significant increase in special education classification. Thinking about the
relationship in the other direction, we note that special education determinations are made at a
local level and depend greatly on the discretion of staff at the school level, guided by policy set
at the state level. The prevalence of special education classification varies widely across states,
including variation in whether students need a diagnosed disability to be classified as eligible for
special education. Aizer, Gordon and Kearney (2013) provide evidence of an association between
the prevalence of special education in a state-year and state-year SSI caseloads. Specifically, they
find that special education is predictive of initial allowances, but not application rates. It could
be that participation in special education contributes to caseload growth via increases the
likelihood of application acceptance by, for example, lending greater credibility to the claim of
disability. Cullen and Schmidt (2011) provide additional evidence of a link between these
programs. Building on the observation in Cullen (2003) that localities in Texas with greater fiscal

58

incentives to label children as disabled experience relative increases in special education caseloads,
Cullen and Schmidt (2011) find larger relative increases in SSI caseloads in such localities.
Exploring these linkages in greater depth is an area worthy of additional research.

5.

Evidence on the effect of SSI participation for working-age and elderly adults
Previous research suggests that the rise in SSI enrollment among non-elderly adults that

began in the mid-1980s was driven by three main factors. First, there was a liberalization of the
program’s medical eligibility criteria in 1984 that made it easier for individuals with more subjective
conditions such as back pain and mental disorders to qualify for the program (Rupp and Stapleton,
1995; Autor and Duggan, 2003). Second, given that SSI enrollment rates rise with age, the aging of
the baby boom generation led to a mechanical increase in SSI enrollment (Duggan and Imberman,
2009). And finally, cutbacks in state general assistance programs increased the number of individuals
applying for and ultimately receiving SSI benefits (Rupp and Stapleton, 1995).
Non-elderly adults who participate in SSI have very low labor force attachment, with just
4 percent having non-zero earnings in 2013. Because of this, the issue of work disincentives is
perhaps not as pertinent as it is for other means-tested transfer programs. This likely explains why
there are not as many studies of the effect of SSI program participation on outcomes for nonelderly adults. One exception is a study by Bound, Burkhauser, and Nichols (2003), who use panel
data from the SIPP linked to SSA disability determination records to trace earnings and income
for adult SSDI and SSI participants. They find that the earnings of applicants decline around the
time of SSI application, but in terms of absolute changes these reductions are quite small, since
labor income is very low for SSI applicants. The data indicate that the increase in benefit income
received by SSI awardees in the months after initial application is largely offset by reductions in
spousal income and other transfer income. Their findings suggest that SSI program participation

59

does not lead to a sizable increase in household income for SSI adult awardees, on average.
However, presumably there is underlying heterogeneity, and for some SSI recipients who do
not have access to spousal income or AFDC benefits from other family members, benefits
from this program constitute a sizable increase in income.
In a series of studies, Neumark and Powers have investigated the behavioral responses
of older adults to potential SSI eligibility under elderly categorical eligibility. 31 Recall that for
elderly applicants, eligibility is based on income and assets and does not require a disability
determination. Neumark and Powers (2000) examine the pre-retirement labor supply of men as
they near age 65, using SIPP data. Their analysis uses a triple-difference strategy and finds that
in states with more generous state supplementation of federal SSI benefits, there is a somewhat
larger reduction in labor supply before age 65 among men who are likely to be eligible for SSI. They
additionally find that this response is more pronounced among men who qualify for early social
security benefits, which might be used to offset the reduction in labor earnings. In subsequent
work, the authors confirm the finding of an anticipatory reduction in labor supply using CPS
data and exploiting within-state changes in SSI supplementation levels (Powers and Neumark,
2005). Powers and Neumark (2006) confirm that these findings are not driven by cross-state
migration related to SSI awards. This pair of authors has also found evidence of dissaving among
likely eligible individuals as they approach age 65 (Powers and Neumark, 2003).
On the issue of program spillovers, Linder and Nichols (2012) present intriguing
results suggesting that enrollment in temporary assistance programs might serve as a “gateway”
to more permanent reliance on assistance. Looking at a sample of workers in the SIPP, the authors
find that UI claimants tend not to apply for SSI, but do apply for DI at increased rates.

31

Using data from the Health and Retirement Survey linked to SSA administrative records, Coe and Wu (2014) confirm
that a higher expected SSI benefit is associated with a higher rate of take-up among adult and elderly individuals

60

Workers who are more likely to receive SNAP benefits are more likely to subsequently apply
for SSI benefits. The authors are careful to note that while these results might imply a
causal relationship between participation in temporary assistance programs and subsequent
enrollment in a disability program, they also could reflect selection on health and income. Further
research is needed into this issue. It is also important to note that the efficiency effects of such a
causal pathway – should one exist – are unclear. If temporary programs serve in part to increase
awareness of SSI among eligible individuals that are ideally admitted -- to use the language of
Diamond and Sheshinki (1995) – then this could be welfare enhancing. If, on the other hand,
they serve to bring individuals onto SSI who would otherwise return to work at fairly low levels
of disutility of work, the social welfare implications are less clear.
In another study of program spillovers, Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2014) examine
what happened to SSDI and SSI applications in Massachusetts shortly following the 2006
state health insurance reform. The effect of the reform – a precursor to the 2010 federal
Affordable Care Act -- was to expand health insurance access to individuals through the
implementation of a state- wide insurance exchange and provision of subsidies. Theoretically, the
effect of this expansion on SSDI and SSI applications could have gone either way. Recall that SSI
recipients immediately qualify for Medicaid when they enter the SSI program. SSDI applicants
qualify for Medicare only after a two-year waiting period. In the pre-health reform paradigm,
individuals with a work-limiting condition might have been too hesitant to separate from an
employer and apply for SSDI or SSI because if their application was unsuccessful, they would
have given up their employer-provided health insurance, and risk being uninsured. The 2006
reform would mitigate this issue of “job lock” and potentially lead to increased applications for
both SSDI and SSI. However, with the expansion of affordable health insurance, the value of
SSDI or SSI falls due to a reduction in the relative value of the health insurance benefits that

61

come with program enrollment – either Medicare or Medicaid, respectively. Using administrative
application data from SSA, the authors find that SSDI applications increased throughout the state
post-reform, consistence with state incentives to shift health insurance costs to the federal
program. For SSI, applications increased in counties with high baseline health insurance coverage
rates – consistent with a job lock story – and decreased in counties with low baseline insurance
coverage rates – consistent with a decline in the relative value of the SSI Medicaid award.
These results speak to the interaction of health insurance coverage and SSDI and SSI, and to the
fiscal externalities between programs paid for by state versus federal funds.
An early paper by Yelowitz (2000) similarly considered the interaction between health
insurance provision and SSI caseloads, focusing on elderly individuals. That work considers
the introduction of the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) program during the 1987 to 1992
period; the program provides supplemental health insurance to Medicare seniors without
requiring SSI enrollment. Consistent with the idea that part of the benefit of SSI enrollment
is the Medicaid award, Yelowitz (2000) finds that the introduction of QMB led to a decline in
SSI participation rates.
6.
Evaluations of Demonstration Programs Designed to Increase Work among SSI
Beneficiaries
Since the early 1980s, there have been a number of government-run large-scale
demonstrations designed to evaluate the work incentives inherent in SSI and SSDI and to
determine how to promote employment and self-sufficiency among current beneficiaries.32 In 1985,
the Social Security Administration introduced the Transitional Employment and Training
Demonstration, the first large-scale intervention focused on SSI recipients. In 13 communities,
working-age adult beneficiaries with intellectual disabilities were randomly assigned to treatment
32

For a detailed description of the most relevant interventions, see Wittenburg et al 2013.

62

and control groups, where the treatment group received job placement, training, and prevention
services. After six years, those who received intervention were 21 percent more likely to be
employed than the control group, although on average earnings in the treatment group did not
increase enough to offset SSI and SSDI benefits received. Other interventions in the 1990s,
including Project NetWork and the State Partnership Initiative, provided a combination of case
management, benefit counseling, benefit waivers, and employment assistance. These interventions
all increased employment in the treatment group by a few percentage points, but not by enough to
offset benefits (Wittenburg et al 2013).
Following these small demonstrations in the 1980s and 1990s, SSA launched the Ticket to
Work (TTW) program in the early 2000s. Over three phases, this experimental program provided
SSDI and SSI beneficiaries with vouchers that they could exchange for employment support and
rehabilitation services. Though the intervention was found to result in an increased use of
employment services, research has not found any subsequent increases in beneficiaries’
employment or earnings. Two possible reasons for this lack of an impact could be the limited
number of employment service providers, and the fact that the intervention was not targeted to
specific sub-populations among SSDI and SSI beneficiaries. This is an area ripe for additional
program experimentation and evaluation.
A recent randomized demonstration experiment sheds some light on the effectiveness of
interventions designed to promote work and education among youth SSI beneficiaries, with the
goal being to reduce the youth disability caseload. SSA launched the Youth Transition
Demonstration (YTD) project in 2003. In six sites across the country, SSI and SSDI beneficiaries
ages 14-25 were randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, where treatment groups
received education and employment services, as well as a reduced benefit offset schedule in order
to encourage more work activity. The intensity of service provision varied across the six sites in the

63

demonstration. The results of the demonstration, evaluated by Mathematica Policy Research,
suggest that effects varied by intensity of service provision. In the most successful site, youth
employment nearly doubled from 23 percent to 42 percent, while there was no increase in
employment in sites with less intensive service provision (Wittenburg et al 2013). However, due to
relatively small increases in earnings, the increased employment among participating youth did not
reduce disability benefits. In addition to employment outcomes, researchers observed rates of
criminal activity, finding some evidence that YTD reduced criminal activity among beneficiaries in
locations with more comprehensive services, and locations with more intense services focused on
employment (Fraker et al 2014).33

CONCLUSION
The SSI program provides cash assistance and health insurance to some of the nation’s
most vulnerable elderly, blind, and disabled residents. In December 2014 the program paid
benefits to 8.5 million U.S. residents. Beyond the direct effects of the program on the recipient
population, the program also has effects on the economic incentives and income security
of beneficiaries’ spouses, parents, and children. Additionally, the program affects incentives for
potential future SSI applicants.
In this paper, we have briefly summarized the history of the SSI program since it was
created 40 years ago, including important changes in the program’s medical eligibility criteria. We
have presented descriptive evidence on caseload composition and caseload trends, showing that the
overall caseload has shifted toward younger recipients and non-physical disability diagnoses. Our
discussion of conceptual issues and relevant evidence focused on four key issues. First, we
In 2014, SSA, the Departments of Education, Labor and Health and Human Services began PROMISE, a new
demonstration designed to promote education and employment among SSI youth and their families. See
http://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/promise.htm for more information.
33

64

described conceptual questions related to the advantages and disadvantages of categorical eligibility
requirements and we showed that the SSI caseload has become increasingly comprised of
difficult-to-verify conditions, namely pain and mental disabilities. Second, we described the
issues related to systematic disincentives to accumulate earnings and assets inherent in the SSI
program design, as in most means-tested transfer programs. Notably, there are far fewer
examinations of studies of employment and earnings incentives of the SSI program as compared to
the SSDI program because the SSI population tends to have close to no work experience. The
more relevant set of questions for the SSI population are related to the full disability requirement
for eligibility and whether there would be ways to increase the employability of those with less
severe disabilities. Third, we described the questions and research about long-term benefits and
costs to program participants, in terms of whether the program adequately and appropriately
serves the needs of disabled individuals and their family members. And fourth, we presented
information and evidence about program spillovers, both across programs and across federal and
state levels of government. Throughout this chapter we have made numerous explicit references
to areas where further study is warranted and open research questions remain.
In addition to the open research questions, there are a number of program design questions
that warrant policy consideration. One critical issue is that of a full versus partial disability scheme.
As described above, SSI eligibility is a dichotomous status and benefits are not dependent on
disability severity. This stands in contrast to the disability systems of many other countries as well
as the Veteran’s Disability Compensation Program, where benefit awards are an increasing function
of disability severity. A partial system could allow for functional limitations that didn’t preclude the
ability for productive market-based work, and thus would allow individuals to combine the receipt
of benefits with earnings. A partial system would also avoid the undesirable program “cliff” where
eligibility immediately goes to zero and all benefits are lost to the recipient if sufficient recovery is

65

observed.
Another policy design issue that should be considered is the justification for two separate
federal disability programs: SSI and SSDI. In the case of adults, the disability determination uses
a similar set of criteria, but eligibility for SSI is additionally based on income and eligibility for
SSDI is additionally based on work history. They also have different waiting periods: zero months
for SSI (and Medicaid) and five months for SSDI (24 months for Medicare). In addition, the
financing schemes are separate, with federal SSI payments financed by general revenue and SSI
payments financed by payroll taxes and the Social Security trust fund. Is this efficient from an
operational standpoint, or would administrative costs and complications be substantially
improved by the streamlining that would come from one federal disability program?
SSI is an important part of the U.S. safety net, but particular features of the program and
the way it operates in practice raise questions and concerns about whether there is a more effective
way to provide income support for individuals with work-limiting disabilities and families with
disabled the children. We have attempted to systematically present these issues here for scholars and
policy-makers to consider and explore.

66

References
Aklerof, George A. 1978. “The Economics of ‘Tagging’ as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax,
Welfare Programs, and Manpower Planning.” American Economic Review, 68(1): 8-19.
Aizer, Anna. 2009. “Peer Effects and Human Capital Accumulation: the Externalities of ADD.”
NBER Working Paper No. 14354.
Aizer, Anna, Nora Gordon and Melissa Kearney. 2013. "Exploring the Growth of the Child SSI
Caseload." Working paper, presented at SSA/NBER Disability Research Conference, Washington
DC, October 2013.
Area Health Resources Files. 2013. US Department of Health and Human Services, Health
Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Professions, Rockville, MD
Autor, David and Mark Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157-206.
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan and David C. Stapleton. 2015. “Long Term Work Activity and Use of
Employment Supports among New Supplemental Security Income Recipients.” Social Security
Administration Bulletin, 75(1): 73-95.
Berkowitz, Edward D. and Larry DeWitt. 2013. The Other Welfare: Supplemental Security Income and U.S.
Social Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan. 2013. “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender
Gap in Disruptive Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1): 32-64.
Bound, John, Richard V. Burkhauser, and Austin Nichols. 2003. "Tracking the Household Income
of SSDI and SSI Applicants." in Research in Labor Economics 22, ed Sol W. Polachek, 113-159.
Stanford, CT: JAI Press.
Buescher, Ariane V.S. Zuleyha Cidav, Martin Knapp, and David S. Mandell. 2014. “Costs of
Autism Spectrum Disorders in the U.S. and the U.K.” Journal of the American Medical Association,
Pediatrics 168(8): 721-728.
Burkhauser, Richard V. and Mary C. Daly. 2003. “The Supplemental Security Income Program.” In
Robert A. Moffitt (Ed.) Means Tested Transfer Programs, 79-139. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press.
Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2008. “The work disincentives of the disability insurance
program in the 1990s.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 757-784.
Coe, Norma and Matthew Rutledge. 2013. "What is the long term impact of Zebley on Adult and
Child Outcomes?" Center for Retirement Research Working Paper No. 2013-3. Chestnut Hill, MA.

67

Cohen, Jessica L. 2007. “Financial Incentives for Special Education Placement: The Impact of SSI
Benefit Expansion on Special Education Enrollment.” Unpublished Manuscript, MIT.
Cambridge, MA.
Cullen, Julie Berry. 2003. “The Impact of Fiscal Incentives on Student Disability Rates.” Journal of
Public Economics, 87: 1557-1589.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Lucie Schmidt. 2011."Growth in the Supplemental Security Income Program
for Children: The Role of Local Jurisdictions and Fiscal Incentives" Working Paper.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. "The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit." American Economic Review, 102(5): 1927-56.
Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostol, and Magne Magstad. (2014). “Family Welfare
Cultures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1711-1752.
Deshpande, Manasi 2014a. "The Effect of Disability Payments on Household Earnings and
Income: Evidence from the Supplemental Security Income Children's Program." Unpublished
Manuscript, MIT. Cambridge, MA.
Deshpande, Manasi 2014b. "Does Welfare Inhibit Success? The Long-Term Effects of Removing
Low- Income Youth from Disability Insurance." Unpublished Manuscript, MIT. Cambridge, MA.
Diamond, Peter and Eytan Sheshinski. 1995. "Economic aspects of optimal disability benefits."
Journal of Public Economics, 57: 1-23.
Duggan, Mark and Scott Imberman. 2009. “Why Are the Disability Rolls Skyrocketing?” in Health
at Older Ages, ed. David Cutler and David Wise, University of Chicago Press.
Duggan, Mark and Melissa Kearney. 2007. "The Impact of Child SSI Enrollment on
Household Outcomes." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4): 861-886.
Evans, William N. and Craig L. Garthwaite. 2014. "Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of
Higher EITC Payments on Maternal Health." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2):
258-90.
Fraker, Thomas, Arif Mamun, Todd Honeycutt, Allison Thompkins and Erin Jacobs Valentine.
2014. “Final Report on the Youth Transition Demonstration Evaluation.” Washington, DC:
Mathematica Policy Research.
French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 291-337.
Garrett, Bowen and Sherry Glied. 2000. “Does State AFDC Generosity Affect child SSI
Participation?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 19(2): 275-95.

68

Hannsgen, Greg P. and Steven H. Sandell. 1996. “Deeming Rules and the Increase in the Number
of Children With Disabilities Receiving SSI: Evaluating the Effects of a Regulatory Change.” Social
Security Bulletin, 59(1): 43-51.
Hemmetter, Jeffrey. 2012. “Changes in Diagnostic Codes at Age 18.” Office of Research, Evaluation
and Statistics, Research Statistics Note No. 2012-14. Social Security Administration, Washington DC.
Hemmeter, Jeffrey and Elaine Gilby. 2009, “The Age 18 Redetermination and Post redetermination
Participation in SSI.” Social Security Bulletin, 69(4): 1-25.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, J and Stephen P. Zeldes. 1995. "Precautionary saving and
social insurance." Journal of Political Economy, 103(2): 360-399.
Hurst, Erik and James P. Ziliak. 2006. "Do Welfare Asset Limits Affect Household Saving?," Journal
of Human Resources, 41(1): 46-71.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2011. "Transfer Program Complexity and the
Take-Up of Social Benefits." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 54-90.
Kubik, Jeffrey D. 1999. “Incentives for the Identification and Treatment of Children with
Disabilities: The Supplemental Security Income Program.” Journal of Public Economics, 73(2): 187-215.
Kubik, Jeffrey D. 2003. “Fiscal federalism and welfare policy: The role of states in the growth of child
SSI.” National Tax Journal , 56(1): 61–79.
Linder, Stephan and Austin Nichols. 2012. "The Impact of Temporary Assistance Programs on
Disability Rolls and Re-Employment." Program on Retirement Policy Working Paper, Washington,
DC: Urban Institute.
Loprest, Pamela and David Wittenburg. 2005. "Choices, Challenges and Options: Child SSI
Recipients Preparing for the Transition to Adult Life." Working Paper. Washington, DC, Urban
Institute.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does Disability Insurance Receipt
Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
Receipt." American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797–1829.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen and Alexander Strand. 2014. "Disability Insurance and Health
Insurance Reform: Evidence from Massachusetts." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
104(5): 329-355.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2004 “The effects of welfare and tax reform: the material
well-being of single mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public Economics, 88: 1387– 1420.
Neumark, David, and Elizabeth T. Powers, 2000. "Welfare for the Elderly: The Effects of SSI on
Pre‐Retirement Labor Supply.” Journal of Public Economics, 78(1‐2): 51‐80.

69

Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. “Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on
Recipients.” American Economic Review, 72(2): 372-377.
Office of the Inspector General. 2008. “Disability Claims Overall Processing Times.” Report No. A01-08-18011. Washington, DC: Social Security Administration.
Parsons, Donald. 1996. “Imperfect Tagging in Social Insurance Programs.” Journal of Public Economics.
62(1-2): 183-207.
Powers, Elizabeth T., 2001. "New Estimates of the Impact of Child Disability on Maternal
Employment." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 91 (2): 135‐139.
Powers, Elizabeth T and David Neumark,. 2003 “Interaction of Public Retirement Programs in the
United States.” American Economic Review Policy and Proceedings, 93(2): 261-265.
Powers, Elizabeth T. and David Neumark,. 2005. “The Supplemental Security Income Program and
Incentives to Claim Social Security Retirement Early.” National Tax Journal, 58: 5-26.
Powers, Elizabeth T. and David Neumark,. 2006 “Supplemental Security Income, Labor Supply,
and Migration,” Journal of Population Economics, 19, 447-480
Riley, Gerald F. and Kalman Rupp. 2012. “Longitudinal Patterns of Medicaid and Medicare
Coverage Among Disability Cash Benefit Awardees.” Social Security Bulletin. 72(3): 19-35.
Rupp, Kalman and David Stapleton. 1995. “Determinants of the Growth in SSA’s Disability
Programs: An Overview.” Social Security Bulletin, 58(4):43-70.
Rupp, Kalman, Paul S. Davies, Chad Newcomb, Howard Iams, Carrie Becker, Shanti Mulpuru,
Stephen Ressler, Kathleen Romig, and Baylor Miller. 2006. “A Profile of Children with Disabilities
Receiving SSI: Highlights from the National Survey of SSI Children and Families.” Social Security
Bulletin, 66(2): 21-48.
Rupp, Kalman and Steve Ressler. 2009. “Family Employment and Caregiving among Parents of
Children with Disabilities on SSI.” Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 30: 153-175
Rupp, Kalman, Jeffrey Hemmeter and Paul S. Davies. 2015. “Longitudinal Patterns of Disability
Program Participation and Mortality among Childhood SSI Award Cohorts.” Social Security Bulletin
75(1): 35-64.
Rutledge, Matthew S. and April Y. Wu. 2013. “Why Do SSI and SNAP Enrollments Rise in Good
Economic Times and in Bad?” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College Working Paper.
Chestnut Hill, MA.
Schmidt, Lucie and Purvi Sevak. 2004. “AFDC, SSI, and welfare reform aggressiveness: Caseload
reductions vs. caseload shifting.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(3): 792–812.

70

Schmidt, Lucie, Lara Shore-Sheppard, and Tara Watson. 2013. "The Effect of Safety Net Programs
on Food Insecurity." NBER Working Paper No. 19558.
Social Security Administration. 2011. “State Assistance Programs for SSI Recipients, January 2011.”
SSA Publication No. 13-11975. Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics. Washington, DC.
Social Security Administration. 2014a. “2014 Red Book.” SSA Publication No. 64-030. Washington,
DC.
Social Security Administration. 2014b. “Annual Statistical Supplement, 2013.” SSA Publication No.
13-11700. Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics. Washington, DC.
Social Security Administration. 2014c. Program Operations Manual System.
https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/. Last accessed November 22, 2014.
Social Security Administration. 2014d. “SSI Annual Statistical Report 2013.” SSA Publication No. 1311827. Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics. Washington, DC.
Social Security Administration. 2014e. “SSI Recipients by State and County, 2013.” SSA Publication
No. 13-11976. Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics. Washington, DC.
Social Security Administration. 2014f. “Annual Report of the Supplemental Security Income
Program.” Baltimore, MD.
Stabile, Mark and Sara Allin. 2012. “The Economic Costs of Childhood Disability.” The Future of
Children 22(1): 65-96.
Strand, Alexander. 2002. “Social Security Disability Programs: Assessing the Variation in Allowance
Rates.” Office of Research, Evaluation and Statistics Working Paper no. 98. Washington, DC. Social
Security Administration.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008-2013. “Survey on Income and Program Participation 2008 Panel.” Last
Accessed October 21, 2014. http://www.nber.org/data/survey-of-income-and-programparticipation-sipp-data.html.
U.S. Census Bureau.2014 “Population and Housing Unit Estimates.” Accessed March 1, 2015.
http://www.census.gov/popest/index.html
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 1994. “Rapid Rise in Children on SSI Disability Rolls Follows
New Regulations.” Report No. GAO-HEHS 94-225. Washington, DC.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 1995. “New Functional Assessments for Children Raise
Eligibility Questions.” Report No. GAO-HEHS 95-66. Washington, DC.

71

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2006. “Clearer Guidance Could Help SSA Apply the
Medical Improvement Standard More Consistently.” Report No. GAO 07-08. Washington, DC.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2012. “Better Oversight Management Needed for Children’s
Benefits.” Report No. GAO 12-497. Washington, DC.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2014. “SSA Could Take Steps to Improve its Assessment
of Continued Eligibility.” Report No. GAO 14-492T. Washington, DC.
Wen, Patricia. 2010. “The Other Welfare” The Boston Globe, December 12-14. Accessed November
26, 2014. http://www.boston.com/news/health/specials/New_Welfare/ .
Wiseman, Michael. 2010. "Supplemental Security Income for the Second Decade." prepared for
Reducing Poverty and Economic Distress after ARRA: The Most Promising Approaches. Washington, DC. The
Urban Institute.
Wittenburg, David. 2011. "Testimony for Hearing on Supplemental Security Income Benefits for
Children" Submitted to Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives.
Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
Wittenburg, David, David R. Mann and Allison Thompkins. 2013. “The Disability System and
Programs to Promote Employment for People with Disabilities.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 2(4): 125.
Wixon, Bernard and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Identifying SSA’s Sequential Disability Determination
Steps Using Administrative Data.” Social Security Administration. Research and Statistics Note 201301. Washington, DC.
Wu, April Y. and Norma Coe. 2014. "What impact does Social Security have on the use of public
assistance programs among the elderly?" Center for Retirement Research Working Paper No. 2014-5.
Chestnut Hill, MA.
Yelowitz, Aaron. 2000. "Using the Medicare Buy-In Program to Estimate the Effect of Medicaid
on SSI Participation." Economic Inquiry, 38(3): 419-441.

72

APPENDIX
Table A1: Percent of population on SSI, by state and age, 2013
State
AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK

Percent under
18 on SSI

Percent 18-64
on SSI

2.58%
0.69%
1.30%
4.26%
1.29%
0.80%
1.09%
1.80%
4.14%
2.66%
1.85%
0.56%
1.34%
1.38%
1.59%
1.16%
1.34%
2.82%
3.30%
1.56%
1.40%
1.70%
1.85%
1.08%
3.19%
1.68%
1.17%
0.91%
1.42%
0.91%
1.28%
1.85%
2.07%
1.93%
0.69%
1.89%
1.96%

3.98%
1.75%
1.77%
3.77%
2.64%
1.42%
1.74%
1.84%
4.17%
2.28%
2.53%
1.73%
2.18%
2.14%
2.18%
1.89%
1.86%
4.74%
3.94%
3.31%
1.96%
2.76%
3.10%
1.79%
4.28%
2.66%
2.11%
1.69%
1.57%
1.75%
1.76%
2.96%
2.96%
2.43%
1.35%
3.03%
2.80%

73

Percent 65+
on SSI
4.29%
5.66%
3.15%
3.55%
13.05%
2.88%
2.82%
2.01%
6.47%
5.41%
4.90%
4.43%
2.01%
3.84%
1.61%
1.55%
1.80%
5.49%
5.68%
2.51%
3.61%
5.17%
3.08%
2.91%
6.23%
2.29%
2.02%
1.73%
3.80%
1.11%
4.72%
6.23%
9.19%
3.51%
1.60%
2.59%
2.84%

State
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

Percent under
18 on SSI
1.24%
2.74%
2.12%
1.92%
1.26%
1.70%
2.14%
0.64%
1.35%
1.29%
1.16%
2.18%
1.70%
0.80%

Percent 18-64
on SSI
2.29%
3.00%
3.16%
2.60%
1.86%
3.16%
2.20%
1.25%
2.83%
1.85%
2.28%
5.03%
2.17%
1.40%

Percent 65+
on SSI
3.11%
3.27%
4.60%
3.42%
2.60%
3.73%
6.60%
1.98%
2.75%
3.45%
3.98%
3.97%
2.13%
1.24%

Notes: SSI Participation counts from SSI Recipients by State and County, 2013. SSA Publication No. 13-11976. Population totals
from the U.S. Census Bureau.

Figure A1: Adult SSI benefit with and without unearned income, 2015

74

Figure A2: Adult SSI benefit based on applicant vs spouse income, 2015

Figure A3: Child SSI based on parental earnings, with and without unearned income, 2015

75

Figure A4: Child SSI benefit for different family types, 2015

Notes: Calculations in Figures A1-A4 based on formulas for benefit schedules outlined in SSA 2014c and
correspondence with representatives from the Social Security Administration.

76

