NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ECONOMIC RATIONALE FOR THE AFRICAN SCRAMBLE:
THE COMMERCIAL TRANSITION AND THE COMMODITY PRICE BOOM OF 1845-1885
Ewout Frankema
Jeffrey Williamson
Pieter Woltjer
Working Paper 21213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2015

We are grateful to Gareth Austin, Luis Bértola, James Femske, Leigh Gardner, Jens Andersson and
the participants of the African Economic History Workshop 2014 (London School of Economics),
the RIDGE Workshop on Comparative studies of the Southern Hemisphere in global economic history
and development (Montevideo), the Workshop on Colonialism, Growth and Development in the Southern
Hemisphere, 1800-2000 (Lund University) and seminar participants at Oxford University, Warwick
University and Wageningen University for their comments on earlier drafts. We acknowledge financial
support from the European Research Council under the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme (ERC Grant Agreement no. 313114) as part of the project ‘Is Poverty Destiny? A New
Empirical Foundation for Long-Term African Welfare Analysis’ (Frankema and Woltjer) and the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research for the project ‘Is Poverty Destiny? Exploring Long Term Changes
in African Living Standards in Global Perspective’ (NWO VIDI Grant no. 016.124.307) (Frankema).
We thank Loes Oudenhuijzen, Jasmijn Appels, Rolinde de Haan and Rens van Baren for excellent
research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ewout Frankema, Jeffrey Williamson, and Pieter Woltjer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Economic Rationale for the African Scramble: The Commercial Transition and the Commodity
Price Boom of 1845-1885
Ewout Frankema, Jeffrey Williamson, and Pieter Woltjer
NBER Working Paper No. 21213
May 2015
JEL No. F10,O40,O55
ABSTRACT
This is the first study to present a unified quantitative account of African commodity trade in the long
19th century from the zenith of the Atlantic slave trade (1790s) to the eve of World War II (1939).
Drawing evidence from a new dataset on export and import prices, volumes, composition and net barter
terms of trade for five African regions, we show that Sub-Saharan Africa experienced a terms of trade
boom that was comparable to other parts of the ‘global periphery’ from the late 18th century up to
the mid-1880s, with an exceptionally sharp price boom in the four decades before the Berlin conference
(1845-1885). We argue that this commodity price boom changed the economic context in favor of
a European scramble for Africa. We also show that the accelerated export growth after the establishment
of colonial rule deepened Africa’s specialization in primary commodities, even though the terms of
trade turned into a prolonged decline after 1885.
Ewout Frankema
Wageningen University
Hollandseweg 1
Wageningen 6700 EW P.O. Box 8130
The Netherlands
ewout.frankema@wur.nl
Jeffrey Williamson
University of Wisconsin at Madison
350 South Hamilton Street #1002
Madison, WI 53703
and Harvard University and CEPR
and also NBER
jwilliam@fas.harvard.edu

Pieter Woltjer
Wageningen University
Hollandseweg 1
Wageningen 6700 EW P.O. 8130
The Netherlands
pieter.woltjer@wur.nl

1. Introduction
The export of slaves across the Atlantic Ocean from Sub-Saharan Africa to the American
plantation economies reached its zenith in the late 18th century. In the wake of the 18th century
slave trade boom, non-human commodity exports were increasing as well. In the first half of the
19th century slave exports were first overtaken and eventually fully replaced by commodity
exports. This shift occurred first in West Africa, then in West-Central Africa and later also in
East Africa, where slaves were sold into the wider Indian Ocean area, including the Persian Gulf
and the Red Sea, until the close of the 19th century (Austen 1987, Klein 1990, Law 1993, 2002).
The so-called ‘commercial transition’ from slave exports to commodity exports was a true gamechanger in the long-term economic development of Sub-Saharan Africa: it put a halt to the
continuous drain of scarce labor resources and paved the way for the expansion of land-extensive
forms of tropical agriculture, engaging both smallholder farmers as well as indigenous slaves
working on family farms, communal farms or estates. In fact, without the commercial transition,
it is questionable whether the European scramble for Africa would have ever taken place.
The establishment of colonial rule over the African interior during the late 19th century (c.
1880-1900) re-enforced the patterns of commodity trade specialization that had emerged in the
18th century and had expanded and transformed in the 19th century. Colonial rule facilitated the
construction of railways, induced larger inflows of foreign (i.e. European) investment, and led to
profound changes in the governance of labor and land markets. The colonial regimes set out to
abolish the institution of slavery, though replacing it by other forms of labor coercion. The effect
of the scramble would soon become obvious to all: between 1897 and 1913 the total value of subSaharan African commodity exports rose by more than 150%, from about 71 million to about 184
million £ (Forbes-Munro 1976: 86). Colonial occupation thus accelerated the trend of 19th
century commodity export growth.
In this paper we aim to offer the first unified quantitative account of African commodity
trade in the long 19th century from the peak of the Atlantic slave trade in the 1790s to the eve of
World War II, focusing on those parts of the continent that were largely unaffected by European
rule before 1880. We show that Sub-Saharan Africa experienced a terms of trade boom that was
comparable to other parts of the ‘global periphery’ from the late 18th century up to the mid-1880s,
with an exceptionally sharp price boom in the four decades before the Berlin conference (18845). We review Hopkins’ thesis regarding the economic basis of imperialism (1973, Chapter 4:
2

124-166, see also Dike 1956), which maintains that the commercial transition enhanced the
perceived economic benefits of investing in West Africa’s export sector, thus raising the stakes of
imperial control and creating a context in which the partition of Africa could be politically
defended.
In the 1970s and 1980s, a series of pioneering studies has documented the transition from
slave to commodity exports, but these studies focused only on parts of the region, parts of the 19th
century and did not connect all sources available (Hopkins 1973; Forbes Munro 1976; Liesegang,
Pasch and Jones 1986; Eltis and Jennings 1988; Gemery, Hogendorn and Johnson 1990, Law
1993). In the ‘pre-spreadsheet’ era the ability to construct and analyze large datasets was
constrained. Moreover, none of these previous studies engaged in comparisons with other parts of
the ‘poor’ commodity-exporting world, as similar studies on Asia and Latin America only
emerged in the 1990s and 2000s (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999; Bértola and Williamson 2006;
Williamson 2011, 2012).
We have gathered trade data from primary sources and have merged these with several
existing series to produce annual time-series of export volumes, export values, commodity export
prices, import prices, and net barter terms of trade series for Western Africa, Eastern Africa,
South Africa, North Africa and the African islands, a spatial categorization which we will
motivate further below. Our series were built up from spatially disaggregated sources, weighted
up to aggregate trade and price series. Although we also gathered data for Portuguese Africa and
the Congo Free State (later Belgian Congo), we focus our analysis on the areas that came under
British and French control, which we will for convenience refer to as ‘colonies’, even though its
use is partly anachronistic and some areas never attained that formal status at all. These British
and French ‘colonies’ constituted over 90% of total continental commodity trade throughout the
19th century. All the data are available as part of the Wageningen African Commodity Trade
Database, 1500-present.1
The comprehensive and comparative perspectives we develop in this study invoke six
conclusions. First, we document an impressive boom in the net barter terms of trade for SubSaharan Africa from the 1790s to the 1880s, a boom that was especially pronounced in the four
decades after 1845. That secular boom peaked exactly, albeit coincidentally, at the date of the
Berlin conference (1884-5). We use this finding to refine the arguments of Hopkins (1973) and of
1

The data will be available online at www.aehnetwork.org. Launch of first version envisaged in October 2015.

3

Eltis and Jennings (1988) that West Africa’s terms of trade rose mainly between the 1820s and
1860s. We show that the decline in palm oil prices in the 1870s, that informed Hopkins’
periodization, was offset by favorable price developments of other commodities such as gum
Arabic and groundnuts up to the mid-1880s. We also show that the net barter terms of trade
approach we adopt here revises the timing of the boom that Eltis and Jennings observed using a
gross barter terms of trade approach.
Second, we show that the share of West African exports in French imperial trade was
much larger than in British imperial trade, which was dominated by British India. This is
consistent with the chronology of the scramble for Africa. The French were the first to move into
the West African interior to survey the possibilities of connecting the Middle Niger delta to their
trading enclaves at the Senegalese coast. The data thus speak against Anglo-centered accounts of
the scramble and place its economic rationale in a more balanced perspective. Third, we show
that the secular terms of trade boom turned into a prolonged and equally impressive bust after
1885, continuing up to 1940. To be sure, there were local and temporal variations in this pattern
depending on each location’s export mix, but the aggregate trends for British and French Africa
were largely the same.
Fourth, exploring our results in a global comparative perspective reveals that the
periodization of the boom and the bust in Sub-Saharan Africa is consistent with the broader
patterns observed in other parts of the ‘global periphery’, and especially those regions specialized
in tropical commodities. Fifth, this comparison also shows that Africa’s commodity price boom
of 1845-1885 was exceptionally sharp in comparison to the 19th century trade booms elsewhere.
And finally, sixth, we find that the different composition of South African exports generated a
markedly less pronounced rise in terms of trade, while the terms of trade in North Africa (i.e.
Egypt) peaked already in the 1860s, some 20 years before the peaks recorded south of the Sahara.
These six attributes of African trade all lend support to the argument that the long-term
rise of African commodity export prices fuelled an optimistic ex-ante assessment of the
profitability of colonization by contending European powers, and by the French in particular,
while the scramble itself reduced the opportunity for African economies to escape a primary
commodity specialization trap during the prolonged terms of trade decline from 1885 to 1940.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the commercial
transition in the context of 19th century global trade developments. Section 3 introduces the
4

debate on the economic causes of the African scramble. Section 4 presents our dataset, method
and the analysis of Africa’s net barter terms of trade. In section 5 we explore our results in a
comparative perspective. Section 6 concludes with a brief reflection on the possible implications
of the scramble for the development of African trade up to 1940.
2. 19th century commodity export booms around the ‘poor periphery’2
The 19th century world trade boom - often called the first global century - was driven by three
fundamental forces: a transport revolution, a liberal trade policy move in industrial Europe and an
acceleration in world GDP growth associated with the industrial revolution. These three forces
affected the commercial transition in Sub-Saharan Africa as well as the European partition of
Africa in various ways, some of which we will highlight in this section.
The transport revolution was driven by technological events along sea lanes and by
railroads connecting ports to interiors. New transport technologies helped integrate world
commodity markets, lowered price gaps between exporters and importers, and fostered trade
between the industrial core and the commodity-exporting periphery. Since falling trade costs
from all sources accounted for more than half of the trade boom between 1870 and 1914 (Jacks et
al. 2011: 529), they must have accounted for even more than that before 1870 when transport
costs declined even more rapidly and the move to free trade was in full swing (North 1958;
Harley 1988). By raising every country’s export prices and lowering every country’s import
prices, it also contributed to a rise in every country’s external terms of trade, especially, as it
turned out, in the commodity-exporting ‘periphery’. The move by the European industrial core
towards a more liberal commercial policy (Estevadeordal et al. 2003), a commitment to the gold
standard (Meissner 2005) and perhaps even imperialism itself (Ferguson 2004; Mitchener and
Weidenmier 2008) all made additional contributions to the 19th century world trade boom.
Rapid manufacturing productivity growth in the industrial core lowered supply costs and
output prices, adding to the demand for inexpensive factory-made manufactures, and by doing so
generated a soaring derived demand for raw materials, or what we now call ‘commodities’. The
derived demand for industrial intermediates - like fuels, fibers, dyes, rubber, oils, fine woods and
metals - soared as well. In the industrializing core, manufacturing growth raced ahead of GDP
growth, and was reinforced by a high income elasticity of demand for luxury consumption goods,
2

This section draws in part on Williamson (2011: Chapter 1).

5

like meat, dairy products, dried fruit, sugar, tobacco, tea, and coffee. All of these forces produced
a powerful, century-long terms of trade3 boom in the ‘peripheral’ commodity exporters, as the
prices of their imported manufactures fell and those of their commodity exports rose.4
Sub-Saharan Africa became part of this world trade boom as it shifted from slave exports
to the export of groundnuts, copra, palm oil, palm kernels, beeswax, gum, dyewoods, sugar,
minerals, precious stones and a range of ‘new’ commodities after the establishment of colonial
rule such as rubber, cocoa, cotton, tea, tobacco and coffee. Elastic factor supplies partly
facilitated the periphery’s response to these external demand shocks, helped by South-South
migrations from labor abundant regions (especially China and India) to labor scarce regions
within the periphery (Southeast Asia), and by financial capital flows from the industrial core
(especially Britain) to those same regions. The perverse role that Sub-Saharan Africa had played
in global labor markets, by supplying its scarce labor resources to relieve demand pressure in
another labor scarce region, ended as abolition efforts took effect and an increasing number of
African societies, voluntarily or involuntarily, engaged in the transition towards ‘legitimate
commerce’. In fact, East Africa became a net recipient of labor immigrants in the early 20th
century, especially from British India.
Even though trade made it possible for the ‘periphery’ to share some of the fruits of the
industrial revolution taking place in the core, globalization also fostered de-industrialization in
the periphery (as in Mexico: Dobado et al. 2008; India: Clingingsmith and Williamson 2008;
Turkey: Pamuk and Williamson 2011; and Egypt: Panza and Williamson 2015) so that income
per capita growth rates in the periphery fell further behind those in the core. In addition,
globalization-induced specialization in primary products meant greater price volatility facing the
commodity exporters, compounding the divergence in growth rates.5 The transport and
communication revolutions associated with the industrial revolution also lowered the costs of
military conquest and permanent territorial occupation. New industrial technologies translated
into superior military power (gun boats, maxim gun) and logistics (steamships, telegraph).
3

Unless otherwise noted, the terms of trade phrase in the text always refers to the net barter terms of trade, that is,
the ratio of the average price of exports to that of imports. We define exports as trade flowing from Africa to Europe,
while imports depict trade flows from Europe to Africa.
4
Only China and Cuba were exceptions.
5
That is, commodity prices have always had greater volatility than manufactures (Jacks et al. 2011; Williamson
2012), and development economists have long known that volatility is bad for growth in poor countries (Blattman et
al. 2007; Poelhekke and van der Ploeg. 2009), including Sub-Saharan Africa (Deaton and Miller 1996; Deaton
1999).

6

Advances in medical knowledge (quinine) reduced the risks of European overseas expeditions.
This drop in the costs of colonization greatly enhanced the feasibility of the European invasion of
tropical Africa.
The commercial transition was first initiated in ‘Western Africa’, which we define here as
the entire area south of the Sahara oriented to Atlantic markets, including West and West-Central
Africa. As Table 1 shows, commodity exports to Britain expanded by more than five times over
the 18th century, along with a doubling of Atlantic slave exports (Johnson et al. 1990). These
commodities were not only carried as by-products on slave ships, trading companies also
operated direct lines for commodity trade between Europe, the Americas and Western Africa
(Eltis 2013: 31-32). While part of the fast growth in commodity exports may be explained by
very low initial levels in 1700, growth rates in the second half of the 18th century retained similar
rates. Exports to Britain dropped between the 1760s and 1770s, but then recovered to the 1790s.
During the early 19th century the Atlantic slave trade moved its center of gravity south to the
West-Central coast (present-day Angola) and the South East (present-day Mozambique), where
Brazilian and Cuban slavers took an increasing share of total trade from areas under Portuguese
control (Klein 2010). In the 1850s the Atlantic slave trade dwindled to a trickle and by 1865 it
had ended.6

[Table 1 about here]

Although the substitution of commodities for slaves may have been a relatively smooth
process in terms of overall export revenues, Hopkins (1973) has argued that it provoked a ‘crisis
of adaptation’ in several parts of Western Africa because some slave trading areas had much
better environmental conditions to shift towards tropical cash-crop exports than others. Moreover,
the production of agricultural cash-crops for export markets involved different business models
6

In the 1780s about 90% of the value of African exports to the New World consisted of slave exports, and about
two-thirds of the slaves destined for the Americas were embarked in West Africa. In the 1820s about two-thirds of
the total embarked slaves came from either the West-Central coast (c. 440.000) or Southeast Africa (c. 120.000),
whereas the remaining third from West Africa (c. 290,000) were a considerably lower number than in the 1780s (c.
505,000). Despite a temporary recovery of the West African share in the early 1830s due to the effectuation of
Anglo-Brazilian treaty to ban the slave trade, the number of slaves embarked in West Africa continued to decrease
(Klein 2010: 193-4). British naval force and diplomatic pressure could not prevent the resurgence of the southern
Atlantic trade in the late 1830s to late 1840s, when Brazil deliberately relaxed enforcement measures. In the 1850s,
when slave exports shrunk to a trickle, the West African share was down to 16%. For the data, see Eltis et al. (2008)
Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database: http://www.slavevoyages.org/.

7

and different groups of producers than the production of slaves. Whereas slave raiding demanded
a certain military hierarchy in order to secure violence monopolies and distribute slave trade
revenues, the production of agricultural commodities could be conducted as efficiently by large
numbers of small farmers, as by large-scale producers employing slave labor. The shift of the
Asante to the kola nut trade with the Hausa states and the development of the palm oil trade must,
therefore, have involved a specific adaptation to new economic power relations (Austin 2005: 467; Lovejoy 2005).
The commercial transition in ‘Eastern Africa’, which we define as the area south of the
Sahara trading into the wider Indian Ocean area, occurred considerably later. During most of the
19th century the Eastbound slave trades expanded and remained sizeable until the 1890s. Austen’s
work on the Red Sea trade (mainly from the Horn of Africa and the Nilotic Sudan) and the
Swahili coast (Kenya and Tanzania; Zanzibar the major hub) suggests a steady outflow of about
100,000 slaves per decade (Austen 1979: tables, 31-33). The hinterland of Mozambique was
entrenched in the Atlantic trade up to the 1850s, but also supplied slaves to Madagascar, the
Comoros, the Mascarenes and further destinations in the Indian Ocean (Campbell 2004; 2008).7
The scramble led to a relatively abrupt decline of the Eastbound slave trades in the 1890s
and 1900s, a trade that was not complemented by vibrant commodity exports, with the exception
of ivory and a short-lived cloves mania during the middle of the 19th century (Clarence-Smith
1986; Sheriff 1986, 1987). Ivory and slave exports had been complementary, because slaves
carrying teeth to the coast offered an efficient solution to high overland transportation costs.
However, the ‘cash-crop revolution’ in Eastern Africa (tobacco, coffee, cotton, tea) did not start
until after 1900, when railways removed the transportation bottlenecks of perishable and/or low
value bulk commodities (Tosh 1980; Jedwab et al. 2014). In Western Africa, the ‘commercial
transition’ was enhanced by increasing use of indigenous slaves in expanding cash-crop sectors,
such as the palm oil industry in the Sokoto caliphate (Law 2002; Lovejoy 2005). Slave-tradeinduced Dutch Disease effects thus appeared to have been more modest in Western Africa than in
Eastern Africa. Consequently, around 1900, when the scramble was more or less completed, the
estimated per capita value of commodity exports in the West and the East exceeded a ratio of 10
to 1 (Frankema and van Waijenburg 2012: 916).
7

The trans-Saharan slave trade also rose to unprecedented levels. According to Austen, the number of slaves
exported across the Sahara doubled from about 70,000 per decade in the 18th century to about 140,000 per decade
between 1800 and 1880.

8

Whereas Western and Eastern Africa were major slave source regions, North Africa,
South Africa and the African islands were net recipient regions. North African trade had always
differed from Sub-Saharan African trade because of its proximity to Mediterranean markets.
South African trade developed differently as a result of early European settlement, its temperate
climate and its unique location for the provisioning of ships on Indian-Atlantic shipping routes.
The African islands off the coast, such as Cape Verde, Mauritius, Reunion and the Comoros,
were small in size, but they accounted for a large share of African export values up to the late
19th century, dominated by sugar. These differences between trade developments of the SubSaharan African mainland on the one hand, and the outer edges of the continent on the other
(North, South, islands) were also reflected by the fact that the latter areas had already come under
some form of European control (long) before 1880.
When Western and Eastern Africa were eventually drawn more firmly into the realms of
the British, French and Portuguese empires, their export growth accelerated. Table 2 shows that
trade increased dramatically in all areas, and especially in Eastern Africa where commodity
exports had remained very small up to 1900. The areas that were under British control sustained a
process of export growth that had set in during the mid-19th century. In French Africa growth
was less pronounced, because trade relations had already been more developed around 1850,
especially with the Senegambia area. Indeed, in the 1850s and 1860s the value of Senegalese
exports exceeded the total sum of exports of the major British West African areas, including the
Gambia, Sierra Leone, the Gold Coast and the Niger delta. Although British trade with the Niger
delta expanded rapidly after the British annexation of Lagos in 1861, and the total value of
Nigerian exports overtook Senegalese exports in the 1870s, in per capita terms the gap remained
huge, c. 10-15 to 1.8

[Table 2 about here]
Table 3a and 3b present the share of African ‘colonies’ in total exports from British and
French colonial possessions to the metropole. Table 3a shows that Sub-Saharan African
commodity trade to Britain had been dominated by South Africa and Mauritius up to the 1880s,

8

For these calculations we used the official exchange rates of the gold standard regime, in which one British Pound
equalled 26 French Francs. We took population estimates for Nigeria and Senegal from Frankema and Jerven (2014).

9

but that the relative shares of Western and Eastern Africa caught up after 1880 and 1900,
respectively. Table 3b shows that exports from Africa dominated French colonial trade in a
similar way as Indian exports dominated British colonial trade (note that exports from the British
dominions, Australia and Canada, are excluded from this account). North Africa, and Algeria in
particular, made up the bulk of this trade, but the share of West African exports to France was
nevertheless substantial (over 10%), and much larger than in British colonial trade. Following the
decline of the French Caribbean trade during the late 19th century, the share of Western African
exports to France was only matched by the exports originating from Indochina.

[Table 3a about here]
[Table 3b about here]

Table 4 presents the top five commodities exported from Sub-Saharan Africa during the
long 19th century according to overall export value. Palm oil was the key commodity in the first
half of the 19th century, along with important ‘18th century’ commodities such as ivory and
beeswax. After 1850 groundnuts and gum kicked in, two major export items from the
Senegambia area. Palm oil was used as a lubricant in the machinery industry (incl. the railways),
as an ingredient in soap production, and as an edible oil in food processing industries.
Groundnuts were especially valued as a protein-rich source of vegetable oils. Gum Arabic was
used for all sorts of industrial purposes, being especially valued for its adhesive qualities. After
1880 a number of ‘new’ commodities gained ground, most notably rubber, cocoa, cotton and oil
seeds.
A final remark needs to be made. Sub-Saharan Africa remained a minor player on the
broader stage of North-South trade during the 19th century, although its overall weight expanded
in the century between 1850 and 1950. Since Sub-Saharan Africa supplied small shares of total
world supplies of most of its commodity exports, its growth had little direct effect on world
market prices and thus reflects an effective supply response to, as we will show below, a very
powerful price boom.9 This may have been different for some commodities such as rubber,

9

Possible exceptions to this general rule might have been ivory, and after 1890 perhaps also Ghanaian cocoa and
Congolese rubber for a brief period (before Asian rubber took off).

10

cocoa, copper or diamonds, in which Africa did become a leading supplier at some point after
1880, but that is an issue for a follow-up study.

[Table 4 about here]

3. An economic rationale for the African scramble?
To appreciate our contribution to the debate on the economic rationale for the scramble, we need
to introduce the key arguments. The most common counter-argument to the view that the
scramble for Africa was driven by economic motives is precisely that its share in total (imperial)
trade was too small to be worth fighting for. Hence, many scholars have argued that the scramble
is best understood as an economically irrational, but politically important demonstration of
military power and strategic considerations, national prestige and moral self-confidence, in an
age of increasing intra-European tensions (Chamberlain 2009, Hyam 1976, Pakenham 1992). In
this game, the French seemed more eager than the British to expand their territory in West Africa
from existing strongholds in the North (Algeria) and the West (the Senegambia coast), since they
considered the region as their natural ‘backyard’ and the British did not. Yet, the British, along
with the Germans and Portuguese, found it too important to leave unclaimed territories to
European contenders, once the French launched an attempt to extend control over the Western
Soudan in 1879, when Joseph Gallieni led an expedition to survey the possibilities of
constructing a railway connecting the Niger river, and the major inland trans-Saharan trade cities
(Djenne, Timbuktu, Gao), to Dakar.
Scholars who have emphasized economic motives for the scramble do not deny that the
commercial interests were comparatively modest, but point out that these interests were growing
and thus contained rising promises of profitable exploitation, and that whether these promises
were realistic ex-ante perceptions or not, doesn’t matter for an assessment of motives (Hopkins
1968, 1973). Surely, the high costs of colonization of tropical Africa goes a long way in
explaining why it was the last major area that came under direct European control, long after the
Americas had gained independence, but the timing of the scramble around 1880 fits the logic of
19th century technological progress, industrial demand and changing patterns of global trade. This
debate is unlikely to ever be resolved, if only because the political motives for invasion are so
difficult to disentangle from the economic motives.
11

According to the Hobson-Lenin thesis ‘Capitalism’ and ‘Imperialism’ are inextricably
connected, since ongoing accumulation of capital eventually had to find its way out of Europe in
search for attractive investment opportunities. According to Moon (1926), the Hobson-Lenin
thesis fits the timing of the extension of ‘formal empire’ in Sub-Saharan Africa quite well. Moon
argued that the replacement of informal control of seaborne trade flows by direct territorial
control around 1880 marked the ‘high age’ of capitalism. Whereas the mid-Victorian era of
‘indifference’ regarding empire was rooted in the pursuit of a radical free trade ideology, the lateVictorian era saw a renewed ‘enthusiasm’ for empire and wider support for imperial expansion.
Gallagher and Robinson (1953) responded that the supposed mid-Victorian ‘indifference’
to imperial expansion was just a matter of words, but that it did not square with political practice.
They argued that British warships in Canton and the establishment of formal control over major
parts of India (the Raj) did not point to much ‘reluctance’ during the 1840s and 1850s. With
respect to Africa they stated that “the West Africa Committee of 1865 made a strong and much
quoted case for giving up all but one of the West African settlements, but even as they sat these
settlements were being extended.” (1953: 4). Dike (1956) also noted how the plea of the West
Africa Committee for retreat, was inconsistent with increasing British encroachment in the Niger
delta in the 1860s. According to Gallagher and Robinson, the scramble should be seen in the
context of a long Victorian age of continuous imperial expansion, but that the British only opted
for the expansion of ‘formal empire’ when their options of informal control (via voluntary or
enforced free trade treaties) were constrained, either due to the lack of reliable local partners or
by European contenders. The timing of the scramble, they argued, was dictated by the “Egyptian
question” of 1881-82, when British commercial, financial and strategic interests (Suez canal;
access to India) were threatened by a revolt against their ally, the Khedive regime.10 We note that
this older strand of literature is mistakenly Anglo-centered, because the timing of the scramble
was provoked by French actions, followed by British re-actions.
Hopkins’ view on what he called the ‘economic basis of imperialism’, which built upon
Dike’s (1956) Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta 1830-1885, contributed three points to the
debate (Hopkins 1968, 1973). First, Hopkins explicitly linked the commercial transition to the
scramble by arguing that the British and French sought to secure those places where they had

10

See Platt (1973) for a critique on Gallagher and Robinson and a defence of the distinction between mid- and lateVictorian imperial policies.

12

built up the strongest commercial relations (the French in the Senegambia area, the British around
the Volta and Niger basins in respectively the Gold Coast and Nigeria). Second, he argued that
European demand for industrial inputs had driven up the price of key West African export
commodities, which he illustrated with a palm-oil price series. Third, he noted that the price of
palm-oil, and indeed many agricultural commodities, had started to fall after the 1860s as a result
of the great depression of 1873-1895, so that the timing of the price boom did not align with the
timing of the scramble. Hopkins reasoned that falling African commodity prices provoked intraAfrican conflicts over shrinking export revenues, which provoked African elites to secure rents
by raising tolls and tariffs, and that this undermining of free trade by Africans motivated
European intervention.
Hopkins’ thesis was subsequently criticized by Ajayi and Austen (1972) who pointed out
that the Yoruba wars in Nigeria, that Hopkins had mainly been referring to, were not primarily
motivated by considerations of declining external trade, since it accounted only for a small
portion of the economic surpluses that were generated in the domestic agricultural economy.
Moreover, Ajayi and Austen contended that the palm-oil trade in the Niger delta wasn’t the main
prize of the scramble. Even though the British secured territorial control over Lagos as a key
commercial hub in the early 1860s, the British and French were primarily concerned about
capturing the external and internal trade flows of the major Savannah empires in the middle Niger
delta. Indeed, although Hopkins tackled the Euro-centric conception of the scramble by pointing
to the African side of the process, his view did contain traces of Anglo-centrism in his account of
the scramble’s chronology.
In the 1980s the debate gradually disappeared from the economic history literature, along
with a general decline of interest in African economic history.11 Perhaps the hypercritical study of
Ratcliffe (1981) dealt a first major blow, while heralding the upcoming ‘cultural turn’ in history.
In a biting methodological critique Ratcliffe argued that economic historians had failed to make
clear how “economic causes are articulated into political action” (1981: 10) and that for a proper
causal analysis of the scramble one would have to look into the psyches of the leading political
actors of the time. He underlined his point by citing Hyam (1976) who stated that: “There used to
be a theory that territories came under the British flag as a result of the export of surplus capital.
It would be much truer to say that the driving force behind empire-building was rather the export
11

A literature that has received new impetus in recent years (Hopkins 2009, Austin and Broadberry 2014).

13

of surplus emotional, or sexual energy" (1981: 11). Hyam claimed that the unimaginative sex
lives of the likes as Cecil Rhodes and Leopold II were the ultimate driving force of imperial
expansion, while adding that the British were not only “the world's greatest empire-builders”, but
also “the world's worst lovers.” (1976: 375).
Although Ratcliffe made it very clear that the causality of the scramble is extremely hard
to pin down, not in the least place because it constituted a multi-layered process of actions and reactions in European and African politics, his argument foregoes the key point that the changing
economic context of the 19th century that Hopkins referred to, may have been a necessary
condition, while certainly not a sufficient condition for the scramble. In fact, the ‘economic
rationale’ had strong moral connotations. The lobby for colonial intervention by European
merchants, venture capitalists and captains of (manufacturing) industry received support from
African explorers, missionaries and anti-slavery campaigners, that is, influential people such as
David Livingstone (Jeal 2001). According to the abolitionists the spread of “Christianity” and
“Commerce” formed two sides of the same coin. The idea was that slavery within Africa could
only be abolished by developing viable economic alternatives. The famous Niger expedition of
1841, which ended in a complete failure, was motivated by precisely these two objectives: to
conclude treaties with local African chiefs to end slavery, and to explore the possibilities for
plantation agriculture along the Niger river (Temperley 1991). The anti-slavery lobbyists,
including a growing group of Protestant missionaries active in the region, were generally in favor
of imperial control and their lobbies played a major part in British parliamentary decisions to
extend colonial rule into East Africa (Frankema 2012). The 19th century expansion of African
commodity trade did not only strengthen the case of traders and prospective investors, it also
squared with those who advocated for the export of ‘civilization’.

4. The commodity price boom of 1845-1885
Back to the changing economic context of the 19th century. This section brings the ‘commercial
transition’ in sharper focus and calls for a revision of some accepted ‘facts’ regarding the timing
as well as the comparative magnitude of Africa’s 19th century commodity price boom. We
calculate the net barter terms of trade (NBBT) as the ratio of the weighted average of all major
export commodities to commodity import prices (consumption and investment goods), and then

14

use this information to calculate annual average growth rates of the purchasing power of exports.
Our dataset covers the period 1784-1939.
The 1850-1939 data cover nineteen distinct Sub-Saharan African areas: Western Africa
(6) – Gold Coast, Gambia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, the French West African Coast (Côte
Occidentale d’Afrique), and Senegal; Eastern Africa (6) – Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Kenya
plus Uganda Protectorate, Somaliland, Tanganyika, and Zanzibar; African Islands (3) Madagascar, Mauritius and Reunion; South Africa (4) Cape of Good Hope, Natal, merged into
the Union of South Africa in 1910, and Southern Rhodesia. Our figures for North Africa are
based solely on Egypt and draw upon the work of Panza and Williamson (2015). The 1784-1849
data for Western Africa and South Africa only covers British trade with British, French,
Portuguese and Dutch possessions in Africa. Our pre-1850 series for the African islands is
exclusively based on sugar, which covered over 80 percent of the islands’ export value. The
terms of trade for Eastern Africa prior to 1890 are exclusively based on ivory prices.
The export price indices rely on a mix of African and world market prices weighted by
area or colony-specific export compositions.12 Our data cover over fifty products and include
foodstuffs, metal ores, woods, rubber and gum. First, we estimate annual price indices for the
main African export commodities. For 1850-1939, we rely almost exclusively on annual prices
quoted at African ports. These capture fully the impact on the local market, as it excludes
international transport costs, insurance and retail margins, and import duties. The data is taken
from British and French trade statistics, primarily the British Statistical Abstracts and the Blue
Books and the French Tableau General du Commerce. In case several commodity prices were
available from different colonies/areas, we weighted each by its share of total African quantities
exported of the given commodity. French prices were converted to British pounds using quoted
exchange rates (Mitchell 1988: 700-3). If African data were missing for the 1850-1939 period,
we interpolated the commodity price indices based on the British wholesale prices trends using
Sauerbeck (1886, 1893, 1905, 1917, 1932, 1951).
For the 1784-1849 period, the British and French sources do not list the nominal prices
for exported commodities except for the Cape of Good Hope. We extrapolated the commodity
12

We are well aware of the downward bias imparted to NBTT trends when commodity prices are quoted in
European or North American markets. As transportation costs fell, the commodity price at the source rose, and it fell
at the import point. While it is relevant to note that we are probably understating the African export price boom and
thus the NBTT boom, the same is true of other commodity exporters with which we will be making comparisons in
section 5.

15

price indices based on American wholesale prices (Bezanson et al. 1937; Historical Statistics of
the United States 1975). American prices were converted to British pounds using official
exchange rates (Officer 2015: Measuring Worth). For ivory we relied on the work of Sheriff
(1986), who lists detailed wholesale prices in East Africa, India and England. South African
prices were taken from the British Blue Books.
To obtain an aggregate export price index for each area/colony, the country’s commodity
prices were weighted using its export mix. These export weights were changed at approximately
twenty-year intervals to capture long-run shifts in export composition. The commodity specific
quantity information for 1850-1939 is based on the same sources as the export price data
described above. The 1784-1850 years rely on the trade data listed in the handwritten British
Customs Records. Lastly, the country-specific export price indices were aggregated to obtain
series for the five sub-regions as well as an aggregate that includes the two Sub-Saharan African
regions, but excludes the islands and South Africa. The aggregate indices were constructed using
area/colony nominal export shares. Once again, these weights were changed at 20 year intervals
to capture the shift in each area’s contribution to the value of total African exports.
Location specific terms of trade were derived by dividing the export price indices by a
common import price index. We took the import price index from British Historical Statistics
(Mitchell 1988: 526-8). This index captures the change in the prices for the primary British
manufactures shipped abroad. The use of a common African import price index implies that we
do not take differences in the import mix of African colonies into account. The data that is
available on the composition of goods imported into Africa suggests that these differences were
minor, validating our choice for a common import index.
Figure 1 reports the trend in the Sub-Saharan Africa terms of trade (1900=100) estimated
over the century and a half from 1784 to 1939. Note that this trend excludes South Africa, North
Africa and the African islands, which we analyze below. We will be more precise in the next
section, but here we stress two findings. First, while the terms of trade rose only modestly over
the half century up to the mid-1840s, they exploded from then to the mid-1880s. The secular
commodity price and terms of trade boom in pre-1880s Sub-Saharan Africa was part of general
globalization forces at work in all poor commodity exporters. The terms of trade boom was huge
in the poor periphery: between the half-decades 1796-1800 and 1856-1860, it increased by almost
two and a half times, or at an annual rate of 1.5 percent, a rate which was vastly greater than per
16

capita income growth in the poor periphery, and even greater than per capita income growth in
the United Kingdom (1.2 percent per annum, 1820-1870, Maddison 1995: 23). Second, the fall
from the peak in the mid-1880s to 1939 destroyed all the gains which had been achieved by
Africa from the 1780s onwards. This terms of trade bust has received far more attention than the
huge boom that preceded it (Prebisch 1950; Singer 1950; Lewis 1978), but our account puts this
bust in a longer perspective: in 1940 the terms of trade of Sub-Saharan Africa had returned to its
1800 level.

[Figure 1 about here]

Table 5 compares our NBBT estimates with the GBBT estimates of Eltis and Jennings
(1988). Although both indices confirm that the African terms of trade improved over the course
of the early 19th century, the rate of growth in the gross barter terms of trade (GBTT) vastly
exceeds that of our NBTT estimate. We observe an extended, yet modest rise in the NBTT from
about 1791 to the 1820s, followed by a brief decline and a subsequent take-off in the 1840s
peaking in the mid-1880s. Eltis and Jennings failed to cover the first 15 years of the 19th century,
but their figures suggest that the African terms of trade more than doubled, which translates into
an annual rate of growth of 2.1 percent between the second half of the 1810s and the early 1850s.
We estimate the terms of trade to have grown by a little over 0.9 percent per annum between
1791 and 1853, less than half of their estimate.
Although Eltis and Jennings were unable to link their early 19th century estimates to the
post-1853 period, they contended that the terms of trade rise “probably continued until the last
third of the 19th century, when a sharp reversal occurred” (1988: 942). Here they resonate
Hopkins' claim, based on his analysis of nominal palm oil prices that “the barter terms of trade
moved decisively against primary producers” (1973: 133) in the third quarter of the 19th century.
Our estimates show that the aggregate terms of trade peaked later, in the middle of the fourth
quarter of the 19th century, because the terms of trade of other African export commodities such
as gum Arabic and groundnuts continued to rise up to the mid-1880s.

[Table 5 about here]

17

We consider our new estimates to be a marked improvement over those of Eltis and
Jennings for four reasons. First, the primary assumption behind the GBTT measure is that the
countries under comparison faced a consistent equilibrium in their balance-of-trade, meaning that
nominal imports always equaled nominal exports and that capital flows were negligible. This is a
strong assumption, and it was clearly violated in the second half of the 19th century when there
were frequent and persistent gaps between import and export values, accompanied by sizable
flows of gold and capital. The NBTT measure does not require that the balance-of-trade be in
equilibrium. Second, the GBTT requires a set of prices for a given base-year to convert the
nominal value of all goods and services traded to real values to allow them to be aggregated. Eltis
and Jennings relied on the official values used in the British customs ledgers which are based on
late 17th century prices. These prices are not representative for the trade flows observed in the
19th century and tend to allocate a greater weight to new export products that had seen sizable
increases in their traded volume accompanied by falling prices.
Third, lumping together quantities of all goods imported and exported does not allow one
to detect the impact of the change in volume of a single commodity on the terms of trade. Indeed,
any remnant of the slave trade – especially if left outside the official customs ledgers – would
lead to an undervaluation of the volume of African exports and a subsequent overestimation of
the terms of trade boom. NBTT estimates allow us to focus strictly on commodities, to single out
the effect of individual goods on the overall terms-of-trade trend and to reweigh the index at 20year intervals to adequately reflect the changing export mix of African counties over time.
Finally, Eltis and Jennings were unable to link their index to the terms of trade estimates reported
by Gemery et al. (1990) for the 18th century, nor to extend it beyond 1850. They thus missed a
vital part of the commercial transition in West Africa and, indeed, they missed the full extent of
the African terms of trade boom of 1845-1885.
The use of the NBTT measure allows us to disentangle the effects of both changes in the
import and export prices as well as the growth in the volume of exports on the purchasing power
of African exports. Table 6 illustrates this for West Africa, linking the evidence from Table 2 and
Figure 1 to reveal the actual impact of globalization on this region. In the period leading up to
1885, during the height of the terms-of-trade boom, the growth in export prices was fuelling the
rise in the purchasing power of exports. Whereas, between 1850 and 1885, the export volume
rose at an annual rate of 1.42 and 2.05 percent for the French and British possessions
18

respectively, the purchasing power of export (i.e. the real value of imports received in exchange
for African exports) rose at nearly double those rates: 4.98 and 3.79 respectively. Hopkins’ thesis
that falling trade revenues provoked intra-African conflicts is completely at odds with our results:
during the third quarter of the 19th century the real revenues from Sub-Saharan African exports
did not contract, they rose at an impressive rate.
After 1885, the terms-of-trade went into sharp decline; this reflected the fact that export
prices rose much slower than the prices for imported goods. The terms-of-trade bust
notwithstanding, the purchasing power of export still rose between 1885 and 1929. This was
driven exclusively by a pronounced increase in the export volume for both British and French
West Africa. In section 6 we will discuss why the export boom continued during the colonial era,
despite the sharp decline in the African terms-of-trade, but for now it is sufficient to conclude that
the period before the scramble was distinctly different from the period after.

[Table 6 about here]
5. The African commodity price boom in comparative perspective13
While Figure 1 makes it clear that Sub-Saharan Africa enjoyed a commodity export price boom
from the late 18th century to the mid-1880s, we now ask how dramatic that boom was compared
with other commodity exporting regions. Figure 2 offers that comparison with the European
Periphery (2.1: Italy, Portugal, Russia, Spain), the Middle East (2.2: Egypt, Ottoman Turkey,
Levant), Latin America (2.3: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Venezuela), South Asia
(2.4: Ceylon, India), and Southeast Asia (2.5: Indonesia, Malaya, the Philippines, Siam).
South Asia – dominated by India – had a shorter and a much weaker 19th century terms of
trade boom. South Asian terms of trade peaked in 1861, which is almost fully in line with the
peak year of the ‘average’ poor commodity-exporter (1860), but a full quarter of a century before
the African peak. The growth rate to peak was also much less steep. This was even truer over the
full 19th century up to 1885-1890. South Asia recorded no growth, whereas we find an annual
average growth of 1.48 for Sub-Saharan Africa (Table 7a). Indeed, all of that early growth in

13

This section draws on Williamson (2011: Chapter 3).

19

India’s terms of trade took place up to the 1820s; after that decade, India exhibited great volatility
but no secular growth in its terms of trade whatsoever.14
The European Periphery and the Middle East both had a steeper boom to peak than SubSaharan Africa, but, like South Asia, they were much shorter, peaking in 1855 and 1857. While
the magnitude of their booms to peak were greater than Sub-Saharan Africa, they were
considerably less than Africa for the full century up to 1885-90. The terms of trade for Latin
America and Southeast Asia were more like Sub-Saharan Africa, which is mainly explained by
the large similarities in the export packages of these three regions.
In section 3, we pointed out that the West African experience is most relevant for
assessing the economic rationale of the scramble, because trade connections with Europeans were
much further developed there than in East Africa. Table 7a converts this visual accounting with
actual per annum growth rates. From the late 18th century to peak year (1860 for all regions
combined), the terms of trade for the average poor commodity exporter (excluding Africa) was
1.43 percent per annum, probably one of the biggest terms of trade booms history has ever
witnessed. The figure for Sub-Saharan Africa was actually a little higher, 1.48 percent per
annum. However, Sub-Saharan Africa enjoyed its boom for 25-30 years longer than the average
poor commodity exporter. The average per annum growth rate for all poor commodity exporters
was 0.72 percent from the late 18th century to the mid-1880s, about half the rate of Sub-Saharan
Africa. Consider the run up to the scramble and the Berlin conference, that is the four decades
from 1845-1849 to 1885-1889, arguably the most relevant period for establishing an economic
rationale for the European scramble. Over those four decades, the growth rates of the SubSaharan terms of trade was a spectacular 2.42 percent per annum, while it was only 0.2 percent
per annum for the average poor commodity exporter.
A global comparative perspective thus shows that the terms of trade boom in Sub-Saharan
Africa in the four decades before the Berlin conference was much bigger than that which
occurred in the rest of the poor commodity exporting periphery. If we are looking for an
economic rationale for the African scramble, we need not look much farther. Hopkins (1973) was
right in pointing to the rising terms of trade in West Africa, but it was stronger, more widespread
and more prolonged (into the 1880s) than he and others have envisaged.

14

This is an especially ironic finding given that the literature on 19th century de-industrialization in British India has
been the most copious and contentious by far (Roy 2000, 2002; Clingingsmith and Williamson 2008).

20

[Figure 2 about here]
[Table 7a about here]
[Table 7b about here]

6. From tailwind to headwind, 1885-1940
While a more in-depth analysis of trade during the colonial era warrants a separate study, we
conclude this paper by making three general observations regarding the development of African
trade after 1885, as it evolved from, but also partly contrasted with, trade developments during
the commercial transition of the pre-scramble era.
First, although African commodity exports increased throughout the 19th century, the
price boom was the defining feature of the 1845-1885 era, with export volumes rising as a supply
response. What followed was different. The export boom continued, but it did so in spite of a
prolonged fall in commodity prices. That is, commodity exports now grew for reasons other than
a supply response to favorable world price trends. As Table 5 has shown, the post-scramble
acceleration of export growth was entirely caused by volume growth. This growth in export
quantities was facilitated by railroads. European territorial control paved the way for railway
investments unlocking the export potential of the African interior. Most of these railways were
constructed and completed in the four decades following 1890. Although this export boom
involved some diversification into a wider range of tropical commodities and minerals, the
overall composition of African exports remained overwhelmingly based on primary commodities.
This deepening of specialization in primary commodities during an era of almost
continuously worsening terms of trade raises another question: Why didn’t Africa escape this
commodity export trap after world markets soured? We will not try to offer a comprehensive
answer to this question here, except to note that the explanation will come from two sources:
first, the African endowment of abundant land with scarce capital, labor and skills, an endowment
that heavily favored land-extensive agriculture and mining; and second, colonial policies which
were designed to support specialization in primary commodities (Austin, Frankema and Jerven
forthcoming 2016). Any attempt to sort out these two forces will have to deal with the evidence
in Figure 3 and Table 6, where it is shown that export growth was slower before the 1880s, when
prices boomed, and faster after the 1880s, when prices slumped, not only to the detriment of
21

African producers, but also to European investors and plantation-owners. And it is worth noting
that the price slump was larger in French Africa than in British Africa, as a result of the declining
value of the French Franc after abandoning the gold standard (it lost much of its value vis-à-vis
the British Pound during 1915-1920 and 1922-1926).

[Figure 3 about here]

Second, the move towards trade liberalization that occurred in Europe during the mid-19th
century was transposed to colonial Africa right at the time that it was starting to reverse in
Europe. Colonial governments implemented modest tariff policies, mainly motivated by the need
to raise government revenues, not by the desire to protect local producers. Colonial governments
promoted the free flow of goods into and out of their territories, and relied on large-scale
programs of forced labor to build the necessary infrastructure (Frankema and van Waijenburg
2014). Colonial governments imposed ad valorem import duties around 5 to 10% and left exports
largely untaxed. Liberal trade policies came under pressure in the 1930s, when soaring budget
deficits forced colonial governments to rethink their models of colonial economic development
(Frankema 2011; Gardner 2012).
So-called marketing boards were established to strengthen the control of colonial
governments on the main export sectors via price controls. The marketing boards were initially
intended to stabilize volatile commodity prices and African farm incomes, but the revenues
derived from the increasing margins between domestic purchasing prices and world market prices
after the depression were kept in metropolitan funds and were not channeled back directly into
the development of local agriculture (Meredith 1986, Havinden and Meredith 1993). In the settler
colonies, where government interventions in markets for labor and land had been more pervasive
and biased against African smallholders, colonial policy reforms removed some of the restrictions
in the hope to revive commodity exports (Frankema, Green and Hillbom 2014).
Third, thanks to the commodity export boom Africa’s share of world trade kept rising to
about 5% in 1950. This share was maintained during the late colonial era up to the early 1970s.
This rise itself is not surprising. Africa was the last major world region to be unlocked by
railways. Moreover, if indeed the external slave trades had crowded out the development of
commodity exports, the slave trades must also have retarded the integration of Africa into world
22

commodity markets. African export prices collapsed again during the 1970s and only started
recovering around 1995-2000. How long Africa’s commodity boom will last this time is difficult
to say, but one thing seems clear: the recent rise in African terms of trade is far more modest than
the 1845-1885 boom. In fact, it is unlikely that this commodity price boom will ever be
replicated.

References
Ajayi, J. F. Ade and Ralph A. Austen (1972), “Hopkins on Economic Imperialism in West Africa,”
Economic History Review, 25 (2): 303-306.
Austen, Ralph A. (1979), “The Trans-Saharan Slave Trade: A Tentative Census,” in Henry A. Gemery
and Jan S. Hogendorn (eds.), The Uncommon Market: Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic
Slave Trade (New York: Academic Press).
______. (1987), African Economic History: Internal Development and External Dependency (London:
James Curry/Heinemann).
Austin, Gareth (2005), Labour, land, and capital in Ghana: from slavery to free labour in Asante, 18071956, Volume 18 (Woodbridge: Boydell & Brewer).
Austin, Gareth and Stephen Broadberry (2014), “Introduction: The renaissance of African economic
history,” Economic History Review 67(4): 893-906.
Austin, Gareth, Frankema, Ewout and Morten Jerven (2016) “Patterns of Manufacturing Growth in SubSaharan Africa: From Colonization to the Present”, In K. H. O'Rourke and J. G. Williamson (eds.),
The Spread of Modern Manufacturing to the Periphery, 1870 to the Present (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, forthcoming).
Bértola, Luis and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2006), “Globalization in Latin America Before 1940," in
Bulmer-Thomas, Victor and John Coatsworth and Roberto Cortes-Conde (eds.), The Cambridge
Economic History of Latin America, Volume 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Blattman, Chris, Hwang, Jason and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2007), “The Impact of the Terms of Trade on
Economic Development in the Periphery, 1870-1939: Volatility and Secular Change,” Journal of
Development Economics 82 (January): 156-79.
Campbell, Gwyn. (2004), Structure of Slavery in Indian Ocean Africa and Asia (New York: Routledge).
______. (2008), An Economic History of Imperial Madagascar, 1750-1895 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press)
23

Chamberlain, Muriel Evelyn (2009), The Scramble for Africa, Third Edition (New York: Routledge).
Clarence-Smith, William Gervase (1986), Third Portuguese Empire: A Study in Economic Imperialism,
1825-1975 (Manchester: Manchester University Press).
Clingingsmith, David and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2008), “Deindustrialization in 18th and 19th century
India: Mughal Decline, Climate Shocks and British Industrial Ascent,” Explorations in Economic
History 45 (July): 209-34.
Deaton, Angus (1999), “Commodity Prices and Growth in Africa,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13
(3): 23-40.
Deaton, Angus and Ronald I. Miller (1996), “International Commodity Prices, Macroeconomic
Performance and Politics in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Journal of African Economies 5 (Supplement): 99191.
Dike, Kenneth O. (1956), Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta 1830-1885 (Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press).
Dobado Gonzáles, Rafael, Gómez Galvarriato, Aurora and Jeffrey G. Williamson. “Mexican
Exceptionalism: Globalization and De-Industrialization 1750-1877.” Journal of Economic History 68,
September (2008): 1-53.
Eltis, David (2008), “A Brief Overview of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade,” Voyages: The Trans-Atlantic
Slave Trade Database, http://www.slavevoyages.org/ (accessed February 17, 2015).
______. (2013), “The slave trade and commercial agriculture in an African context”, In R. Law, S.
Schwarz and S. Strickrodt (eds.), Commercial Agriculture, the Slave Trade and Slavery in Atlantic
Africa (pp. 28-53) (Woodbridge, Suffolk: James Curry).
Eltis, David and Lawrence C. Jennings (1988), “Trade between Western Africa and the Atlantic World in
the Pre-Colonial Era”, American Historical Review, 93 (4): 936-959.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Frantz, Brian and Alan M. Taylor (2003), “The Rise and Fall of World Trade,
1870-1939,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (May): 359-407.
Ferguson, Niall (2004), Empire: How Britain Made the Modern World (New York: Penguin).
Forbes-Munro, John (1976), Africa and the international economy, 1800-1960: an introduction to the
modern economic history of Africa south of the Sahara (Worthing: Littlehampton Book Services).
Frankema, Ewout (2011), “Colonial Taxation and Government Spending in British Africa, 1880-1940:
Maximizing Revenue or Minimizing Effort?,” Explorations in Economic History, 48 (1): 136-149.

24

______. (2012), “The Origins of Formal Education in sub-Saharan Africa: Was British Rule More
Benign?,” European Review of Economic History, 16 (4): 335-355.
Frankema, Ewout, Erik Green and Ellen Hillbom (2014), “Success and Failure of European Settler
Farming in Colonial Africa,” African Economic History Working Paper no. 16.
Frankema, Ewout and Morten Jerven (2014), Writing history backwards or sideways: towards a consensus
on African population, 1850-2010, Economic History Review, 67 (4): 907-931.
Frankema, Ewout and Marlous van Waijenburg (2012) “Structural Impediments to African Growth? New
Evidence from British African Real Wages, 1880-1965,” Journal of Economic History, 72
(December): 895-926.
______. (2014), “Metropolitan Blueprints of Colonial Taxation? Lessons from Fiscal Capacity Building in
British and French Africa, c. 1880-1940,” Journal of African History 55 (3): 371-400.
Gallagher, John and Ronald Robinson (1953), “The imperialism of free trade,” Economic History Review,
6 (1): 1-15.
Gardner, Leigh (2012), Taxing Colonial Africa: The Political Economy of British Imperialism. (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).
Gemery, Henry A., Hogendorn, Jan and Marion Johnson (1990), “Evidence on English/African terms of
trade in the eighteenth century,” Explorations in Economic History 27 (2), 157-177.
Harley, C. Knick (1988), “Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913: The Primacy of Mechanical
Invention Reaffirmed,” Journal of Economic History 48 (December): 851-76.
Havinden, Michael, and David Meredith (1995), Colonialism and Development. Britain and its Tropical
Colonies, 1850-1960 (London: Routledge).
Hopkins, Anthony G. (1968), “Economic Imperialism in West Africa: Lagos, 1880-92,” Economic History
Review, 21 (3): 580-606.
______. (1973), An Economic History of West Africa (London: Longman).
______. (2009), “The new economic history of Africa,” The Journal of African History 50(2):155–177.
Hyam, Ronald (1976), Britain's imperial century, 1815-1914: a study of empire and expansion (New
York: Barnes & Noble Books).
Jacks, David S., O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2011), “Commodity Price Volatility and
World Market Integration since 1720,” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3): 800-13.
Jeal, Tim (2001), Livingstone, Revised edition (New Haven: Yale University Press).

25

Jedwab, Remi, & Christiaensen, Luc and Marina Gindelsky (2014), “Rural push, urban pull and... urban
push? New historical evidence from developing countries”, Institute for International Economic
Policy, IIEPWP-2014-4. The George Washington University.
Johnson, Marion, Lindblad, Thomas J. and Robert Ross (1990), Anglo-African Trade in the Eighteenth
Century: English Statistics on African Trade 1699-1808 (Leiden: Centre for the History of European
Expansion).
Klein, Herbert S. (2010), The Atlantic Slave Trade, Second Edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press).
Law, Robin (1993), “The historiography of the commercial transition in nineteenth-century West Africa,”
In Falola, T. (ed.) African Historiography: Essays in Honour of Ade Ajayi (pp. 91-115) (Harlow:
Longman).
______. (2002) From Slave Trade to ‘Legitimate’ Commerce: The Commercial Transition in NineteenthCentury West Africa, Volume 86 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Lewis, W. Arthur (1978), The Evolution of the International Economic Order (Princeton: Princeton
University Press).
Liesgang, Gerhard, Pasch, Helma and Adam Jones (eds.), Figuring African Trade (Berlin: Dietrich
Reimer Verlag).
Lovejoy, Paul E. (2005), Slavery, commerce and production in the Sokoto Caliphate of West
Africa (Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press).
Maddison, Angus (1995), Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992 (Paris: OECD).
Meissner, Chris (2005), “A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of the Classical Gold Standard,”
Journal of International Economics 66 (July): 385-406.
Meredith, David (1986), “State controlled marketing and economic development: the case of west African
produce during the second world war,” Economic History Review, 39 (01): 77-91.
Mitchener, Kris J. and Macr Weidenmier (2008), “Trade and Empire,” NBER Working Paper no. 13765,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. (January).
Moon, Parker T. (1926), Imperialism and world politics (New York: Macmillan Co).
North, Douglas C. (1958), “Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development 1750-1913,” Journal of
Economic History 18 (December): 538-55.

26

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History: The Evolution of a
Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy (Cambridge: MIT Press).
Pakenham, Thomas (1992). The Scramble for Africa: The White Man’s Conquest of the Dark Continent
from 1876–1912 (New York: Avon Books).
Pamuk, Şevket and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2011), “Ottoman De-Industrialization 1800-1913: Assessing
the Shock, Its Impact and the Response,” Economic History Review 64. S1 (February Special Issue):
159-184.
Panza, Laura and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2015), “Did Muhammad Ali Foster Industrialization in Early
19th Century Egypt?” Economic History Review (forthcoming).
Platt, D. C. M. (1973), “Further Objections to an "Imperialism of Free Trade", 1830-60,” Economic
History Review, 26 (1): 77-91.
Poelhekke, Steven and Frederick van der Ploeg (2009), “Volatility and the Natural Resource Curse,”
Oxford Economic Papers 61 (4): 727-760.
Prebisch, Raul (1950), The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems, Lake
Success, NY: United Nations, Department of Economic Affairs, 1950.
Ratcliffe, Barrie M. (1981), “The economics of the partition of Africa: methods and recent research
trends,” Canadian Journal of African Studies, 15 (1): 3-31.
Roy, Tirthanker (2000), The Economic History of India 1857-1947 (Delhi: Oxford University Press).
______. (2002), “Economic History and Modern India: Redefining the Link,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 16 (Summer): 109-30.
Sheriff, Abdul (1986), “Ivory and Commercial Expansion in East Africa,” In Liesegang, G., Pasch, H.,
and A. Jones (eds.), Figuring African Trade (Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag).
______. (1987), Slaves, spices & ivory in Zanzibar: integration of an East African Commercial Empire
into the world economy, 1770 – 1873 (London: James Currey).
Singer, Hans W. (1950), "The Distribution of Gains between Investing and Borrowing Countries,"
American Economic Review 40 (1950): 473-85.
Temperley, Howard (1991), White dreams, Black Africa: the antislavery expedition to the River Niger
1841-1842 (New Haven: Yale University Press).
Tosh, John (1980), “The Cash Crop Revolution in Tropical Africa: An Agricultural Reappraisal," African
Affairs, 79(314): 79 -94.
27

Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2011), Trade and Poverty: When the Third World Fell Behind (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press).
______. (2012), “Commodity Prices over Two Centuries: Trends, Volatility and Impact,” Annual Review
of Resource Economics 4: 185-207.

Primary and Secondary Sources
Administration des Douanes (1830-1895), Tableau General du Commerce de la France avec ses Colonies
et les Puissance Etrangeres (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale).
______. (1896-1928), Tableau General du Commerce et de la Navigation, Volume I (Paris: Imprimerie
Nationale).
______. (1929-1939), Tableau General du Commerce Exterieur (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale).
Bezanson, Anne, Robert D. Gray and Miriam Hussey (1937), Wholesale Prices in Philadelphia 17841861: Past II - Series of Relative Monthly Prices (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press).
Board of Trade (1865, 1874, 1885, 1891, 1895), Statistical Abstract for the Several Colonial and Other
Possessions of the United Kingdom, no. 1, 10, 20, 28, 32 (London: Eyre and Spottiswoode).
______. (1906), Statistical Abstract for the Several British Colonies, Possessions, and Protectorates, no.
43 (London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office).
______. (1911), Statistical Abstract for the Several British Self-Governing Dominions, Crown Colonies,
Possessions, and Protectorates, no. 48 (London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office).
______. (1926), Statistical Abstract for the Several British Oversea Dominions and Protectorates, no. 57
(London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office).
______. (1935, 1939), Statistical Abstract for the British Empire, no. 63, 68 (London: His Majesty’s
Stationery Office).
______. (1947, 1950), Statistical Abstract for the British Commonwealth, no. 69, 70 (London: His
Majesty’s Stationery Office).
British Customs Ledgers (1809-1850), Ledgers of Imports under Countries, CUST 4 (Kew: The National
Archives).
28

______. (1784-1808), States of Navigation, Commerce and Revenue, CUST 17 (Kew: The National
Archives).
British Foreign and Commonwealth Office (1821-1904), Cape of Good Hope Blue Book (London:
Government Printer).
______. (1921, 1926, 1936), Tanganyika Territory Blue Book (Dar Es Salaam: Government Printer).
Mitchell, Brian R. (1988), British Historical Statistics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Ministere de l’Agriculture et du Commerce (1878-1899), Annuaire Statistique de la France (Paris:
Imprimerie Nationale).
Ministere du Commerce, de l’Industrie, des Postes et des Telegraphes (1900-1939), Annuaire Statistique
(Paris: Imprimerie Nationale).
Officer, Lawrence H. (2015), “Dollar-Pound Exchange Rate from 1791.” MeasuringWorth
(http://www.measuringworth.com/exchangepound/).
Sauerbeck, Augustus (1886), “Prices of Commodities and the Precious Metals.” Journal of the Statistical
Society of London 49 (3): 581-648.
______. (1894), “Prices of Commodities in 1893.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 57 (1):
172-183.
______. (1905), “Prices of Commodities in 1904.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 68 (1):
138-153.
______. (1917), “Prices of Commodities in 1916.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 80 (2):
289-309.
______. (1932) “Prices of Commodities in 1931.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 95 (2): 303319.
______. (1951), “Wholesale Prices in 1950.” Journal of the Statistical Society of London 114 (3): 408422.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975), Historical Statistics of the United States,
Colonial Times to 1970 (Washington D.C.: U.S. GPO).
29

Tables and Figures
Table 1: English commodity imports from Africa and slave
exports to the New World, 1701-1800 (1701-1710 = 100)
Years
1701-1710
1711-1720
1721-1730
1731-1740
1741-1750
1751-1760
1761-1770
1771-1780
1781-1790
1791-1800

English imports from
Africa

Slaves exported from
Africa to New World

100
147.8
258.5
340.5
160.5
221.5
265.4
126.3
410.7
527.8

100
115.0
139.1
151.7
143.7
163.1
207.7
191.7
220.2
215.2

Sources: Commodity imports from Johnson et al. (1990, p. 164).
Slave exports from Eltis (2008).
Table 2: Volume of exports Sub-Saharan Africa, 1850-1939 (1900-1909=100)
British West
French West British East
Madagascar
Africa
Africa
Africa
Mauritius
and Reunion
1850-1859
8
42
75
1860-1869
7
36
91
1870-1879
15
58
96
1880-1889
21
64
98
32
1890-1899
50
57
93
59
1900-1909
100
100
100
100
100
1910-1919
208
188
435
174
185
1920-1929
327
337
899
166
297
1930-1939
459
581
2,573
176
349
Sources: British trade from Statistical Abstracts (various issues); Blue Books (various issues).
French trade from Tableau General du Commerce (various issues).

30

Table 3a: Share of exports of British colonial possessions, 1860-1939 (%)
Region
1860s 1870s 1880s 1890s 1900s 1910s
India and Ceylon
72
69
70
60
60
55
South-East Asia
11
12
12
15
15
16
Caribbean
10
9
7
6
4
4
Sub-Saharan Africa
7
10
11
18
21
25
Western Africa
0.8
1.5
1.1
2.0
2.7
4.2
Eastern Africa
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
1.2
Mauritius
3.2
3.4
2.7
1.9
1.2
1.2
South Africa
3.3
4.8
6.9
13.9
16.3
18.8
Note: May not sum to total due to rounding.
Source: Statistical Abstracts (various issues).

1920s
59
20
3
18
5.0
1.6
1.0
10.3

1930s
53
22
4
21
6.4
4.2
0.7
10.1

Table 3b: Share of exports of French colonial possessions, 1860-1939 (%)
Region
1860s 1870s 1880s
1890s 1900s 1910s
1920s
1930s
French India
3
2
5
2
3
2
0
0
Indochina
0
1
1
5
10
12
11
10
Caribbean
21
17
15
9
6
8
8
6
Other possessions
11
11
11
10
9
5
5
1
Africa
65
70
68
74
72
73
76
82
Western Africa
13.0
9.4
15.4
7.6
10.3
11.7
15.1
11.6
Eastern Africa
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.2
0.0
Madagascar and Reunion 18.5
10.2
6.1
4.6
4.2
6.7
8.3
7.0
North Africa
33.2
50.0
46.4
62.1
57.4
54.5
52.9
63.7
Notes: ‘Other possessions’ include St-Pierre-et-Miquelon, New Caledonia and other French
possessions in Oceania. ‘Madagascar and Reunion’ also include Mayotte, Nossi-Be and Ste-Marie-deMadagascar. ‘Caribbean’ also includes French Guiana. May not sum to total due to rounding.
Sources: Tableau General du Commerce (1860-67); Annuaire Statistique de la France (1878-1939).

31

Table 4: Top 5 exported commodities Sub-Saharan Africa, 1820-1929
Rank 1820

1850

1870

1890

1913

1929

1

Palm oil

Palm oil

Groundnuts

Palm oil

Palm
kernels

Cocoa

2

Ivory

Wood, tropical

Gum

Groundnuts

Cocoa

Palm
kernels

3

Hides and
skins

Ivory

Palm oil

Palm
kernels

Oil seeds

Oil seeds

4

Beeswax

Hides and
skins

Palm
kernels

Gum

Palm oil

Palm oil

5

Groundnuts

Beeswax

Oil seeds

Rubber

Rubber

Cotton

Notes: ‘1820-1850’ covers British trade with West Africa only. ‘1870-1929’ covers French and British
trade with Sub-Saharan Africa, excluding South Africa, Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion.
Sources: British Customs Ledgers (various issues); Statistical Abstracts (various issues); Blue Books
(various issues); Tableau General du Commerce (various issues).

Table 5: African Terms of Trade Compared, 1791-1853 (1850-53=100)
Eltis & Jennings (GBTT) This study (NBTT)
1791-95
58.7
1796-1800
82.0
1801-05
74.8
1806-11
72.2
1811-15
70.9
1816-20
48.8
91.5
1821-25
64.8
104.2
1826-30
49.9
78.1
1831-35
49.4
81.3
1836-40
59.1
77.9
1841-45
64.5
74.4
1846-49
67.9
70.0
1850-53
100.0
100.0
Note: Gross and Net Barter Terms of Trade for Africa with England.
Sources: Eltis and Jennings (1988, p. 943); see text.

32

Table 6: Decomposition of export growth in British and French West Africa, 1850-1929
Annual average growth (%)
Import
Purchasing
power of export price
(2)
(1)
British West Africa (£)
1850-1885 3.79
-0.37
1885-1929 5.53
1.29

Contribution (%)
Export
price
(3)

Export
volume
(4)

Price
(5)

Volume
(6)

1.38
-0.04

2.05
6.85

46
-24

54
124

French West Africa (Fr.)
1850-1885 4.98
-0.31
2.50
1.42
72
28
1885-1929 1.98
4.43
1.99
4.41
-123
223
Notes: Growth rate in natural logs. The purchasing power of export in column (1) is the sum of
columns (3) and (4) minus (2). The price contribution is the difference between columns (3) and (2)
divided by (1). The volume contribution is the ratio of (4) and (1). May not sum to total due to
rounding.
Sources: See table 2.
Table 7a: Terms of trade in the periphery, African growth rates in perspective (%)
Starting year

Peak year

Annual growth
start to peak (%)

1796

1860

1.43

European periphery

1782

1855

2.43

Latin America

1782

1895

0.87

Middle East

1796

1857

1.68

South Asia

1782

1861

0.90

South-East Asia

1782

1896

1.42

1791

1885

1.48

Western Africa

1784

1885

1.65

Eastern Africa

1804

1887

2.88

Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion

1785

1883

1.63

South Africa

1816

1878

1.39

Egypt

1803

1865

4.30

Region
All periphery (ex. East Asia and Africa)

Sub-Saharan Africa (ex. South Africa)

Note: growth rate in natural logs.
Sources: ‘Other periphery’ from Williamson (2011). ‘Africa’ see text.

33

Table 7b: Terms of trade in the periphery, 1845-1889 (%)
Start
period

End
period

Annual growth
start to peak (%)

All periphery (ex. East Asia and Africa)

1845-9

1885-9

0.20

Sub-Saharan Africa (ex. South Africa)

1845-9

1885-9

2.42

Western Africa

1845-9

1885-9

2.96

Eastern Africa

1845-9

1885-9

2.19

Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion

1845-9

1885-9

1.31

South Africa

1845-9

1885-9

0.09

Egypt

1845-9

1885-9

3.01

Region

Notes and sources: See table 7a.
Figure 1: Terms of trade Sub-Saharan Africa, 1784-1939 (1900=100)

Notes: Excluding South Africa, Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion. Smoothed trend derived using
Hodrick-Prescott filter, with a smoothing factor set to 100.
Sources: See text.

34

Figure 2: Terms of trade in Sub-Saharan Africa and the rest of the poor commodity-exporting
periphery, 1784-1913
2.1: European Periphery
2.2: Middle East

2.3: Latin America

2.4: South Asia

2.5: South-East Asia

Sources: ‘Other periphery’ from Williamson (2011). ‘Africa’ see text.

35

Figure 3: Volume of exports and terms of trade Sub-Saharan Africa, 1850-1939 (1900=100)

Notes: excluding South Africa. Smoothed trend derived using Hodrick-Prescott filter, with a
smoothing factor set to 100.
Sources: ‘Terms of Trade’ see text. British exports from Statistical Abstracts for the Several Colonial
and Other Possessions (various issues); Blue Books (various issues). French exports from Tableau
General du Commerce (various issues).

36

Appendix A: Terms of trade for individual products, 1800-1939 (1900=100)
A.1: Ivory

A.2: Groundnuts

A.3: Oil seeds

A.4: Palm kernels

A.5: Gum

A.6: Palm oil

37

A.7: Sugar

A.8: Cocoa

A.9: Rubber

A.10: Hides and skins

A.11: Cotton

Sources: see text.

38

Appendix B: Regional terms of trade Sub-Saharan Africa, 1784-1939 (1900=100)
B.1: Western Africa

B.2: Eastern Africa

B.3: Mauritius, Madagascar and Reunion

39

B.4: South-Africa and Southern Rhodesia

B.5: Egypt

40

