                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PROCURING FIRM GROWTH:
          THE EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT PURCHASES ON FIRM DYNAMICS

                                            Claudio Ferraz
                                           Frederico Finan
                                           Dimitri Szerman

                                        Working Paper 21219
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21219


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2015




We are grateful to David Card, Carlos Corseuil, Miguel Foguel, Gustavo Gonzaga, Guido Imbens,
Pat Kline, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Gabriel Ulyssea, Eric Verhoogen, and participants at various seminars
and conferences for comments and suggestions. We thank Gustavo Gonzaga for sharing parts of the
data used in this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Dimitri Szerman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Procuring Firm Growth: The Effects of Government Purchases on Firm Dynamics
Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Dimitri Szerman
NBER Working Paper No. 21219
May 2015
JEL No. F14,F66,J21,O0

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper tests whether demand shocks affect firm dynamics. We examine whether firms that win
government procurement contracts grow more compared to firms that compete for these contracts
but do not win. We assemble a comprehensive data set combining matched employer-employee data
for the universe of formal firms in Brazil with the universe of federal government procurement contracts
over the period of 2004 to 2010. Exploiting a quasi-experimental design, we find that winning at least
one contract in a given quarter increases firm growth by 2.2 percentage points over that quarter, with
93% of the new hires coming from either unemployment or the informal sector. These effects also
persist well beyond the length of the contracts. Part of this persistence comes from firms participating
and wining more future auctions, as well as penetrating other markets.


Claudio Ferraz                                     Dimitri Szerman
Department of Economics                            Núcleo de Avaliação de Políticas Climáticas
PUC-Rio                                            PUC-Rio
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22453-900                      Rio de Janeiro, RJ 22451-263
Brazil                                             Brazil
cferraz@econ.puc-rio.br                            and Climate Policy Initiative
                                                   dimitri.szerman@puc-rio.br
Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
University of California
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

Government purchases are used throughout the world as a tool to foster economic ac-
tivity, increase employment, and encourage innovation. There is a contentious debate,
however, on how effective these policies are.1 In models with firm-level heterogeneity,
the aggregate effects of government purchases depend on which firms are most affected
(i.e. young versus old), how incumbent firms respond, and whether policies affect entry
and exit (Acemoglu et al. (2013)). The existing empirical literature offers few insights into
this question. While there is a large literature measuring the aggregate effects of govern-
ment purchases, we lack evidence on how these interventions affect firm behavior at the
microlevel. At some level, this is not surprising. Governments do not assign contracts
at random, but instead target specific types of firms. In some cases, they may target the
most productive firms when picking winners; or the less productive firms when political
favoritism and corruption become a consideration. Thus, winning a government contract
is likely to be correlated with unobserved firm characteristics, which makes it difficult to
isolate the effects of government contracts on firm performance.

In this paper we use a new empirical strategy to assess the effects of government pur-
chases on firm growth. We examine whether firms that win government procurement
contracts in Brazil grow more compared to firms that compete for these contracts, but win
less. To address the endogeneity of winning government contracts, we assemble one of
the most comprehensive firm-level data sets to date. We combine the universe of procure-
ment contracts auctioned out by Brazil’s federal government over the internet during the
period of 2005 to 2010 with matched employer-employee data for the universe of formal
firms in Brazil.2 From the procurement data, we observe not only the characteristics of
the auction such as the product codes and the location of the auction, but also the entire
distribution of bids. From the firm data, we observe firm size, age of the firm, the char-
acteristics of all workers, and the exact date workers are hired and fired. We combine
these datasets to estimate the effects of winning government contracts on firm growth for
over 47,000 firms that participated in over 6.5 million lots auctioned off by Brazil’s federal
government during this period.3

    1 See for example Ramey (2011) on the evidence of fiscal multiplier. See Aghion et al. (2012) for a discus-
sion of industrial policies.
    2 Starting in 2005, bidding on all federal procurement contracts had to be done via an Internet portal,

called ComprasNet.
    3 A significant share of government purchases around the world is done through public procurement.



                                                      1
To identify the effects of winning a government contract on firm growth we introduce a
novel research design that exploits three unique aspects of our setting. First, because we
observe the timing and entire distribution of firms’ bids in these electronic procurement
auctions we can compare winners and runner-ups in very close auctions. These are auc-
tions in which at least two firms bid in the last 30 seconds and the winning bid and the
second-place bid is only a tiny fraction of the contract amount (e.g. in many auctions the
difference is less than 0.001 percent). Second, unlike most auctions that end at a predeter-
mined time (or based on a predetermined rule), the auctions carried out by Brazil’s federal
government end unexpectedly based on an unknown random number drawn by a com-
puter. Neither firms nor the auctioneer know when exactly the auction will end. Third,
these auctions do not contain a proxy-bidding system. Instead, firms must enter their bids
manually and will routinely outbid each other several times until the auction ends at ran-
dom. We show that winning these types of close auctions can be considered as good as
random and that firms that lose can be used as a valid counterfactual for firms that win.
We then use the contracts won by a firm within a quarter as an exogenous demand shock
to the firm.

We find that winning a government contract has a significant effect on firm growth both
during the quarter in which they win, as well as over the medium horizon. These effects
are also larger for younger firms, conditional on size. Our estimates imply that winning
at least one contract in a given quarter increases firm growth by a sizable 2.2 percentage
points over the quarter, which is sufficient to move a firm located at the median of the
firm growth distribution to the 75th percentile of the distribution. These effects persist
over time as firms experience growth for at least 2 years after winning a contract, which
is well beyond the time when most government contracts have expired.4

To further understand the long-lasting effects of government contracts, we use auction
and firm level data to examine the behavior of firms that were close winners and close
losers. We find that these persistence effects are, in part, attributed to firm behavior in fu-
ture auctions. Firms that win a close auction participate in 30 percent more auctions over
the next three months compared to those firms that barely lose. Moreover a year later,
we still find that close winners participate in 20 percent more auctions than close losers
over a 30 day window. These participation effects translate into higher win rates, and sig-

Among OECD countries, for example, governments spend on average 13 percent of their GDP on public
procurement. See Dimitri et al. (2011) on the importance of procurement around the world.
   4 The government contracts we consider typically last for a year.



                                               2
nificantly more contract winnings.5 We also find that winning a close auction affects the
markets firms enter and the products they supply. Winners are more likely to participate
in auctions where the buyer is located outside of their municipality and increase the num-
ber of products they compete for in auctions. These diversification effects are present both
in the short and long run. Thus our findings suggest that winning government contracts
through auctions increase firm growth not only because firms are more likely to get more
contracts in the future, but also because they enter more valuable auctions, penetrate more
markets, and also increase the variety of products they sell.

An important feature of our employer-employee dataset is that we can follow workers
over time as they switch firms or enter in and out of the formal sector. This aspect of our
data allows us to decompose the firm growth into hirings and firings and further examine
whether the workers that are hired come from other firms or from unemployment or the
informal sector. We find that 93 percent of the growth in new hires comes from individuals
who were either unemployed, in the informal sector, or outside the labor force. Thus, our
results show that government contracts create new formal sector jobs, and do not simply
induce a reallocation of workers across firms in a given locality.

Our study is related to two strands of literature. First, we contribute to a nascent literature
that examines the role demand factors play in firm growth. Our findings are consistent
with those of Pozzi and Schivardi (2012) and Foster et al. (2012), who highlight the im-
portance of demand factors and shocks in explaining firm dynamics. In contrast to our
approach, much of this empirical literature has had to rely on the availability of price
data and functional form assumptions in order to disentangle demand from productiv-
ity shocks (Pozzi and Schivardi (2012), Foster et al. (2012), De Loecker (2011)). Besides
our study, the only other exception is Atkin et al. (2014) who conduct a randomized con-
trol trial that generates exogenous variation in the access to foreign markets for Egyptian
firms. They document that, after starting to export, firms increase the quality of products
through learning from their foreign buyers. Thus, they also provide evidence consistent
with the importance of demand constraints and the effects of relaxing those constraints
through expanding market access.

Second, our findings relate to an extensive literature that examines the life cycle of firms
(e.g. Sutton (1997)). As the literature has pointed out, firms tend to grow as they age,

   5 These results are consistent with a learning-by-doing process highlighted by Jofre-Bonet and Pesendor-

fer (2003) and Tiererova (2013).

                                                    3
and this life-cycle pattern is often interpreted as evidence of firm-specific accumulation
of organizational capital (Atkeson and Kehoe (2005); Hsieh and Klenow (2014), Kueng
et al. (2014)). Growth in organizational capital can come about due to investments in
new technologies, managerial practices, or customer capital.6 If younger firms have not
yet developed this organization capital and do not, for instance, have the customer base
of older firms, then we would expect the effects of these government-induced demand
shocks to be more pronounced among younger firms. This is precisely what we find. The
effects for firms less than 5 years old are twice the size of the effects for firms between 5
and 15 years old, and more than 4 times the effects size among firms 25 years and older.7

The plan for the paper is as follows. The next section offers some background on Brazil’s
public procurement auction, followed by Section 3, which describes our research design
and tests of its validity. Section 4 discusses our dataset and estimation sample, and we
present our results in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background

In this section, we provide a brief description of public procurement auctions in Brazil.
We then highlight two features of the auction process that are central to our empirical
strategy – the random ending of auctions and the absence of proxy bidding.


2.1     Electronic Procurement Auctions in Brazil

The Brazilian public administration has used reverse auctions as a procurement method
for off-the-shelf goods – from pharmaceuticals to cleaning services – since 2001.8 Starting
in 2005, it became mandatory for federal agencies to procure off-the-shelf goods through
    6 See  for example Cabral and Mata (2003), Rob and Fishman (2005), Arkolakis (2010), Dinlersoz and
Yorukoglu (2012), Gourio and Rudanko (2014), Luttmer (2011), Drozd and Nosal (2012), Kueng et al. (2014).
     7 These results are consistent with Fort et al. (2013) who find that younger business in the U.S. are more

sensitive to cyclical shocks.
     8 Off-the-shelf goods are goods that have precise and concise enough specifications, so that bids can be

compared solely based on price. IT equipment for instance qualify as off-the-shelf, whereas engineering
projects do not. Although the legislation does not provide a clear-cut definition of an “engineering project”,
it is known, for example, to include entire road resurfacing works. On the other hand, reverse auction
are sometimes used to procure small demolition work. Federal Law 8666/93 regulates public procurement
in Brazil, and Federal Law 10520/2002 are specific to procurement auctions. For a detailed description of
public procurement in Brazil, see World Bank (2004).

                                                      4
these auctions, and to conduct them online on ComprasNet, a one-stop internet portal
for the federal government’s procurement of goods and services. Each year, around 2200
public bodies scattered across the country list around 1 million lots on ComprasNet; in
2012, 0.76 percent of Brazil’s GDP – or R$ 33.6 billion worth of contracts accounting for
46 percent of the federal government’s procurement spending – was awarded through
ComprasNet auctions. In short, these auctions represent a large share of federal tenders
and a substantial amount is contracted through them every year.

Over 65,000 firms have placed bids in the ComprasNet platform for contracts to supply
the government with various goods and services. To participate in an auction, firms must
first register as a vendor. To encourage participation, especially among small firms, the
registration process which is done online is fairly streamlined and simple. And while par-
ticipation in some specific auctions may involve additional requirements – for example, in
the case of service contracts, a public body may ask firms to provide proof that they have
the capacity to deliver the same type of service at a similar scale – most of the documents
supporting a firm’s bid are submitted after winning an auction, which again lowers the
cost of participating.

A typical ComprasNet auction starts with a public body defining lots it needs to procure.
A lot consists of some indivisible quantity of an off-the-shelf good or service.9 Several
lots can be procured at the same session. Next, the public body must provide a reserva-
tion price for each lot. The reservation price is calculated as the average of at least three
quotes obtained through market research, and is meant to capture the retail price of the
lot. Finally, the public body advertises the tender at least 8 days before the session and
publishes a tender document on the internet. The tender document is free to download
anonymously and contains a detailed description of each lot, the date of the session, reser-
vation prices and the contract’s terms and conditions.


2.2        The Auction Mechanism

Two features of ComprasNet auctions are central to our empirical strategy. First, within
time limits, these auctions end at random. To explain how this random ending works,
Figure 1 depicts the bidding timeline of a typical auction. Interested firms must submit a
    9 Inprinciple, auctioneers may allow bidders to bid for fractions of the lot. In practice, this is very rarely
done. In the data, we noted 724 lots (out of more than 6 million) in which two or more bidders were awarded
fractions of the lot.

                                                        5
sealed bid before a pre-specified deadline t0 , after which no firm may enter the auction. At
t0 sealed bids are open, and bidders learn the low bid. Firms now engage in a descending
auction, and can place as many new bids as they wish.10 At a point t1 , the auctioneer
announces t2 , the start of the ending (random) phase. Bidding ends at a point t3 up to 30
minutes after t2 , but firms, as well as the auctioneer, only learn t3 once it has passed. The
lowest bidder at t3 wins and is paid her bid. It is important to note that winning is only a
function of price and not quality.11

To illustrate that auctions indeed end at random, Figure 2 shows the distribution of the fi-
nal (random) phase duration, for two periods. Panel (a) depicts the distribution of random
phases from 2004 to April 2006. In this period, the end phase duration clearly followed
a uniform distribution on the [0, 30] minutes interval, as mandated by the ComprasNet
rules. Following complains by firms claiming that this rule did not give them enough
time to place their best bids, ComprasNet changed the rules. The distribution of random
phases after this change is depicted in Panel (b). This distribution results from the sum
of a uniform [5,30] plus one random draw from a uniform [0,2] for each bid placed in the
auction, as long as the total time does not exceed 30 minutes. If the random draw does
extend the total time beyond 30 minutes, the random draw is not added, which is why
the random phase can be less than 30 minutes even when there has been a sufficiently
high number of bids. In sum, even though firms had more time to place their bids, they
remained ex-ante ignorant about the exact time the auction ended.

A second important feature of these auctions is the absence of a proxy bidding system.
Proxy bidding, available in platforms such as eBay, allows bidders to submit their reser-
vation prices and have the system automatically place new bids on their behalf as soon
as they are outbid (see, for example, Roth and Ockenfels (2002)). In contrast, every time
firms wish to lower their bids in ComprasNet, they must enter it manually on the auction
page, which gives rise to potential bidding frictions. Given the setup of the online mar-
ketplace, it takes firms a minimum of 6 seconds to submit a bid. Note also that there is no

   10 A  bidder can only place bids strictly lower than her own previous bids. Bidders can, however, submit
bids higher than other bidders’ previous bids. This is to avoid a situation in which typos (unintentional or
otherwise) prevent bidders from placing new bids. The platform software uses an algorithm to spot this
sort of typos.
    11 After bidding closes, the auctioneer checks if the best bid is below the reservation price. If it is, the

best bidder is requested to submit supporting documentation. Required documents vary across lots, but are
described in the tender announcement. Documents typically concern firms’ tax duties, but may include, for
example, a cost breakdown when the lot is a service, or sample items if the lot is a good. If the documentation
is accepted, the lot is adjudicated.

                                                       6
minimum bid decrement12 , and throughout the auction firms (and the auctioneer) only
learn the currently low bid, but neither the identity of the firms nor the history of bids.



3      Empirical Strategy

We are interested in estimating the effect of winning a government contract on firm growth.
Let the growth rate of firm i in period t be given by git . We can write the growth of firm i
as:
                                   git = f ( Xit , Ui , Dit , ε it )                      (1)

where Xit represent firm observable characteristics, Ui represent firm unobservable char-
acteristics, Dit represents the demand for the firm’s products (firm sales or purchased
orders) received in period t, and ε it represents shocks to firm growth in period t that are
not observed to the econometrician (e.g. changes in firm productivity).

If we assume an additive and linear model, we could estimate a reduced-form equation
for the growth of firms as:
                             git = β 0 + β 1 Dit + δXit + eit                     (2)

where the error term eit = Ui + ε it is composed of a fixed firm-level unobservable charac-
teristic and a component that varies over time.

Our measure of purchase orders or demand Dit can be further separated into purchase or-
ders that come from the private sector, Pit , and orders that come from the government, Git :
Dit = Git + Pit . Because we only observe purchase orders that come from the government,
all purchase orders from the private sector will be part of the unobserved component of
firm growth: eit = Ui + Pit + ε it .

In this setting, there are two potential sources of bias from estimating Equation 2 by OLS.
First, because we only observe purchase orders from the government, any correlation be-
tween private and government sales will bias our coefficient. If private sector contracts
crowd-out government contracts due to perhaps capacity constraints, then we will under-
estimate the effects of government contracts on firm growth. Similarly, if negative demand
shocks in the private sector induce firms to participate more in government auctions, then
this too will bias our coefficient downwards. A second source of bias arises if government

    12 To   be precise, the minimum bid decrement is R$0.01, which is negligible.

                                                        7
contracts are awarded to the most productive firms. In this case, firms who receive pos-
itive productivity shocks will not only be more likely to win a government contract, but
will also tend to grow more (independently of winning the contract). This of course will
lead us to over-estimate the coefficient of interest.

To overcome these estimation concerns, we propose a novel empirical strategy that ex-
ploits the unique design of the procurement auctions to construct an exogenous demand
shock. We then use this government-induced demand shock as an instrument to estimate
the effects of winning government contracts on firm dynamics. We describe the approach
next.


3.1   Research Design with Close Auctions

We define a close auction as any auction in which both the winner and loser placed a
bid within the last 30 seconds of the auction, and the win margin was less 0.5%. The use
of close auctions combined with the random ending are critical features of our research
design. To see why, consider the following simple example. Suppose there are two types
of firms: high-valuation firms and low-valuation firms. This will generate three types
of auctions: 1) two high-valuation firms are competing; 2) two low valuation-firms are
competing; and 3) a high-valuation firm competes against a low-valuation firm. For the
first two types of auctions, the losing firms will on average serve as a good counterfactual
for the winning firms when we restrict our sample to auctions that ended with a close
win margin. The potentially problematic comparison lies with the third set of auctions.
In these auctions, the high-valuation firm can engage in two strategies. First, the high
valuation firm may decide to aggressively bid its true (or near its true) valuation, and win
with probability one. In this case, the difference in bids between the first and second place
bids is likely to be large, or the auction is resolved early on. By considering small win
margins and tight timings, we eliminate these auctions from our identifying variation.
Alternatively, instead of bidding its true valuation, the high-valuation firm may chose to
place a lower initial bid and only increase its bid by an small incremental amount if the
low-valuation firm outbids the current offer. This is a riskier strategy given the auction’s
random ending and possible frictions in the bidding technology. As a result of the random
ending, high valuation firms engaged in this strategy will win in some cases but lose in
others. Thus, in expectation, the winners and losers of these types of auctions will be
similar.

                                             8
This intuition is formalized in Szerman (2012), which extends the Ockenfels and Roth
(2006) model of eBay auctions to allow for a random ending rule.13 This model generates
two types of equilibria. The first is one in which all bidders bid up to their true valuations
before the random phase starts. These equilibria are payoff equivalent to the standard
equilibrium in weakly dominant strategies of a Vickrey auction. Once the random phase
starts, there is no further bidding and the firm with the highest valuation wins. This type
of equilibria are not part of our close auctions.

The second type of equilibria is where firms engage in an incremental bidding strategy
during the random phase of the auction. The key element for late bidding to arise in
equilibrium is that there exists some probability that bids are not transmitted towards
the end of the auction due to bidding frictions. When some bids are not transmitted, the
winning price is effectively higher, causing expected surplus to be transferred from the
auctioneer to bidders. As a result, bidders will avoid an early price war and engage in
incremental bidding during the random phase.14 This is the bidding behavior that gives
rise to the close auctions we use.

Given our research design and the structure of the auction data, it would be natural to
estimate the following model:

                           yi,k+t = α + τ [1|Wi,k > 0] + f (Wik ) + δk + ε ik                             (3)

where yi,k+t is the outcome of firm i at time t periods after auction k, Wik is the win margin
of firm i in auction k and τ measures the causal effect of winning an auction on outcome
yi,k+t . The function f (Wik ) is a smooth function of the win margin and δk are a set of
auction fixed effects so as to exploit within auction variation.

Although we estimate this specification for auction-level outcomes, it poses two practical
problems for estimating the effects of winning a contract on firm dynamics. First, firm
size is unlikely to change at the daily level. For meaningful variation in firm size, our
unit of time needs to be longer. Second, firms will enter and win several auctions within
a single day. In this case, how much a firm wins in an average auction is less relevant
to a firm’s employment decisions than how much it won in total over a given period of
   13 SeeAppendix A for a formal treatment of the model.
   14 Szerman (2012) show that such equilibrium can be sustained with a likelihood that is non-monotonic
on the probability that bids do not get transmitted: if the probability is too low, then there is little to be
gained by delaying bidding. On the other hand if the probability is too high, then the chances of winning
the auction are too low.

                                                      9
time. For these reasons, we examine firm growth at the quarterly level, which requires an
alternative identification strategy.

To identify the causal relationship of the amount of contracts a firm wins on firm growth,
we exploit variation in the share of close auctions won by a firm in a given quarter. Firms
typically participate in several auctions in a given quarter, and some of those will end up
being close auctions. Because there is a random component of who wins the close-auctions
due to the random-ending auction design, the outcome of many of these auctions ends up
being as good as random, conditional on firms participating in these auctions. Thus, the
proportion of close-auctions won during a quarter provides us with exogenous variation
in the total amount that a firm won.15 Using this variation, we can measure the causal
effects by estimating the following model by TSLS:

                                         git = α Ĝit + ηi + δt + eit                                             (4)
                                         Git = γZit + ξ i + κt + νit                                              (5)

where git is the growth in employment in period t for firm i, Git is the total value of
government contracts won by firm i in period t, Zit is the total value of contracts won in
close auctions by firm i in period t divided by the total value of contracts from auctions
that firm i participated in that period, i.e. Zit = Vitwin close /(Vitlose close + Vitwin close ).16 ηi , ξ i
and δt , κt are firm and time fixed-effects. The estimate of α yields the causal effect of a
government-induced demand on firm growth conditional on participation.17


3.2     Adjusting for Endogenous Participation

As we discuss in Section 4, our estimation sample only includes firms who have ever par-
ticipated in a government auction. But even within this restricted sample, in any given
period a firm will choose whether or not to participate in a set of auctions, which creates a
potential sample selection issue when estimating Equation 4. We account for this endoge-

   15 This approach is similar to the one used by Rehavi (2007) to assess the effects of female legislators on
public spending.
   16 Following Bartelsman et al. (2013), we calculate firm growth g = ( E − E
                                                                     it      it    it−1 ) / (0.5 × Eit + 0.5 × Eit−1 )
to account for the fact that firms can have zero employees in some periods.
   17 Note that for the exclusion restriction to hold, we need to assume that private sector sales at time t do

not respond to the unexpected shocks also occurring at time t. We think this is a reasonable assumption
given that investments into private sector sales are likely to occur prior to or at the beginning of the quarter.
Violations to this assumption are likely to produce underestimates of the true effect.

                                                         10
nous participation decision following the selection procedure suggested by Semykina and
Wooldridge (2010). We proceed in two steps: first, we estimate the probability that a firm
participates in a government auction in a particular quarter. Let sit∗ denote the latent vari-
able determining participation, which we model as follows:

                                 sit∗ = βZit−1 + ηi + δt + vit .


Here vit is an idiosyncratic error term, Zit−1 is our demand shock in the previous period.
The selection indicator sit can be defined as:

                       sit = 1[sit∗ > 0] = 1[ βZit−1 + ηi + δt + vit > 0],                 (6)

where 1[·] represents the indicator function. Under the assumption that vit is N (0, 1), we
can estimate Equation 6 as a probit model. The key identifying assumption underlying
this estimation is the exogeneity of the demand shock in the previous period, which as
we will show below, strongly predicts participation in future auctions. Based on the es-
timation of this selection equation, we then compute an inverse Mills Ratio, λit . In the
second step, we re-estimate Equation 4 with the addition of the inverse Mills Ratio for the
selected sample.

The validity of this approach hinges on two related assumptions: 1) Zit−1 is exogenous
to the selection equation, and 2) Zit−1 does not directly affect growth in period t. Both
assumptions are quite plausible. Given our research design, Zit is exogenous for all t
and as we will document in Section 5 winning a close auction in period t induces firms
to participate in auctions in the next period. The plausibility of the second assumption
is more subtle. Conditional on our model specification being correct, and in particular
the lag structure governing Git , Zit−1 should not directly affect firm growth. Of course,
if the true growth model was determined by both Git and Git−1 , then by not controlling
for government sales in the previous period, we would be creating an artificial correlation
between ε it and Zit−1 and our exclusion restriction would not hold. Although in this case,
we could in principal then use Zit−2 as an instrument in the selection model.




                                               11
4      Data

To estimate the effects of winning a procurement contract on firm dynamics, we assemble
an original data set that combines data on the universe of federal procurement auctions
from 2004 to 2010 with data on the universe of formal firms in Brazil. In this section, we
describe these data, and our final estimation sample.


4.1      Online Procurement Data

We use data on over 4.2 million lots auctioned off by federal public bodies between 2004
and 2010 through ComprasNet. Our data come from two administrative sources. First,
we use publicly available data from ComprasNet. For each lot, the ComprasNet platform
automatically records the following information: the reservation price; the name and tax
revenue number of firms participating in the auction; all bids placed by each firm and
their respective time stamps; time stamps for each auction event (as depicted in Figure
1); and the purchasing unit running the auction. All this information is recorded and
published in html format at the ComprasNet website.18 We extract this information from
the web pages to construct our data set.

Second, we complement these data with internal data from the Ministry of Planning, Bud-
get and Management. These data contain information on lots, bidders, and purchasing
units. On lots, there is a paragraph-long description of the item along with product classi-
fication codes following the United States’ Federal Supply Codes (FSC) for materials and
United Nations’ Central Product Classification for services. These classification schemes
define product categories by 2-digit codes, and sub-categories by 4-digit codes19 . On bid-
ders, the data contain information on whether they are registered as a small or micro
enterprise (SME). Finally, these data contains the municipality and state of the purchas-
ing units. These two sources are combined to form a dataset in which each auction is an
observation.

Table 1 reports statistics for the 20 most frequent product categories in the sample. As the
categories header suggests, various types of goods and services from different industries
are procured through ComprasNet auctions. Categories range from books, to pharmaceu-

    18 See   http://www.comprasgovernamentais.gov.br/
    19 The   Federal Supply Codes are available at http://www.dlis.dla.mil/H2/search.aspx.

                                                      12
tical, to building materials. Moreover, items auctioned are primarily retail goods; only one
service category (Maintenance & Installation Services) makes it into the top 20. Overall,
services make up less than 5 percent of the number of lots (not shown in the table), and as
a result we exclude them from the main analysis. Columns 1 and 2 give the total and rela-
tive frequencies of each category. The top 6 categories account for more than 50 percent of
the total number of lots. Overall it is worth emphasizing that we are considering contracts
for the procurement of off-the-shelf goods, as opposed to large-scale construction projects.

Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for our sample of auctions and close auctions. The
reservation value of each lot is on average R$18,155. The winning bid ends up being
around 69 percent of the reservation price, with the difference between the winning bid
and the second place bid being around 10 percent. On average 7 bidders participate for
each lot. Of these 7 bidders, only two are from the same city in which the public body is
located, which again highlights the important role this procurement system plays in pro-
viding firms with access to other markets. The auctions are held throughout Brazil, with
a slight concentration in the Southeast region of the country. When we restrict the sam-
ple to close auctions, we see unsurprisingly that the reservation price is 64 percent higher
compared to the overall sample and that the winning bid is 71 percent of the reservation
price. Naturally, these lots attracted more bidders, with an average of 8.44 bidders.

Bidding in this marketplace is quite active, particularly in close auctions. On average there
are 81.4 bids in close auctions, with 92.5 percent of those bids occurring during the random
phase. In the end, winners place slightly more bids than the second-place firms, but this
isn’t surprising given that winners by definition will have always placed the last bid. For
close auctions, winners take on average 18.1 seconds in between bids during the random
phase of the auction, compared to 21.6 seconds for the second-place firms. This small
difference is not only below the 6 seconds it would take a firm to submit a bid, but part of
the difference is again mechanical since winners have the advantage of having had placed
the last bid. Also, neither winners nor runner-ups necessarily start off with aggressive
opening bids. On average both winners and runner-ups place opening bids that ranked
them in between 3rd and 4th . Overall, we find no evidence that winners and runner ups
in close auctions are engaging in different bidding strategies, which is important for our
research design.




                                             13
4.2   Firm-Level Data

We use matched employer-employee data from the Relação Anual de Informações Sociais
(RAIS) during the period of 2003-2010.The RAIS is an administrative data set collected
on an annual basis by the Brazilian Ministry of Labor. It covers all (formal) firms and
workers in Brazil, and contains information on wages, education, gender, and age of ev-
ery employee in all firms. At the end of each year, firms give a monthly breakdown of the
status of each of their employees, including the month that they were hired and fired. We
construct quarterly measures of firm growth in terms of number of employees. Further-
more, we have firms’ geographical locations and industry, as defined by the International
Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC). Firms are identified by their tax revenue number,
which allows us to match these data with the ComprasNet auction data. Our final estima-
tion sample only includes those firms that appear in the RAIS and have participated in a
federal public procurement auction.

Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for the firms in our data, as well as for the entire
firm population. As we see from the table, the sample of firms who participate in the
public procurement auctions are larger, and pay slightly higher hourly wages. Firms in
our sample have an average number of 28.2 employees and offer an hourly wage of $20.7,
compared to an average firm size of 11.5 and an hourly wage of $18 for the entire sample.
Firms in our sample also experienced a quarterly growth of 2.1 percent during the period,
compared to only 1.5 percent for the sample as a whole. The majority of the workforce
consists of permanent workers: Only 0.43 out 28.2 employees are classified as temporary
workers.

On average, firms hire 3.64 new employees per quarter. Most of these new employees
come from either unemployment or from the informal sector: Only 0.77 of a new em-
ployee comes from other firms. As documented by Gonzaga (2003) and others, the worker
turnover rates in Brazil are some of the highest in the world. In addition to the new hires,
firms also layoff 3.11 workers per quarter.

From Table 3, we also see that on average firms participate in over 31 auctions per quarter,
winning on average 4.8, which amounts to an average BRL $183,200 per quarter. Consid-
ering that the average monthly wage bill of the firm is BRL $164,100, these winnings are a
sizable source of revenue to the firm.

The average age of the firms in our sample is 7 years. In Figure 3 we plot the share of


                                            14
employment by the age of the firm. Forty percent of formal sector employment comes
from firms that are below the age of 15. This number is between those documented for
Mexico (6̃0%) and US (3̃0%). In Brazil, less than 27 percent of the formal sector is employed
by firms over the age of 29, whereas in the U.S. almost 40 percent are employed by these
older firms (Hsieh and Klenow (2014)).

In Figure 4, we plot the relationship between firm size and age of the firm, distinguishing
between firms that are located in municipalities below the median in per capita GDP and
those located above the median. The difference in the life-cycle of these two sets of firms
is quite striking and consistent with the patterns documented across countries. For firms
below the age of 15, the relationship between firm size and age is very similar for firms lo-
cated in poorer municipalities compared to those located in richer municipalities. But for
firms 15 years old and older, there is a pronounced divergence. Among these older firms,
the relationship is much flatter for firms located in poorer municipalities. For example,
among firms 30 years old and older, firms located in richer municipalities are more than
2.5 times larger than firms located in poorer regions. These stylized facts serve as part of
the motivation for investigating whether the effects of demand shocks vary according to
the age of the firm.

Combining these two datasets, our final estimation sample consists of every firm that ever
participated in at least one federal auction during the period of 2004-2010.


4.3   Validity of the Close-Auction Design

For our preferred specification, we define a close auction as one in which at least two firms
issue bids within the last 30 seconds of the auction ending, and the difference between the
winning and losing bids is less than 0.05% of the second-place bid. This definition, while
somewhat arbitrary, trades off the usual bias versus efficiency concerns that has become
common to regression discontinuity designs. Our results (as we document below) are,
however, highly robust to both relaxing and restricting this definition.

Given this definition, the validity of our instrument depends on whether winning close
auctions can be treated as random events. Our implicit assumption is that firms who
barely win an auction are similar, on average, to those that barely lose an auction. Sev-
eral features of the auction suggest that this likely to be a reasonable assumption. As we
discussed in Section 2, the duration of the auction is a random event. Thus, firms do not

                                             15
know when the auction will end, and moreover throughout the auction, both firms and
the auctioneer only observe the current low bid: neither the identity of the bidding firm
nor the history of bids are ever revealed. Also firms do not benefit from a proxy-bidding
system, and must enter their bids manually. As we restrict the sample to firms who were
issuing similar bids just prior to the auction’s end, it is likely that firms that barely win
and barely lose are similar in their productive characteristics, on average.

In Table 4, we provide further evidence that firms who barely lose are in fact similar to
firms that barely win for various definitions of closeness. In the top panel, we restrict the
sample to auctions with at least 2 active bidders in the last 30 seconds, and where the bid
difference between the first and second-place bidders is less than 0.5 percent. Approxi-
mately 265,000 auctions satisfy this definition of closeness, and we will use this definition
for the rest of analysis. Based on this sample, first and second-place firms are similar along
several key characteristics, such as their growth rate in both the previous quarter as well
as the previous 12 months, win rates, number of employees, etc. Only the average real
wage in the previous quarter is statistically significant at a 10 percent level.

In the remaining two panels of Table 4 we strengthen our definition of closeness along
two dimensions. In the middle panel, we reduced the sample used in the top panel to
include only auctions with at least 2 active bidders in the last 12 seconds. Whereas in the
bottom panel, we restrict the sample used in the top panel to auctions, in which the dif-
ference between the first and second place bidders is less than 0.1 percent. For the middle
panel, we see that the differences between the first and second place firms decrease along
some characteristics, but increase along others. For instance, while there is no longer a
difference in average real wage in the previous quarter, there are significant differences
in the number of employees in the previous quarter and whether the bidder is registered
as a small-medium enterprise. Our third definition of closeness (presented in the bottom
panel) does not necessarily achieve more balance, despite a stricter requirement for differ-
ences in the bid amounts. Overall for our definition of closeness the results suggest that
the characteristics of first and second-placed firms are well balanced.

As a further validity check of our research design, in Table 5 we compute for our sample
of close auctions, the proportion of auctions the winning and losing firms would win if
the auction had ended at an earlier point in time. Given the random-ending rule and
the frictions in the bidding technology that don’t allow firms to bid faster than every 6
seconds, we would expect the identity of the winners and losers to switch back and forth


                                             16
as we “end” the auction at earlier points in time. This is precisely what we see in Table 5.
In row 1 we computed the proportion of auctions the winning firm would have won had
the auction ended 6 seconds before its actual ending time. In column 2 of the same row,
we compute the proportion of auctions the losing firm would have won. The sample used
in columns 1 and 2 is based on our preferred definition of a close auction.

When we end the auction 6 seconds prior to actual end time, we see that actual winning
firm would have won 50 percent of time, which is expected since the winning firm was
the last one to bid by definition. Had the auction ended 12 seconds earlier, the runner-up
firm would have won 48 percent of the time compared to only 40 percent of the time for
the winning firm.20 The identity of the winning firm then switch back when we look at the
18 second mark. This pattern is consistent with the idea that as firms outbid each other, it
is the random end time of the auction that ultimately determines which firm wins.

We also test for any discontinuous breaks in distribution of bids near the threshold. A
common concern that arises with such a design is the potential manipulation of the run-
ning variable, or in our case the bids. For instance, if the auctioneer could manipulate
the bidding system, then we might expect to observe a concentration of bids that barely
win. The distribution of bids is however quite continuous, which is not surprising given
that the random-duration feature of the auctions was implemented in part as a safeguard
against corruption.21



5      Results

We begin this section by documenting the effects of winning government contracts on firm
growth, both in the short and medium run, and find that these effects persist well beyond
the length of an average government contract. We then use data at the auction level to
investigate the mechanisms that lead to this persistence. Here, we show that winning a
contract affects how firms behave in future auctions, which we interpret as evidence of
learning. We conclude this section by showing that most of the effects on firm growth
come from firms hiring workers out of unemployment or the informal sector.


    20 Since other firms may also be participating in the auctions, these percentages need not sum up to one.
    21 We   do not report these results in order to economize on space. They can be made available upon
request.

                                                      17
5.1   The Effects of Winning Government Contracts on Firm Growth

Table 6 presents the effect of winning government contracts on firm growth. The unit
of observation in all specifications is a firm-quarter pair and we control for both firm
and time-fixed effects. To account for any serial correlation across firms, we cluster our
standard errors at the firm level. We use two different measures of government contracts:
an indicator for whether the firm won at least one contract during that quarter and the
total value of contracts won. On average 15 percent of the firms win at least one contract
in a given quarter and conditional on winning a contract, the average winnings for a firm
is a sizable BRL$1.3 million.

In columns 1 and 2 we present the OLS estimates. Winning a contract increases firm
growth in that quarter by 1 percentage point, from a baseline growth rate of 2.4 percent
(see column 1). In column 2, we present the results using the total value of contracts won
by the firm in a quarter. Based on our estimates, a 10 percent increase in the value of
contracts won increases firm growth by 0.01 percentage points, or 0.45 percent over the
baseline growth rate.

Overall these effects are fairly modest, but as we discussed in Section 3, interpreting these
estimates as causal can be problematic. Although the OLS estimates do account for unob-
served firm characteristics that are fixed over time, productivity shocks or demand shocks
to the firm arising from the private sector can potentially bias these estimates. To over-
come these sources of bias, we present in columns 3-8 results that rely on the variation in
contract winnings from close auctions.

In columns 3 and 4, we present reduced-form estimates, using two versions of our instru-
ment. In column 3, we use an indicator for whether or not a firm won a close auction in
that period, whereas in column 4 we use the share of winnings a firm won in a close auc-
tions. Winning a random contract leads to 1.6 percentage point increase in firm growth,
whereas the point estimate in column 4 implies that a 10 percentage point increase in the
share of winnings in close auctions increases firm growth by 0.13 percentage points.

In columns 5 and 6, we present the corresponding IV estimates to columns 1 and 2 using
the exogenous variation in the share of winnings in close auctions as an instrument (the
first-stage regressions are presented in columns 7 and 8). From column 5, the IV estimate
on winning a contract is 0.022 compared to 0.010 for the OLS, suggesting that OLS under
estimates the effects of winning government contracts. At least two channels could lead


                                             18
to a downward bias of the OLS coefficients. First, as discussed in Section 3, if government
and private contracts serve as substitutes then any decrease in demand from the private
sector will also be reflected in the estimates of winning a government contract. Second, if
smaller and/or younger firms represent the subpopulation that is most responsive to our
instrument (something we will explore later), then this could also be an explanation for
why the LATE estimates are larger than the average effects.

Overall the results in Table 6 suggest that winning a government contract leads to an
immediate and sizable increase in firm growth. Based on our point estimates, for a firm
located at the median of the firm growth distribution, winning a government contract
moves the firm to 75th percentile of the distribution in that given quarter. Given the size of
the contracts, the magnitudes of these effects are not too surprising: the average winnings
in a quarter is 11 percent larger than the firm’s average wage bill.

For the remainder of the analysis, we will use our indicator for winning a contract as our
main independent variable. Besides allowing us to economize on space, we decided to
focus on the extensive margin because as we mentioned above only 15 percent of firms
win a contract in a given quarter. Having stated this, all of our results hold if we instead
base the analysis on our continuous measure.22


5.2   Heterogeneous Effects

In this section, we explore whether the effects of winning a government contract vary
according to characteristics of the firm. We examine three firm attributes that have been
emphasized in the literature: the sector of the firm (manufacturing versus retail), the size
(small and medium versus large) and the age of the firm (young versus old).

In Table 7, columns 1 and 2 show that the effects of winning a government contract are
much more pronounced among retail firms compared to manufacturing firms.23 The ef-
fects on growth for retail firms are almost twice the size of those for manufacturing firms
once we account for the fact that retail firms tend to grow more slowly (2.3 percent for re-
tail firms compared to 3.0 for manufacturing firms). One explanation for this differential
response has to do with the relative size of the shocks. Although we do not have data on

  22 These
         results are available upon request.
  23 Weidentify manufacturing firms based on their Classificação Nacional de Atividades Econômicas
(CNAE) code, which is the Brazilian counterpart to the U.S. ISIC codes.

                                               19
revenue, the total wage bill of manufacturing firms is more than 5 times the wage bill of
retail firms, and these firms win similar contract amounts. Thus, the effective size of the
demand shock for manufacturing firms is considerably smaller.

In columns 3 and 4 we examine whether winning government contracts has a differential
effect based on the initial size of the firm, as measured prior to the start of the online auc-
tions. Based on their initial size, we divide firms into two groups: those below the median
and those above median.24 Among the firms above the median, winning a government
contract increases growth in employment by 2.3 percentage points compared to 2.6 per-
centage points for smaller firms. Although this difference is small, it could still just reflect
differences in the age of the firm.

In Figure 5, we examine the extent to which the effects of winning a government contract
vary according to the age of the firm. As in Figure 4, we divide firms according to varies
age bins (e.g. 0-4,5-9,10-14, etc). For each bin, we estimate the effects of winning a contract
on firm growth. In order to isolate the effects by firm age (as opposed to firm size), we
also allow the treatment effect to vary by the firm’s initial size.25 In Figure 5, we plot these
IV estimates along with their 95 percent point-wise confidence intervals. The effects for
younger firms (i.e. firms that are less than 5 years of age) is twice the size of the effects for
firms that are between 5 and 15 years of age, and more than 4 times the effects size among
firms 25 years and older.

The fact that younger firms respond more to demand shocks, even conditional on their
size, is consistent with a nascent but growing literature that emphasizes the importance of
demand factors for firm growth. As Fort et al. (2013) and others have documented, young
firms grow faster than older firms even conditional on firm size. Since models with only
idiosyncratic productivity shocks cannot fully explain firm dynamics over the life cycle,
a new class of models have begun to focus on factors such as organizational capital or
learning about demand. Our findings are consistent with such theories (e.g. Arkolakis
et al. (2014)), where younger firms, by participating in these government auctions, learn
about their products’ demand, and adjust their production accordingly.



   24 Based   on their initial size, the median firm in our sample had 3 employees prior to the start of the
auction.
    25 Specifically, for each age bin we re-estimate our main IV specification including an interaction term for

winning a contract and the initial size of the firm. The interaction term is not statistically significant in any
of the regressions.

                                                       20
5.3   Are the effects of government contracts persistent?

Thus far we have documented that firms who win a government contract experience
growth during the quarter. If firms hire additional workers to simply fill the contract, then
we would not expect this growth to persist beyond the length of the contract.26 Given the
length of our panel data, we can estimate the effects of winning a contract not only for the
same quarter, but also for future periods.

In Figure 6 we plot the effects of winning a government contract on growth rates for
different periods of time. As an example, for quarter 2 we estimate the effects of winning a
contract on growth defined over two periods (i.e. git = Ei,t+1 − Ei,t−1 /(0.5 × Ei,t+1 + 0.5 ×
Ei,t−1 )). As the figure depicts, the effects of winning a contract extend well beyond the
average contract length of a year. Even two years after winning the contract, firm growth
is almost 4 percentage points higher. In fact, the effects remain positive and statistically
significant for at least 9 quarters.


5.4   Mechanisms of Persistence

Why does winning a contract lead to such persistent effects? There are two broad expla-
nations. First, winning a government contract could be providing information to the firm
about the demand for its products. As firms learn more about their demand over time,
they decide to grow. In our setting, firms face uncertainty both in the demand for its prod-
ucts, as well as the marketplace itself. By winning a government contract, firms may start
to realize that their products can be sold not only to their own local government, but to
governments in neighboring municipalities and states.

Second, winning a government contract may encourage firms to investment more in orga-
nizational and human capital. If firms are credit constrained, then winning a government
contract could allow firms to further invest in organizational upgrading. For example,
firms may want to hire someone devoted entirely to managing the logistics of the on-
line marketplace (i.e. bidding, finalization of the contracts, etc.). If firms reorganize their
workforce or investment in more human capital in response to these demand shocks, they
are likely to become more competitive and productive over time, which would explain
the persistence in growth even after the contracts expire.

  26 The   average contract length in these auctions is 12 months.

                                                      21
Unfortunately, we do not have the data to distinguish between these hypotheses. We do
however provide evidence that winning a contract, even by a small margin, dramatically
affects the way firms behave in the marketplace. Not only are they much more likely to
participate (and win) in future auctions, but they also begin to diversify in the types of
auctions they participate in, which is consistent with our learning mechanism.


5.4.1   Learning in Auctions

Figure 7 displays a series of plots depicting the effects of winning a close auction on a
firm’s performance and participation in future auctions. The estimation sample is at the
auction level and based on auctions in which at least two firms bid within 30 seconds of
the end of the auction. The horizontal axis of each plot denotes the difference between the
winning bid and second place bid as a share of the second place bid. In the top panel, we
plot different outcomes measured over a 30 day window the day after the auction. The
figures show that after a firm wins a close auction, they enter more auctions, win more
contracts, and win a larger share of the auctions they enter. Interestingly, these differences
persist even when we examine these outcomes over a 30-day window, one year after the
auction took place (see bottom panel). This pattern of persistence in our auction setting is
consistent with the persistent effects that we documented on firm growth.

In Table 8, we present these results in a regression format. For each outcome we present
the estimation results for a 30 days window for 30 days, 90 days, and 1 year after the close
auction took place. Then, for each period of time and outcome, we show three different
specifications that vary the functional form assumptions about the running variable (i.e.
the win margin): a third-order polynomial in win margin, a linear spline in win margin,
and a cubic spline.

The regression results confirm the patterns seen in the figures. Winning a close auction
today implies an increase of approximately 60 percent in the value of contracts that a firm
wins over the next 30 days (see Panel A). Even after 1 year, these firms are still winning
on average 30 percent more. Three non-mutually exclusive mechanisms can lead to more
total contract winnings: winning firms are either participating in more future auctions, or
participating in more valuable future auctions, or winning a higher share of the auctions
that they participate in. In panels B-D, we see that all three margins are at play. Firms that
win a close auction will participate in 40 percent more auctions over the next 3 months


                                             22
compared to those that barely lose the auction (panel B). Even one year out, close winners
are still participating in 20 percent more auctions compared to close losers. Winning firms
also win a higher share of future auctions: 90 days after winning a close auction, the
winning firm’s win rate will be on average 1.5 percentage points higher than the losing
firm. This difference is however only 0.7 percentage points, one year after winning the
initial auction. Finally, in panel D, we see that 30 days after winning a close auction, the
winners win auctions that are 4.6 percent larger than firms that lose. The effects persist 3
months afterwards, but dissipate one year out.

In Table 9, we explore two other participation decisions made by the firm. The first de-
cision is whether a firm decides to participate in an auction that is located outside of its
own city. The second decision is whether a firm decides to sell different products to the
government. In both cases, we would expect that winning an auction might lead firms to
explore access to other types of markets, both in terms of products and location.

In Panel A, we estimate the effects of winning a close auction on the share of auctions
a firm participated in that is located outside of its own city. Our estimates suggest that
winning a close auction reduces the share of auctions that a firm participate in their own
locality by 2.5 percentage points or by 16 percent (calculated with respect to the mean of
0.15). The effects in the short run (columns (1) to (3)) are similar to those one year after
the event (columns (7) to (9)). In Panels B, C, and D we show results for diversification
of products. We measure diversification in three ways: the number of different product
codes, the share of auctions in the top product code of the firm, and the share of auctions in
the top 3 product codes. The estimates suggest that winners of close auctions are also more
likely to participate in auctions of different products. For instance, in panel B we show that
winning a close auction increases the number of product codes that a firm participates in
by almost 15 percent. Similar evidence emerges in Panels C and D. In both cases, winning
firms are much less likely to participate in these auctions, suggesting that they diversify
to other products. Moreover, these diversification effects are present both in the short run,
as well as the in long run.

In sum, these results suggest an important reason why firm growth persists over time.
Winning a close auction in a given period translates into winning several contracts in the
future, as firms not only win more auctions, but also penetrate more markets.




                                             23
5.4.2   Organizational upgrading

Investments in organizational capital can also explain why our effects persist over time.
In Figure 5, we documented that the effects of winning a contract on firm growth are
larger among younger firms, even conditional of firm size. While this pattern may reflect
a learning story, it is also consistent with theories of organizational upgrading. Models
with organizational capital accumulation, such as Akcigit et al. (2014), Caliendo and Rossi-
Hansberg (2012), and Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), predict that as firms grow, they add
more organizational layers, which allows for more knowledge specialization and division
of labor.27 If winning a contract allows younger firms to overcome the fix cost of hiring a
professional managers or of decentralizing the decision making within the firm, then we
would expect younger firms to respond more to a demand shock than older firms.

To test this mechanism explicitly, one would ideally have data on management practices
or the internal organization of the firm. Unfortunately for our sample of firms, such data
do not exist. So instead, we use the average education of the work force as a measure of
organizational capacity. In Table 10, we present a set of IV regression results, using data
at the firm-quarter level. For each regression, the dependent variable is the average years
of schooling of the workforce, and as before we include both firm and time intercepts. In
column 1, we estimate the model for the entire sample, and in columns 2-6 we estimate
the model by firm-age bins to test whether the effects vary by age.

Firms that win a government contract do upgrade the education level of their work force,
but the effects are quite small. According to our estimates, winning a government contract
leads to 0.025 year increase in the average education of its workers. Given that the educa-
tion level of workers for an average firm is 10.15 years of schooling, this impact amounts
to less than a 0.25 percent increase. There also does not appear to be any systematic rela-
tionship between the effects of winning a contract on education by firm age. The effects
are slightly more pronounced for firms less than 10 years old, but still small. In the end,
while firms may be investing in other forms of organizational capital, we do not find any
evidence that winning additional contracts leads to improvements in workforce quality.




  27 These   models have received recent empirical support by Kueng et al. (2014).

                                                     24
5.5   Robustness to endogenous participation

One potential concern with the results presented above is that the estimation treats the
participation decision into the auctions as exogenous. Moreover, one might be concerned
that the number of close auctions a firm is involved in is a function of the number of
auctions it participated in the past.

In Table 11 we test the robustness of our main results by controlling for the participation
of firms in several different ways. First, we control for the number of auctions a firm
participates in during the quarter. Second, we control for the ex-ante probability that a
firm wins an auction based on the firm’s past win rates. Third, we account for the sample
selection directly by estimating a selection equation as discussed in Section 3.

In column 1, we present the estimation of Equation 6, which includes a Mills Ratio to
corrects for sample selection. As we discussed in Section 3, identification of the Mills Ratio
comes from the share of close auctions the firm won in the previous period. The estimates
in column 1 suggest that if anything we are under-estimating the effects of winning a
government contract on firm growth: Firms that won a government contract grew by 2.6
percent during the quarter.

In column 2, we extend the model estimated in column 1 to flexibly control for the num-
ber of auctions the firm participated in during the quarter. By conditioning on the number
of auctions a firm participated in, we can account for the fact that firms that participate
in more auctions are more likely to win even if winning a close auction is random. As
reported in column 2, even after controlling for a 5th degree polynomial in the number
of auctions, our main point estimate remains virtually unchanged. Of course, the ex-
ante probability of winning an auction is not constant across firms, and so even if we are
comparing firms who are participating in the same number of auctions, the “effective”
number of auctions that they participate in can be quite different. In column 3 we ac-
count for this possibility by controlling for a firm’s average win rate up until the period.
Again, our main estimates remain highly robust. In column 4 we include all three sets of
controls (past win rate, number of auctions, Mills Ratio) and again our estimates remain
unchanged.

Obviously, the results presented in columns 1-4 condition the sample on participation
into an auction. In column 5, we re-estimate our original model using the entire sample
(i.e. without the Mills Ratio), but control for the number of auctions a firm participated in


                                             25
during the quarter and it’s average win rate. Perhaps not too surprising given the previous
results, the effects are again virtually unchanged. In Panel B, we repeat the exercise for
our continuous measure of contract amounts, and our conclusions remain unchanged.

Given that winning a close auction induces participation in future auctions, another way
to test for endogenous selection effects is to estimate our main model restricting the sam-
ple to just the periods when the firm wins for the first time. This specification check elim-
inates all future dynamics after a firm wins for the first time. Thus, winning a contract
cannot affect future participation by construction. Also note that in this specification we
are estimating the employment effects based on variation in the intensive margin, since
our sample only comprises of winners. Although we do not report it in the table, we find
an IV estimate on the value of contracts a firm won in the quarter of 0.018 (clustered stan-
dard error = 0.004), with a sample size of 30,267 observations. The point estimate is larger
than those reported in main tables, but the employment growth rate for this sample of
firms is also much higher. The magnitude implies that a 10 percent increase in contracts
increases employment growth by 4.2 percent, which is actually slightly smaller than the
magnitudes of our other point estimates.


5.6   Do government purchases create jobs?

Firms that win government contracts grow more both in the short run and in the longer
run. This does not imply however, that government contracts are effective at creating jobs.
If firms that win contracts poach workers from firms that lose contracts then there would
be no employment creation within the local economy. In order to investigate whether
formal employment at the local level is created we exploit the fact that our employer-
employee data allow us to track workers as they move from one firm to the other, as well
as in and out of unemployment or the informal sector.

Specifically, we decompose the growth effects into mutually exclusive categories as fol-
lows:
                             Ei,t − Ei,t−1               Ei,t,c − Ei,t−1,c
                gi,t =                           =∑
                       0.5 × Ei,t + 0.5 × Ei,t−1  c 0.5 × Ei,t + 0.5 × Ei,t−1

where ( Ei,t,c − Ei,t−1,c )/(0.5 × Ei,t + 0.5 × Ei,t−1 ) represent category cth contribution to the
growth of firm i. We start by decomposing firm growth between an increase in hires and
a decline in layoffs. We then further decompose the new hires as workers that come from


                                                26
other firms and workers that come from unemployment or the informal sector.28 Finally,
we decompose the new hired workers who do not come from other (formal) firms into
four categories: workers who were out of the (formal) labor market for one, two, three or
more than three quarters.

In Table 12, we present the results from re-estimating our main IV specification using as
a dependent variable the growth in employment associated with each category. In col-
umn 1 we replicate our main result for the effect of winning government contracts. In
columns 2 and 3 we decompose the growth effect between layoffs and new hires. The
results are quite striking. While firms that won a contract layoff slightly more people
(a mean effect of 6.3 percent), the increase in new hires is large enough to produce all
of the observed firm growth. We further decompose the growth in employment in two
parts: new workers that come from other firms and workers that come from unemploy-
ment/informality/out of the labor force. As we see in columns 4 and 5, the increase in
hires from unemployment/informality accounts for (0.0252/0.0272 =) 93 percent of the ef-
fect of winning a government contract on firm growth. We then categorize the new hires
from unemployment/informality according to the number of quarters that they have been
outside of the formal labor market in columns 6-9. The contribution of workers who were
out of the formal labor market for 4 quarters or more is by far the biggest. That category
alone accounts for (0.0158/0.0223 =) 70 percent of the estimated growth effect.

In sum, all of the growth effects we estimate come from firms who, by winning a govern-
ment contract, hire more workers, relative to those who did not. Ninety-three percent of
the growth in new hires comes from hiring workers who are not formally employed, and
in fact 58 percent of the growth in new hires comes from hiring workers who are out of
the formal labor market for 4 or more quarters, or who had never had a formal job before.
Hence, government contracts can have real employment effects by creating new jobs in
the formal economy.



6     Conclusions

We employ a novel empirical strategy to test whether an exogenous change in the de-
mand for a firm’s products affects its growth. We find that firms that win more govern-
    28 We only observe whether a worker does not appear in our data in previous periods, so we do not know

whether the worker was unemployed, employed in the informal sector, or out of the labor force.

                                                    27
ment contracts through procurement auctions experience significant increases in growth
that persist well beyond the length of the contract. We interpret these persistent effects
as the result of firms learning about the demand for their products. Consistent with this
interpretation, we find that firms who win a close auction are much more likely to partic-
ipate more in future auctions, participate in auctions of higher values, and sell a broader
set of goods in different markets. Younger firms (even conditional on initial size) also
grow relatively more after getting a government contract, which is again consistent with
a learning-based story.

While we provide evidence consistent with firms learning about their demand, there are
alternative explanations for our findings. One potential explanation is that winning gov-
ernment contracts act as a liquidity shock to the firm. If firms, and particularly younger
firms, face a fixed cost in adopting newer technologies and managerial capacities, then a
demand shock may allow firms to grow. This would explain the persistent effects of the
contracts, as well as the differential effects by age since younger firms tend to be, on aver-
age, more credit constrained. Also, although we emphasized a learning story about prod-
uct demand, firms and customers may also be learning about the firm’s product quality.
While we cannot reject the liquidity mechanism, we do believe that this second channel is
less likely, given that our procurement contracts are strictly based on price bids.

Our results are in line with a growing set of papers that suggest an important role for
demand factors in explaining why some firms grow more than others during their life-
cycle. Furthermore, our findings shed light on the restrictions faced by firms in developing
countries. Lack of access to markets (because of distance or lack of knowledge) seems
to play an important role in constraining firm growth. Thus, government policies that
could alleviate this constraint either by informing firms of potential markets or reducing
barriers to sell in larger markets could enable firms to growth. Such policies may also be
particularly relevant for younger firms, which often lack the networks and knowledge to
sell in larger markets.

Our results do not necessarily imply that government purchases are an effective way to
foster growth and employment. To address this question, we would need to understand
what happens to other firms located in the same city as winning firms and whether the
effects spill over to downstream suppliers. Also, government purchases might just be
substituting for private purchases. If the government acts as a monopolist, this might
induce lower competition and might affect product quality in the long-run. Differentiating


                                             28
among some of these mechanisms should be the focus of future research.




                                         29
References
Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Bloom, N., and Kerr, W. R. (2013). Innovation, Reallocation
 and Growth. NBER Working Papers 18993, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Du, L., Harrison, A., and Legros, P. (2012). Industrial Policy
 and Competition. NBER Working Papers 18048, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Akcigit, U., Alp, H., and Peters, M. (2014). Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation:
 Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries. Working Paper.

Arkolakis, C. (2010). Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in Inter-
  national Trade. Journal of Political Economy, 118(6):1151 – 1199.

Arkolakis, C., Papageorgiou, T., and Timoshenko, O. (2014). Firm Learning and Growth.
  Working paper, Yale.

Atkeson, A. and Kehoe, P. J. (2005). Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 113(5):1026–1053.

Atkin, D., Khandelwal, A. K., and Osman, A. (2014). Exporting and Firm Performance:
  Evidence from a Randomized Trial. Working paper, UCLA.

Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., and Scarpetta, S. (2013). Cross-Country Differences in Pro-
  ductivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection. American Economic Review, 103(1):305–
  34.

Cabral, L. M. B. and Mata, J. (2003). On the Evolution of the Firm Size Distribution: Facts
  and Theory. American Economic Review, 93(4):1075–1090.

Caliendo, L. and Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2012). The impact of trade on organization and
  productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

De Loecker, J. (2011). Product Differentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating the
 Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity. Econometrica, 79(5):1407–1451.

Dimitri, N., Piga, G., and Spagnolo, G., editors (2011). Handbook of Procurement. Number
  9781107402317 in Cambridge Books. Cambridge University Press.

Dinlersoz, E. M. and Yorukoglu, M. (2012). Information and Industry Dynamics. American
  Economic Review, 102(2):884–913.


                                            30
Drozd, L. A. and Nosal, J. B. (2012). Understanding International Prices: Customers as
  Capital. American Economic Review, 102(1):364–95.

Fort, T. C., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., and Miranda, J. (2013). How Firms Respond to
  Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size. NBER Working Papers 19134,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J. C., and Syverson, C. (2012). The Slow Growth of New Plants:
  Learning about Demand? NBER Working Papers 17853, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Gonzaga, G. (2003). Labor turnover and labor legislation in brazil. Economia, 4(1):pp.
 165–222.

Gourio, F. and Rudanko, L. (2014). Customer capital. The Review of Economic Studies,
 81(3):1102–1136.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2014). The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Jofre-Bonet, M. and Pesendorfer, M. (2003). Estimation of a Dynamic Auction Game.
  Econometrica, 71(5):1443–1489.

Kueng, L., Yang, M.-J., and Hong, B. (2014). Sources of Firm Life-Cycle Dynamics: Dif-
 ferentiating Size vs. Age Effects. Working Paper 20621, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Luttmer, E. G. J. (2011). On the Mechanics of Firm Growth. Review of Economic Studies,
  78(3):1042–1068.

Ockenfels, A. and Roth, A. E. (2006). Late and multiple bidding in second price internet
 auctions: Theory and evidence concerning different rules for ending an auction. Games
 and Economic Behavior, 55(2):297–320.

Pozzi, A. and Schivardi, F. (2012). Demand or Productivity: What Determines Firm
  Growth? EIEF Working Papers Series 1211, Einaudi Institute for Economics and Fi-
  nance (EIEF).

Ramey, V. A. (2011). Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?           Journal of
  Economic Literature, 49(3):673–85.



                                           31
Rehavi, M. M. (2007). Sex and Politics: Do Female Legislators Affect State Spending?
  Working Paper.

Rob, R. and Fishman, A. (2005). Is Bigger Better? Customer Base Expansion through
  Word-of-Mouth Reputation. Journal of Political Economy, 113(5):1146–1175.

Roth, A. E. and Ockenfels, A. (2002). Last-minute bidding and the rules for ending second-
  price auctions: Evidence from eBay and amazon auctions on the internet. American
  Economic Review, 92(4):1093–1103.

Semykina, A. and Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Estimating panel data models in the presence
  of endogeneity and selection. Journal of Econometrics, 157(2):375 – 380.

Sutton, J. (1997). Gibrat’s Legacy. Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1):40–59.

Szerman, D. (2012). Public procurement auctions in Brazil. PhD thesis, The London School
  of Economics and Political Science.

Tiererova, L. (2013). A Dynamic Model of Bidder Learning in Procurement Auctions.
  Working Paper.

World Bank (2004). Brazil country procurement assessment report. Technical Report
 28446, World Bank.




                                              32
Outcry           Auctioneer          Start of End
bidding starts   announces t2        Phase                     Close



t0                     t1                     t2                       t3



                                                    Random Phase


                    Figure 1: Bidding Timeline




                                33
            .3
            .2                Period I                                        Period II
  Density
            .1
            0




                 0   5   10              20          30    0      5      10               20         30
                                                  Minutes

                           Figure 2: Distribution of Random Duration

Notes: Panel A depicts the distribution of random phases from 2004 to April 2006. In this period, the
end phase duration followed a uniform distribution on the [0, 30] minutes interval. Panel B depicts the
distribution of random phases after April 2006. This distribution results from the sum of a uniform [5,30]
plus one random draw from a uniform [0,2] for each bid placed in the auction, as long as the total time does
not exceed 30 minutes.




                                                    34
                           Figure 3: Formal employment by Firm Age

Notes: This figure plot the share of employment by the age of the firm for our sample of firms. The sample
size is 42,398 firms.




                                                   35
                                      Figure 4: Firm Size by Age

Notes: This figure plots the relationship between firm size and age of the firm, distinguishing between firms
that are located in municipalities below the median in per capita GDP and those located above the median.
The sample size is 42,398 firms.




                                                     36
                       .05


                       .04


                       .03
   Treatment Effects




                       .02


                       .01


                         0


                       -.01


                              <5   5-9       10-14        15-19       20-24           25-29          >=30
                                                     Firm Age (years)


                                    Figure 5: Treatment Effects by Firm Age

Notes: This figure depicts the effects of winning a government contract by age of the firm. For each age bin,
we plot the IV estimate along with 95 percent point-wise confidence interval.




                                                       37
                       .08

                       .07

                       .06

                       .05
   Treatment Effects




                       .04

                       .03

                       .02

                       .01

                         0

                       -.01

                       -.02

                              0   1       2     3      4      5     6     7    8      9    10      11     12
                                                    Quarters After Winning an Auction


                                      Figure 6: Long Run Effects of Winning an Auction

Notes: The figure plots IV estimates for the effects of winning a government contract on growth rates
for different periods of time. Firm growth k periods after winning a contract is defined as git = Ei,t+k −
Ei,t−1 /(0.5 × Ei,t+k + 0.5 × Ei,t−1 ). The vertical lines denote the 95 percent point-wise confidence intervals.




                                                               38
                                                  Panel A: 30-day window starting at auction day




                       Participation (log)                      Value of Winnings (log)                              Win Rate

                                             Panel B: 30-day window starting 350 days after auction day




39
                       Participation (log)                      Value of Winnings (log)                              Win Rate

                 Figure 7: The Effect of Winning a Government Contract on Future Auction outcomes: RD Graphs

     Notes: This figure displays a series of plots depicting the effects of winning a close auction on a firm’s performance and participation in future
     auctions. The estimation sample is at the auction level and based on auctions in which at least two firms bid within 30 seconds of the end of
     the auction. The horizontal axis of each plot denotes the difference between the winning bid and second place bid as a share of the second
     place bid.
                             Table 1: 20 Most Frequent Product Categories in ComprasNet: 2004-2010

                                                 (1)             (2)                   (3)                          (4)                    (5)              (6)
                                              # of Lots      % of Total       Median Lot Estimate      % of Total Value Purchased      # of 4-digit     # of 6-digit

      Books, Maps, Other Publications          502,253          12                   149                             .71                   7              134
      Medical & Veterinary Equip               446,508          11                   780                           12                     12           31, 149
      Laboratory Equipment                     398,921           9.6                 500                            4.7                   19            5, 009
      Office Supplies and Devices              312,593           7.5                 323                            1.6                    4            9, 754
      Subsistence (Food)                       247,975           6                 2, 250                           5                     14            3, 383
      IT E&S                                   238,268           5.7               1, 892                           9.1                   11            8, 010
      Vehicular Equipment Components           234,852           5.6                 400                            2.3                    5              976
      Electrical/Electronic Equip Com          151,060           3.6                 310                                .75               26            6, 751
      Construction & Building Materia          121,983           2.9               1, 113                           3.5                    8            1, 283
      Chemicals and Chemical Products            91,431          2.2                 339                            1.3                    5            4, 248
      Hardware and Abrasives                     85,683          2.1                 240                                .44               16            3, 181




40
      Pipe, Tubing, Hose, Fittings               85,338          2                   215                                .34                3            2, 830
      Hand Tools                                 84,036          2                   149                                .16                7            2, 159
      Brushes, Paints & Sealers                  80,374          1.9                 560                                .92                4            1, 673
      Furniture                                  68,960          1.7               2, 925                           2.1                    4            2, 999
      Cleaning E&S                               64,253          1.5                 706                                .42                3              810
      Electric Wire & Power Equipment            60,760          1.5                 900                                .95               13            3, 013
      Food Preparation E&S                       55,806          1.3                 872                                .67                6            2, 098
      Maintenance & Installation Serv            53,768          1.3               3, 200                           6.1                   16              260
      Nonmetallic Fabricated Materials           46,867          1.1                 564                                .58                6            2, 428

      Total                                   4,163,599          1.0e + 02           560                            1.0e + 02            704          118, 819

     Notes: Table reports statistics for the 20 most frequent categories in ComprasNet between June 2004 and December 2010. There are 106 categories, as defined
     by the U.S. Federal Supply Classification for goods and the U.N. Central Product Classification for services. The last row shows total for all categories, not only
     the ones showed in the table. Column (1) shows the number of lots that attracted at least 2 bidders, in each category. Column (2) shows the percentage each
     category represents. Column (3) shows the median reservation price of lots within each category. Column (4) shows the share of each category in total value
     purchased. Column (5) shows the number of subcategories in each category. Subcategories are defined by 4-digit codes of the aforementioned classification
     schemes. Column (6) shows the number of 6-digit codes in each category. 6-digit codes are created by procurement officers in ComprasNet.
                               Table 2: Sample Descriptive Statistics: Auctions

                                                                                         All auctions                   Close auctions
                                                                                     Mean          Std. Dev.          Mean         Std. Dev.
    Reserve price                                                                   18155.3         620599.2         29780.4        916777.9
    Winning bid                                                                     10314.2         340152.8         16828.9        492363.7
                 − Ranked1
    100x Ranked2
             Ranked2                                                                  10.0            17.9             0.13           0.14
    Winning bid/Reserve                                                               0.69            0.31            0.71            0.28
    Number of Bidders                                                                 7.00            4.97            8.44            5.81
 Auction duration
  Total (minutes)                                                                     66.3             55.2            70.0            53.7
  Random phase (minutes)                                                              21.2             8.16            26.2            5.90
 Number of bids
  Total                                                                               22.7             37.4            81.4            62.5
  In random phase                                                                     19.0             34.6            75.3            58.9
  In random phase, placed by winner                                                   6.75             12.8            27.0            22.4
  In random phase, placed by runner-up                                                5.60             11.3            24.8            21.1
 Response Time to rivals’ bids in random phase (seconds)
  Winner’s response                                                                   30.2             20.7            18.1            11.1
  Runner-up’s response                                                                36.7             25.2            21.6            13.0
 Rank of first bid placed
  Winner                                                                              2.81             2.79            3.85            3.55
  Runner-up                                                                           2.95             2.77            3.62            3.46
  Number of outbids in random phase                                                   13.2             22.3            51.0            34.0
 Geographic region of public body
     North                                                                            0.12             0.33            0.10            0.30
     Northeast                                                                        0.21             0.41            0.21            0.41
     Southeast                                                                        0.33             0.47            0.32            0.47
     South                                                                            0.18             0.38            0.20            0.40
     Center-West                                                                      0.16             0.37            0.17            0.38

 Number of auctions                                                               4,291,040                          265,642
Notes: Table shows summary statistics for auctions held by federal purchasing units between June 2004 and December 2010 in which at least two
firms participate. See data appendix for a detailed description of filters used. We define close auctions as those auctions where (i) both the win-
ner and runnerup placed bids in the last 30 seconds of the auction, and (ii) the runnerup bid does not exceed the winning bid by more than 0.5%.
Monetary values are measured in 2010 R$.




                                                                 41
                                 Table 3: Sample Descriptive Statistics: Firms

                                                   Firms Participating in                               All Firms
                                                         Auctions
                                                 Mean                Std. Dev.                Mean               Std. Dev.
 Number of employees
  Total                                          28.2                  194.1                   11.5                  78.5
  Temporary                                      0.43                   14.7                    0.20                 10.5
  Growth                                         0.021                  0.24                   0.015                 0.31
 Number of new hires
  Total                                           3.64                  34.7                   1.62                  18.0
  From other firms                                0.77                  11.3                   0.25                  3.91
  Not from other firms                            2.88                  28.8                   1.37                  15.3
  From same municipality                          1.38                  9.50                   0.59                  5.32
  Layoffs                                         3.11                  36.6                   1.49                  20.0
 Employees’ Characteristics
  Average monthly wages                          880.5                1276.9                   746.7                837.4
  Average hourly wages                            20.7                 31.3                     18.0                 23.9
  Average years of schooling                      7.93                 4.50                     8.09                 3.95
  Wage bill (R$1,000)                            164.1                1811.6                   43.4                 668.2
 All auctions...
  Participated                                    31.5                 268.5
  Won                                             4.80                  58.3
  Winnings (R$1,000)                             183.2               130350.9
 Close auctions...
  Participated                                    0.55                  7.74
  Won                                             0.28                  4.63
  Winnings (R$1,000)                              4.14                 227.4

 Number of firms                                42,398                                      3,979,261
 Observations                                  962,562                                     62,277,196
Notes: Table shows summary statistics for a quarterly unbalanced panel of firms from 2004Q3 to 2010Q4. Growth in quarter t is defined
as the difference between the number of employees at the end of quarters t and t − 1, divided by the average number of employees in
the end of the two quarters.




                                                                42
                         Table 4: Winners vs Runnerups: Sample Balance

                                                                  Runnerups                  Winners
                                                            Mean        Std. Dev        Mean       Std. Dev       p-value

      Sample: 265,749 auctions with 2 active bidders in last 30 seconds; bid difference <0.005
 Number of Employees in previous quarter                     12.96       111.2          10.43        94.7            0.13
 Growth rate in previous quarter                              0.05         0.3           0.06         0.3            0.88
 Growth rate in previous 12 months                            0.18         0.5           0.20         0.5            0.63
 Average real wages in previous quarter                     634.58       622.5         612.66       615.5            0.09
 Employees’ Schooling in previous quarter                     7.30         4.9           7.19         4.9            0.23
 Accumulated win rate                                         0.19         0.1           0.20         0.1            0.36
 Bidder in same city as Auction                               0.22         0.4           0.19         0.4            0.81
 Bidder registred as SME                                      0.90         0.3           0.94         0.2            0.11

      Sample: 108,604 auctions with 2 active bidders in last 12 seconds; bid difference <0.005
 Number of Employees in previous quarter                     11.21       107.4           9.25        90.1            0.06
 Growth rate in previous quarter                              0.06         0.3           0.06         0.3            0.43
 Growth rate in previous 12 months                            0.20         0.5           0.21         0.5            0.38
 Average real wages in previous quarter                     620.22       595.4         598.53       584.5            0.21
 Employees’ Schooling in previous quarter                     7.23         4.9           7.07         5.0            0.27
 Accumulated win rate                                         0.18         0.1           0.19         0.1            0.23
 Bidder in same city as Auction                               0.19         0.4           0.16         0.4            0.93
 Bidder registred as SME                                      0.93         0.3           0.96         0.2            0.07

      Sample: 143,500 auctions with 2 active bidders in last 30 seconds; bid difference <0.001
 Number of Employees in previous quarter                     13.86       125.6          10.40       103.0            0.10
 Growth rate in previous quarter                              0.06         0.3           0.06         0.3            0.41
 Growth rate in previous 12 months                            0.18         0.5           0.20         0.5            0.30
 Average real wages in previous quarter                     645.34       631.3         601.70       622.0            0.04
 Employees’ Schooling in previous quarter                     7.32         4.9           7.03         5.0            0.09
 Accumulated win rate                                         0.19         0.1           0.20         0.1            0.20
 Bidder in same city as Auction                               0.21         0.4           0.18         0.4            0.74
 Bidder registred as SME                                      0.89         0.3           0.93         0.2            0.05
Notes: Table shows means and standard deviations of selected variables for winners and runnerups of close auctions, for
different deffinitions of closeness. p-value test for the null that the means are the same, and are obtained from a regression
with auction-fixed effects and standard-errors clustered at the firm level.




                                                             43
Table 5: Placebo test: Who would win a close auction had it ended seconds before?

                                                        winner        runner-up
                   2 seconds                             0.672            0.267
                   6 seconds                             0.498            0.429
                   8 seconds                             0.457            0.465
                   12 seconds                            0.423            0.484
                   18 seconds                            0.445            0.441
                   24 seconds                            0.500            0.371
                   Number of Auctions                            265,714
                  Notes: To compute the figures shown in this table, we artifically
                  end auctions early and see which firm would win it under the new
                  duration. Column (1) shows the fraction of auction where the win-
                  ner’s identity would not change. Column (2) shows the fraction of
                  auction in which the runner up would be the new winner under the
                  new duration. Note that it is possible that a third firm would win the
                  auction, so the two columns do not add to one. The first row cuts ac-
                  tuall auction durations by 5 seconds. The other rows are analogous.




                                                   44
                                                 Table 6: The Effects of Winning a Contract on Firm Growth

      Dependent variable                                                           Firm Growth                                                          Won             Amount
                                                                                                                                                                         Won
                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                   OLS              OLS          Reduced-         Reduced-             IV               IV             First-            First-
                                                                                   form             form                                               stage             stage
      Won                                          0.010                                                             0.022
                                                  [0.001]                                                           [0.002]
      Amount Won (logs)                                            0.001                                                              0.002
45




                                                                  [0.000]                                                            [0.000]
      Won a close auction                                                           0.016                                                              0.697
                                                                                   [0.001]                                                            [0.002]
      Share of close auctions won                                                                    0.013                                                               7.686
                                                                                                    [0.002]                                                             [0.022]


      R2                                          0.052            0.052            0.052           0.052            -0.000          0.000            0.456             0.468
      Observations                               962,562          962,562          962,562         962,562          962,531         962,531          962,562           962,562
      Mean dep. var.                              0.024            0.024            0.024           0.024             0.024          0.024            0.145             1.505
     Notes: All specifications include firm fixed effects and quarter dummies. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets. Firm growth is defined as the change in the firm’s number
     of employees between the end of the previous and current quarters divided by the average number of employees between the two quarters.
Table 7: The Effects of Winning a Contract on Firm Growth: Heterogeneous Effects by
Firms’ Characteristics

                                              Sector                                               Firm Size
                               (1)                        (2)                          (3)                        (4)
                           Manufacturing                 Non-                     Below Median               Above Median
                                                      Manufacturing
 Won a contract                   0.018                      0.023                      0.026                      0.023
                                 [0.006]                    [0.002]                    [0.003]                    [0.003]


 Observations                   176,982                    785,549                     403,739                    545,329
 Mean dep. var.                  0.030                      0.023                       0.041                      0.008
Notes: Table shows IV estimates for the effect of winning a government contract on firm growth. All specifications include firm fixed
effects and quarter dummies. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets.




                                                                46
                                        Table 8: The Effects of winning a Contract on Future Auction Outcomes

                                                     30 days                                            90 days                                            1 year
                                        (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)


      Panel A: Winnings in particpated auction (log)
       Winner                   0.579          0.593                    0.643           0.530            0.544            0.588            0.337           0.341            0.342
                               [0.045]        [0.048]                  [0.059]         [0.041]          [0.043]          [0.053]          [0.084]         [0.090]          [0.116]
         Observations                453,668          453,668         453,668          479,962          479,962         479,962          513,716          513,716         513,716
         Mean of Dep. Var.            11.29            11.29           11.29            12.32            12.32           12.32             5.51             5.51            5.51

      Panel B: Number of auctions participated (log)
       Winner                   0.393          0.411                    0.468           0.397            0.414            0.466            0.194           0.200            0.212
                               [0.031]        [0.033]                  [0.041]         [0.032]          [0.034]          [0.042]          [0.052]         [0.056]          [0.073]
         Observations                513,716          513,716         513,716          513,716          513,716         513,716          513,716          513,716         513,716
         Mean of Dep. Var.             5.71             5.71            5.71             6.59             6.59            6.59             3.10             3.10            3.10




47
      Panel C: Win rate
       Winner                         0.017            0.017            0.016           0.015            0.015            0.014            0.008           0.008            0.007
                                     [0.004]          [0.005]          [0.006]         [0.004]          [0.005]          [0.006]          [0.003]         [0.003]          [0.004]
         Observations                479,146          479,146         479,146          495,638          495,638         495,638          214,248          214,248         214,248
         Mean of Dep. Var.            0.195            0.195           0.195            0.191            0.191           0.191            0.170            0.170           0.170

      Panel D: Winnings/Number Won
       Winner                0.046                     0.045            0.042           0.032            0.030            0.028            -0.011          -0.012           -0.016
                            [0.014]                   [0.015]          [0.018]         [0.018]          [0.019]          [0.023]          [0.020]         [0.021]          [0.024]
         Observations                435,612          435,612         435,612          469,660          469,660         469,660          167,296          167,296         167,296
         Mean of Dep. Var.             7.35             7.35            7.35             7.54             7.54            7.54             7.31             7.31            7.31
      Controls                        Cubic           Linear           Cubic            Cubic           Linear           Cubic            Cubic           Linear           Cubic
                                     polyno-          Spline           spline          polyno-          Spline           spline          polyno-          Spline           spline
                                      mial                                              mial                                              mial
     Notes: Sample is winners and runner-ups in close auctions. Each coefficient is the effect of being the winner in a close auction, controling for auction fixed-effects and flexible
     controls on the winning margin, as described in the last row. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets. In columns (1)-(3), outcomes are measure in a 30-day window starting
     the day after the auction. In columns (4)-(6), outcomes are measured in a 90-day window starting the day after the auction. In columns (7)-(9), outcomes are measured in a 30-day
     window centered around 365 days after the auction.
                                        Table 9: The Effects of winning a Contract on Future Auction Outcomes

                                                     30 days                                            90 days                                            1 year
                                        (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)


      Panel A: Share of participated auctions in the same city
       Winner                     -0.025         -0.025         -0.026                 -0.024            -0.025           -0.027           -0.019          -0.019           -0.018
                                 [0.002]        [0.003]        [0.003]                 [0.002]          [0.002]          [0.003]          [0.003]         [0.003]          [0.004]
         Observations                477,926          477,926         477,926          494,406          494,406         494,406          213,814          213,814         213,814
         Mean of Dep. Var.             0.15             0.15            0.15             0.15             0.15            0.15             0.14             0.14            0.14

      Panel B: Number of different product codes
       Winner                     5.8            6.0                     7.1              7.7              8.0             9.4              1.9              1.9             2.1
                                 [0.9]          [1.0]                   [1.1]            [1.2]            [1.2]           [1.4]            [0.4]            [0.4]           [0.5]
         Observations                510,946          510,946         510,946          510,946          510,946         510,946          510,946          510,946         510,946
         Mean of Dep. Var.             30.8             30.8            30.8             45.1             45.1            45.1             15.3             15.3            15.3




48
      Panel C: Share of auctions in the top product code
       Winner                    -1.8917        -1.9890                -2.3142          -1.5990         -1.6926          -2.0302          -0.8402          -0.8735         -0.9009
                                [0.2679]       [0.2810]               [0.3333]         [0.2622]        [0.2738]         [0.3205]         [0.2411]         [0.2557]        [0.3196]
         Observations                472,536          472,536         472,536          490,922          490,922         490,922          206,904          206,904         206,904
         Mean of Dep. Var.            53.46            53.46           53.46            51.23            51.23           51.23            55.85            55.85           55.85

      Panel D: Share of auctions in the top 3 product codes
       Winner                    -2.0410        -2.1623                -2.6537          -1.9097         -2.0215          -2.4660          -1.0062          -1.0664         -1.2840
                                [0.3035]       [0.3178]               [0.3786]         [0.3005]        [0.3134]         [0.3692]         [0.2606]         [0.2778]        [0.3474]
         Observations                472,536          472,536         472,536          490,922          490,922         490,922          206,904          206,904         206,904
         Mean of Dep. Var.            72.47            72.47           72.47            69.84            69.84           69.84            75.51            75.51           75.51
      Controls                        Cubic           Linear           Cubic            Cubic           Linear           Cubic            Cubic           Linear           Cubic
                                     polyno-          Spline           spline          polyno-          Spline           spline          polyno-          Spline           spline
                                      mial                                              mial                                              mial
     Notes: Sample is winners and runner-ups in close auctions. Each coefficient is the effect of being the winner in a close auction, controling for auction fixed-effects and flexible
     controls on the winning margin, as described in the last row. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets. In columns (1)-(3), outcomes are measure in a 30-day window starting
     the day after the auction. In columns (4)-(6), outcomes are measured in a 90-day window starting the day after the auction. In columns (7)-(9), outcomes are measured in a 30-day
     window centered around 365 days after the auction.
Table 10: The Effects of Winning a Government Contract on Employee’s years of schooling

                                                                  Firm Age (years)
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                  <5           5-9        10-14        15-19          20+


          Won                      0.025        0.042        0.058       -0.016       -0.007         0.043
                                  [0.014]      [0.025]      [0.023]      [0.028]      [0.034]       [0.032]

          Observations           702,055       154,744      189,694      138,131      88,760       130,208
          Mean dep. var.         10.1497       10.3518      10.2092      10.1276      10.0468       9.9153
         Notes: All specifications include firm fixed effects and quarter dummies. Standard errors clustered by
         firm in brackets.




                                                          49
Table 11: The Effects of Winning a Government Contract on Firm Growth: Controlling for
Selection

                                                               Dependent Variable: Employment Growth
                                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)



 Panel A
   Won                                                0.026            0.024            0.029            0.026           0.029
                                                     [0.005]          [0.006]          [0.005]          [0.007]         [0.004]
     Inverse Mill’s ratio                             -0.001           -0.001           -0.002           -0.002
                                                     [0.003]          [0.003]          [0.003]          [0.003]

 Panel B
   Amount Won (logs)                                  0.002            0.001            0.002            0.002           0.002
                                                     [0.000]          [0.001]          [0.000]          [0.001]         [0.000]
     Inverse Mill’s ratio                             -0.001           -0.001           -0.002           -0.001
                                                     [0.002]          [0.002]          [0.002]          [0.002]


 Number of Auctions Participated                       No               Yes              No               Yes              Yes
 Cummulative Win Rate (t-1)                            No               No               Yes              Yes              Yes

 Observations                                       209,625           209,625         209,625          209,625          962,531
 Mean dep. var.                                      0.0262            0.0262          0.0262           0.0262           0.0240
Notes: All specifications include firm fixed effects and quarter dummies. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets. Columns (1)
shows IV estimates from the same specification used in Table 6 restricting the sample to firms-quarters with positive participation in
auctions. Column (2) adds controls. Columns (3)-(6) shows IV estimates controlling for the inverse Mill’s ratio obtained in a probit
regression for the probability of participation, as described in Equation 6.




                                                                 50
                                       Table 12: Decomposing the Effects on Firm Growth: Hires and Layoffs

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
                                        Growth         Layoffs                                                     New Hires
                                                                        Total                                        From Other Firms?
                                                                                        Yes                                            No
                                                                                                      Total       How many quarters out of the Labor Market?
                                                                                                                       1              2              3             4+
51




      Won a contract                     0.0223         0.0047         0.0272         0.0020         0.0252         0.0022         0.0039         0.0033        0.0158
                                        [0.0020]       [0.0012]       [0.0017]       [0.0006]       [0.0015]       [0.0004]       [0.0005]       [0.0004]      [0.0012]


      Observaions                       962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531        962,531
      Mean of Dep. Variable              0.024          0.074          0.099          0.017          0.082          0.009          0.010          0.007          0.056
     Notes: This table decomposes firms’ growth into hires minus layoffs, appropriately divided by the average number of employees between quarters. In column 1, the dependnt
     variable is firm’s growth. In column 2 the dependent variable is the number of layoffs in quarter t. In column 3 the dependent variable is the number of new hires between
     quarters t and t − 1. Columns 4 and 5 further decompose new hires. The dependent variable in column 4 is the number of new hires who were employed by another firm in the
     previous quarter. The dependent variable in column 5 in the number of new hires who were not employed by another firm in the previous quarter. Column 6-9 decompose the
     dependent variable of column 5 intro the number of new hires who were last employed by another firm 2, 3, 4 or more than 4 quarter ago, respectively. The last category also
     includes hires who had never been formally employed. All regressions include firm-fixed effects and quarter dummies. Standard errors clustered by firm in brackets.
A     Appendix: Equilibrium Bidding Behavior

Consider an environment, where there is a single seller auctioning a single indivisible
object. Suppose there are n ≥ 2 bidders denoted by N = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Each bidder
has a private valuation vi ∈ [0, v̄] that is drawn identically and independently according
to some distribution F (v). The strategy structure of the auction can be summarized as
follows:

    • The minimum initial bid equals zero (i.e. there is no reservation price for the seller).29

    • A player can place a single bid bit at any time t ∈ T = {0} ∪ {t1 (m) = mm+1 ; m =
                                         +1
      1, 2, . . . } ∪ {1} ∪ {t2 (m) = 2m
                                       m+1 ; m = 1, 2, . . . } ∪ {2}. If a player i ∈ N at some time
      t ∈ T does not bid, then we denote her bid as bit = ∅. This formulation states that the
      auction game has four periods, two of which are divided in an infinite and countable
      number of subperiods. This resembles the bidding timeline of ComprasNet, see
      Figure 1. Every new bid of a player has to be higher than her last nonempty bid, i.e.
         0                       0
      bit > bit if t0 > t for bit 6= ∅ and bit 6= ∅. At any given time t ∈ T, players can submit
      bids simultaneously without knowing what other bids are placed. The bid history
      at some time t lists all the bids placed up to that time along with the identities of the
      bidders. The auction ends either at the end of time t = 1 with probability h ∈ (0, 1)
      or at the end of time t = 2 with the remaining probability, 1 − h.

    • Depending on the ending time realization t̄, the highest bidder wins the auction
      paying the highest submitted bid from another bidder according to the bid history
      and the last bids placed at t̄ (if any).

    • A bidder who wins the auction at some price p earns vi − p, a bidder who does not
      win earns 0.

    • A player has time to react to another player’s bid at any time t ∈ T \ {1, 2}, however
                                                               0
      the reaction can not be instantaneous. Any reaction bit to a bid btj for i 6= j can arrive
      earliest at t0 = t1 (1) if t = 0, or at t0 = t1 (m + 1) if t = t1 (m) for some m, or at
      t0 = t2 (m0 + 1) if t = t2 (m0 ) for some m0 .

    • Equal bids from different bidders are resolved by order of arrival (first bidder to
      submit has priority) or, if they were simultaneously submitted, at random with equal
      probability.
  29 For   any seller’s reservation price r ∈ (0, v̄), the results do not change.

                                                         52
    • Any bid submitted at t ∈ T \ {1, 2} is transmitted with certainty.

    • A bid submitted at time t = 2 is successfully transmitted with probability 0 < q < 1,
      where q is an exogenously given probability.

    • Similarly, a bid submitted at time t = 1 arrives at the end of t = 1 with probability
      q ∈ (0, 1]. If the auction does not end at t = 1, and the bid does not arrive at t = 1,
      then it arrives at t2 (1)30 . This is a crucial difference between the last-minute bid at
      t = 2 and (possibly) a last-minute bid at t = 1.

We search for equilibria that display late bidding, and more importantly sniping. Sniping
will be referred to as a situation in which a player places a bid that cannot be retaliated
against. In our game, conditional on the game ending at t = 2, a bid successfully placed at
t = 2 is a snipe. Similarly a bid successfully placed at t = 1 may be a snipe with probabil-
ity h. We show by construction that there may exist equilibria with sniping at t = 2 in the
presence of a random ending time. Before we state the main result consider the subgame
at t = 2.

Theorem A.1. There may exist symmetric perfect Bayesian equilibria where bidders with valua-
tion above a threshold p ∈ [0, v̄) snipe each other mutually at t = 2 and do not place any bids in
(0, 2).

Proof. Without loss of generality, consider the case of 2 bidders. Then the following strate-
gies comprise the equilibrium profile. There exists a cutoff bid p ∈ [0, v̄) such that the
following strategy profile (S1, S2) along with the beliefs form a perfect Bayesian equilib-
rium,

 S1. If vi ≤ p, then she bids bi0 = vi and never updates after time t = 0, i.e. bit = ∅ for all
     t > 0.

 S2. If vi ≥ p, then she bids bi0 = p at time t = 0. If the opponent has bid b0j < p then
                   t (1)
       she bids bi 1 = vi . Otherwise, she does not update until t = 2, i.e. bit = ∅ at any
       t ∈ (0, 2). At t = 2 she bids bi2 = vi . If i observes that b0j > p or btj 6= ∅ at some
                                      0
       t ∈ (0, 2), then she bids bit = vi at the next possible period.



   30 This  implies that the other bidders have opportunity to reply to a bid placed at t = 1 with probability
1 − h, i.e. the probability that the auction ends at t = 2.

                                                     53
The condition for the equilibrium to exist is given by
                                                           Z v̄
                                       h · q (1 − F ( p))
                        
                         F ( p) + q
                (v̄ − p)            −                      ≥     F (v)dv
                           1+q        1 − h (1 − q2 )        p


See Celiktemur and Szerman (2014) for further details on the proof.




                                       54
