                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE GREAT ESCAPE:
        INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY IN THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1940

                                     Nathaniel G. Hilger

                                     Working Paper 21217
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w21217


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2015




Previously circulated as "The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility Since 1940." I thank
Anna Aizer, Sam Asher, Nathaniel Baum-Snow, Leah Boustan, David Card, Kenneth Chay, Raj
Chetty, Pedro Dal Bo, Eleanor Dillon, Andrew Foster, Claudia Goldin, Rachel Friedberg, Justine
Hastings, Caroline Hoxby, Lawrence Katz, Brian Knight, Michael Kremer, David Lagakos, John
Logan, Glenn Loury, Robert Margo, Paul Novosad, Claudia Olivetti, Emily Oster, Daniele
Paserman, Emmanuel Saez, Jesse Shapiro, Matthew Turner, David Weil and Danny Yagan. Jenna
Anders, Motaz Al-Chanati, James Bernard, Kian Ivey and Jorge Perez provided excellent
research assistance. Weiwei Zhang provided helpful assistance with the 100% census data.
Financial support from the Russell Sage Foundation is gratefully acknowledged (Grant No.
83-16-07). All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Nathaniel G. Hilger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the United States Since 1940
Nathaniel G. Hilger
NBER Working Paper No. 21217
May 2015, Revised April 2016
JEL No. J1,J24,J62,N01,N3,O15

                                         ABSTRACT

I develop a method to estimate intergenerational mobility (IM) in education on large cross-
sectional surveys and apply the method to U.S. census data from 1940 to 2000. The method
estimates IM directly for children age 26-29 who still live with parents and adjusts for
independent children using a procedure that I validate extensively. Estimates imply large
post-1940 gains in IM that were (1) driven primarily by large IM gains in the South for both
whites and blacks, (2) larger for blacks due to their greater concentration in the South, and (3)
driven by high school rather than college enrollment.


Nathaniel G. Hilger
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
nathaniel_hilger@brown.edu
1. Introduction
Intergenerational mobility (IM) is an important social objective for many individuals and
policymakers, and may aﬀect public attitudes toward other social objectives such as equal-
ity and growth (Piketty, 1995; Benabou and Ok, 2001; Corak, 2013). However, surprisingly
little is known about IM variation over time, space and groups. The main empirical prob-
lem is that measuring IM requires data on labor market outcomes for both parents and
children. Several panel datasets contain this information, but they begin in the late 1960s
and are too small to examine mobility over time and subgroups with precision (e.g., Lee
and Solon, 2009), while tax records only link children beginning in the 1990s (Chetty et al.,
2014a). The scarcity of evidence on longer-term trends overall and for various subgroups is
unfortunate because many interventions often thought to increase equality of opportunity
such as the early GI Bills, Great Society programs, and the Civil Rights movement predate
these panel datasets.
  In this paper I develop a new method to estimate educational IM on U.S. census data–or
any other large cross-sectional family survey–back to 1940. IM statistics typically charac-
terize the joint distribution of parent and child outcomes. Unfortunately, census data only
link parent and child outcomes while children still live with parents, and many children
leave the parental household at ages before final educational attainment or earnings can be
observed meaningfully (Cameron and Heckman, 1993). I develop a simple, semi-parametric
adjustment for these “missing” independent children that allows me to estimate the con-
ditional expectation function (CEF) of children’s educational attainment in their late 20s
(e.g., ages 26-29) with respect to parental income or education. After this adjustment, it
is straightforward to recover point estimates of standard educational IM statistics based
on the slopes and intercepts of these CEFs.
   The adjustment for independent children rests on two simple and verifiable assumptions.
To illustrate, consider an example with two parental groups in a fixed year. Let children
have either “low-income” or “high-income” parents denoted 0 and 1, respectively. Among
27-year-olds, I observe 100 children living with high-income parents, 100 with low-income
parents and 300 living independently, with average highest grade attained of 14, 12 and 12,
respectively. I therefore observe a schooling CEF intercept of 12 years of schooling and a




                                             1
slope of 2 years of schooling across parental groups, but only for dependent children. I need
to know two things to account for the remaining 60% of children who are independent: their
parental group composition, and their average schooling by group. I first make a “parallel
trends” assumption that the schooling CEF among independent children has the same slope
as the CEF among dependent children: here 2 years. Now observe that the great majority
of children up through age 17 still live with their parents. Suppose I observe 200 high-
income and 300 low-income 17-year-olds. Under a second “smooth cohorts” assumption that
parental group shares do not change across cohorts, I infer that 100 of the independent
27-year-old children have high-income parents and 200 have low-income parents. Let h
equal average schooling of low-income 27-year-old independent children. We can now solve
for h: 12 = 100300
                   (h + 2) + 200
                             300
                                 h =) h = 11.33. Total schooling of low-income children
is therefore 300 · 12 + 300 · 11.33 = 11.55 and total schooling of high-income children is
              100        200

100
200
    · 14 + 100
           200
                · 13.33 = 13.665. The total schooling CEF therefore has intercept of 11.55
and slope of 2.11. Below I formalize these two assumptions of parallel trends and smooth
cohorts, generalize the method to more than two groups, and use multiple datasets spanning
the entire 1940-2000 period to validate both the two assumptions and the resulting CEFs
in the U.S. historical context.
  I find that these assumptions appear surprisingly plausible in a wide range of panel
datasets, though I also document cases in which they break down. Despite its limitations
the approach here is useful because it opens up many new possibilities for research on IM
in time periods, places and subgroups that can only be studied in large cross-sectional
datasets such as population censuses. As a first application of the new method, I examine
long-term IM trends in the U.S. nationally and for many subgroups.1 Estimates imply
that educational IM increased significantly after 1940 and stabilized sometime around
1960-80. Back of the envelope calculations suggest these IM gains generated significant
annual aggregate earnings growth for several decades. I confirm that these large post-
1940 IM gains are in fact consistent with analogous time trends in other data sources,
and post-1940 time trends in income-based IM in census data based on the very diﬀerent
estimation strategy of Aaronson and Mazumder (2008). However, I find that multiple
other data sources and prior research indicate a decline in educational IM after 1980 that
my approach fails to detect. Despite this bias, I show that my educational IM estimates

 1
     In Hilger (2016) I exploit the methodology to estimate educational IM for cohorts of Asian-Americans
      and blacks born in California as far back as 1911, an exercise which is only feasible in census data due
      to the very small sizes of these subgroups historically.




                                                       2
by state-of-birth since 1980 are highly correlated with income-based IM estimates across
states in tax data (Chetty et al., 2014a), confirming the method’s ability to detect spatial
variation in IM.
     The new approach allows me to extend this spatial variation back further in time than
any prior study and reveals that post-1940 IM gains were driven primarily by large IM
gains in the South from astonishingly low initial levels. Southern IM gains, in turn, were
primarily driven by high school rather than college enrollment, and were similar for men and
women. Strikingly, southern IM gains were also similar for whites and blacks, and thereby
account for larger post-1940 IM gains of blacks nationally due to the greater geographic
concentration of blacks in the South at this time.
  The findings suggest a potentially important role for the “transformation” of the Southern
economy after 1930 (Wright, 1986) in explaining post-1940 IM gains. To further explore
potential mechanisms I construct a panel dataset of educational IM by state of birth
for years 1940 to 2000 and show that higher IM correlates with larger black population
shares, higher per-capita state income, lower income inequality, better K-12 schools, and
several other factors, in many cases even conditional on state and year fixed eﬀects. These
correlations largely coincide with those reported in (Chetty et al., 2014a) with the exception
that I find a larger historical correlation with income levels. This discrepancy likely relates
to the broader trends of industrialization, urbanization, and political liberalization that
took place over the long historical period studied here.


2. Related Literature
The primary advantage of the method developed here is that it potentially allows estimation
of IM in time periods, places and subgroups that are not well-covered by existing panel
datasets. For example, to my knowledge there is currently no method permitting estimation
of any type of IM statistic separately by state of birth before the advent of tax data in the
2000s (Chetty et al., 2014b). The particular application I develop here also contributes
to a broad literature on empirical estimation of IM. While historical trends in IM across
states and demographic groups in the U.S. have not previously been available, a growing
literature compares IM across places in recent decades.2
 2
     A few of the important papers in this growing literature include Erikson and Goldthorpe (1992); Checchi
      et al. (1999); Jantti et al. (2006); Corak (2006); Hertz et al. (2008); Mayer and Lopoo (2008); Long
      and Ferrie (2013); Clark (2014); Chetty et al. (2014a); Chetty and Hendren (2015).




                                                      3
  Many prior studies have estimated various measures of IM for the U.S. nationally as
reviewed in Solon (1999) and Black and Devereux (2011). In this paper I focus on educa-
tional mobility out of necessity, but education also has the advantage of being less sensitive
to well-known problems with measurement error and lifecycle bias aﬄicting measures of
income (Solon, 1992; Mazumder, 2005, 2015; Mazumder and Acosta, 2015). Hertz et al.
(2008) estimate educational IM in the U.S. for cohorts born as early as 1932, as well as
for many other countries, using the World Bank Living Standards Measurement Surveys.
They find a gradual increase in educational IM according to intergenerational elasticities,
but no change in intergenerational correlations. I find that IM increased significantly for
cohorts born between 1911 and 1932 in both elasticities and correlations, and I obtain
results for cohorts born after 1932 that diﬀer from their estimates. One possible explana-
tion for this discrepancy is that Hertz et al. (2008) estimate time trends using variation in
ages 20-69 from surveys conducted during years 1994-2000. As they discuss, their trends
may therefore incorporate bias from high and selective mortality attrition over this period
(Costa, 2015), as well as bias from changes in recall errors in own or parental education by
age (Goldin, 1998). Hertz et al. (2008) are also unable to study sub-national IM variation
across places or demographic groups due to sample size limitations.
  Hertz (2007), Lee and Solon (2009) and Harding et al. (2009) document that intergener-
ational income elasticities exhibit no significant time trend for children born between 1950
and 1970. Chetty et al. (2014b) document stable rank-rank income IM for cohorts born
between 1970 and 1990, and argue that national IM statistics based on ranks and logs are
likely comparable in practice, implying stable income mobility for cohorts born 1950-1990.
However, Mitnik et al. (2015) and Mazumder (2015) present evidence that IGE estimates
and, to a lesser extent, rank-rank income-based IM statistics in Chetty et al. (2014b) are
biased down by various measurement problems, which could also aﬀect trend estimates if
these biases vary significantly over time.
  Aaronson and Mazumder (2008) estimate intergenerational income elasticities in census
data back to 1940 by instrumenting for parental income with children’s state of birth.
They find that this measure of income-based IM increased after 1940 and, in contrast with
the above studies, decreased after 1980. As Aaronson and Mazumder (2008) discuss in
detail, their method may yield biased estimates of time trends if places have time-varying
causal eﬀects on children’s income that are not captured by parental income. Putting
concerns about this assumption aside, however, the results in Aaronson and Mazumder
(2008) suggest similar post-1940 time trends for income IM as those I estimate for edu-



                                              4
cational IM. However, my approach oﬀers a significant advantage over that of Aaronson
and Mazumder (2008) by facilitating estimation of IM separately across states of birth and
demographic groups in every census beginning in 1940, rather than relying on state of birth
as an allegedly exogenous instrument for parental income to estimate national IM trends.
While my approach also relies on strong assumptions, it oﬀers a new, inexpensive, and
widely-available window onto a broad range of IM heterogeneity that could not otherwise
be studied with existing data or methods.
  Other researchers have estimated occupational IM in census data using information
about names to construct matched panel datasets (Long and Ferrie, 2013) or pseudo-
panels (Clark, 2014; Olivetti and Paserman, 2015). Findings in Long and Ferrie (2013)
and Olivetti and Paserman (2015) suggest that occupational mobility declined significantly
from the 19th to the mid-20th century, and may have begun to increase before 1940 de-
pending on the method used to impute occupational income. An increase in IM after 1940,
as I find here for educational IM, may therefore represent a return to higher 19th century
levels. However, long-term comparisons of educational and occupational IM are diﬃcult
due to complex potential changes in returns to diﬀerent occupations and to educational
attainment.
   Like most prior literature, I focus on two-generation mobility statistics relating child
outcomes to parental outcomes. Recent work suggests that two-generation IM statistics
likely overstate multi-generational IM (e.g., Clark, 2014; Olivetti et al., 2014; Stuhler,
2014; Braun and Stuhler, 2015; Solon, 2015).3 Nonetheless, two-generation IM statistics
are likely to remain critical benchmark measures of equality of opportunity due to data
limitations in much the same way that GDP, Gini coeﬃcients and poverty rates remain
valuable measures of social objectives despite their well-known limitations.
  Nybom and Stuhler (2014) provide important insights into the interpretation of time
trends in IM. They show that one-time improvements in equality of opportunity (e.g.,
positive education supply shocks) will tend to increase two-generation IM statistics greatly
at first when only child outcomes are aﬀected, but less so in subsequent generations when
both parent and child outcomes fully reflect the new environment. Counterintuitively, this
eﬀect can mechanically decrease two-generation IM statistics gradually starting about 30
years after a reform when the children first aﬀected by the new environment begin to
have their own children. Second, large social changes not directly related to equality of
 3
     Note that much of this work rejects the extreme claim of Clark (2014) that multi-generational IM is
      similarly low across all times and places (e.g., Braun and Stuhler, 2015; Solon, 2015).




                                                    5
opportunity (e.g., industrial reallocations, wars, technology shocks, etc.) tend to increase
two-generation IM statistics temporarily as advantages shift among dynasties with newly-
favored skills and assets, again followed by declines in IM 30-60 years later. Below I
argue that educational IM increased after 1940 most likely due to broad changes in the
South, and that IM subsequently decreased after 1980. The arguments in Nybom and
Stuhler (2014) imply that care must be taken in searching for causes of changes in IM,
especially declines in IM. The post-1980 IM decline may represent new changes in the U.S.
economy such as greater reliance on post-secondary educational institutions, but could also
represent mechanical aftershocks of the much earlier forces that drove post-1940 IM gains.
Distinguishing between these two explanations for the post-1980 decline in educational IM
therefore represents an important empirical problem that I am not able to resolve in this
paper.
  A few papers also compare IM across races. Torche (2015) reviews some evidence of
higher relative occupational IM for blacks than whites in the U.S. in recent decades, which
would line up with my findings for educational IM. However, she concludes that little
reliable evidence exists on time trends in black IM. Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011)
point out that comparisons of black and white intergenerational elasticities are problematic
because they reflect mean-reversion to group-specific rather than population parental mean
income, which can generate spurious racial diﬀerences in IM statistics if underlying CEFs
are nonlinear.4 I address this issue by estimating slopes of CEFs for whites and blacks on
data collapsed to the same population distributions of parental SES, which amounts to
reweighting all groups to the same parental SES distribution. I also find that these CEFs
are approximately linear.5 Therefore my estimated diﬀerences in IM statistics capture
genuine diﬀerences in underlying group CEFs, not distributional shifts across regions of
the same nonlinear CEF. Like Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011), I find evidence of
slightly lower upward mobility for blacks than whites in more recent decades. However,
I uncover much lower black IM in earlier decades and show these gaps stem from greater
geographic concentration of blacks in the South.6
 4
   The same concerns about nonlinearities in CEFs have played an important role in comparisons of IM
    across countries. See e.g., Bratsberg et al. (2007); Bratberg et al. (2015).
 5
   Given that these CEFs are approximately linear, in many results below I estimate intercepts and slopes
    of these CEFs weighting by cell sizes in order to increase precision. Apart from improvements in
    precision, results are not sensitive to these weights.
 6
   Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011) compare IM across races by focusing on upward mobility of children
    measured in terms of population quantile movements. My most relevant results for comparison are my
    estimates of rank-rank absolute upward educational mobility (CEF intercepts) in 1990 in Table A.5,




                                                   6
  Finally, there are currently large-scale proposals emerging to link individuals across
censuses and other datasets spanning the entire 20th century (e.g. Grusky et al., 2015;
Johnson et al., 2015, and others). One might worry these eﬀorts will render the methods
here obsolete. However these proposals are still in early stages, and it is possible that
linkage methodologies will introduce their own biases and exclude certain subgroups such
as married women, minorities, people with low literacy rates, people with limited labor
force participation, immigrants, and many other groups of interest. Even if these linkages
prove highly successful in the U.S. (hopefully!), many other countries will continue to lack
long-term, large-scale microdata linking adult children with their adult parents. Therefore
the method here is likely to remain useful in a wide range of contexts well into the future,
and can complement alternative data sources on IM as they develop.


3. Methodology
Consider an adult individual i in generation t with educational attainment hi,t in a fixed
calendar year. Education can be measured in levels, ranks, z-scores, or any other trans-
formation. Likewise let yi,t 1 denote some measure of parental SES such as income or
education, or any transformation of these variables. Most IM statistics in the literature
characterize the CEF E [hi,t |yi,t 1 ] in some parametric fashion. Much of the prior literature
estimates best linear predictors of this CEF using regressions of the form:

                                      hi,t = ↵ + yi,t   1   + ei,t                                 (1)

interpreting estimates of and possibly ↵ as descriptive measures of IM.
  Unfortunately, this regression cannot be estimated directly in census data because the
census only contains parental characteristics for the subset of children who still live with
parents. The key problem is that many children move out before standard ages of school
completion, and the few children who do live with parents at older ages may not be
representative of all children (e.g., Cameron and Heckman, 1993). Figure I illustrates
this problem using age variation across cohorts in 1980 census data. Once children reach
age 18 they rapidly begin to leave the parental home, yet educational attainment continues
to increase well into children’s mid-20s. I here develop a simple correction for the missing

   Columns (3)-(4). These results are still only roughly comparable due to diﬀerences in child outcomes
   (income vs. education) as well as other diﬀerences in methodology and sample.




                                                  7
independent children at later ages to estimate E [hi,t |yi,t 1 ], thereby recovering ↵, , or any
other statistic based on E [hi,t |yi,t 1 ]. I validate this correction empirically in detail below.
  Let ha,y represent average years of completed schooling for children of fixed age a with
parental income or education group y. Let hD        a,y and ha,y indicate average years of school-
                                                              I

ing for dependent children and independent children at age a, respectively. To fix ideas,
think about a as an age in the range of 26-29 when (I confirm below) average educational
attainment has stabilized, and think about y as a parental income decile. Let Na,yD
                                                                                     and
Na,y indicate the number of dependent and independent children at age a. By definition,
  I



                                ha,y = da,y hD
                                             a,y + (1   da,y ) hIa,y .                         (2)

                  ND
where da,y = N D +N  a,y
                         I , the dependency rate for children at age a in parental group y.
                 a,y     a,y
For dependent children, I observe both average schooling, hD     y , and number of children
for each parental group, Na,y . For independent children, I only observe the total number
                               D

of children NaI and overall average schooling hIa , pooling all parental groups. I do not
observe schooling or frequencies for independent children allocated to parental groups, hIa,y
and Na,y
       I
         . I therefore need to estimate these unobserved terms in order to impute overall
schooling in parental groups, ha,y .
  I make two assumptions: (1) a parallel trends assumption for dependent and inde-
pendent children by parental group status, and (2) smooth group cohort share trends
(“smooth cohorts”) for parental groups. The parallel trends assumption states that:

                                       f hD    I
                                          y , hy = ⇢ 8y                                        (3)

where f (.) is any function known to the researcher based on evidence outside the census
data. I refer to this as “parallel trends” because I implement this assuming f hD           I
                                                                                       y , hy =
hDy  hIy . This function places no restriction on the shape of the CEFs of children’s education
in parental income or education; it simply requires these CEFs to be equal up to a constant
across dependent and independent children, where this constant is free to vary over time,
place, demographic groups, etc. The economic underpinnings of this assumption depend
on complex, unobserved relationships between schooling, dependent status, and parental
groups. However, the assumption partly reflects a simple intuition: rich children exhibit
better educational outcomes than poor children, wherever they choose to live in their late
20s. The simplest example would be ⇢ = 0, in which case children’s dependency choices in




                                                8
their late 20s do not depend on prior educational attainment after conditioning on parental
group.
  The second assumption is smooth cohorts. This assumption allows me to impute the
number of independent children in each parental group at older ages, using the total number
of dependent children at earlier ages when most children are still dependent. Denote the
total number of children in each parental group in cross-sectional data as Na,y , where
         D
Na,y = Na,y     I
            + Na,y . The assumption is that parental group shares in older cohorts can be
approximated by functions of parental group sizes (and shares) in younger cohorts:

                         Na,y
                              ⇡ gy (Na   k 1,y , Na k 2,y , ..., N1,y )   8y             (4)
                         Na

for any functions gy (.) that need not be known to the researcher but are smooth enough
to be estimated parametrically in census data, and where k captures the distance between
the target age and the ages used in estimation. Below I show that most children under
18 still live at home with parents in all census years, implying Na,y
                                                                    D
                                                                       ⇡ Na,y for a < 18.
Under smooth cohorts, we can therefore estimate group cohort shares in cohorts that are
old enough to have largely completed schooling by estimating the functions gy (.) on group
cohorts under age 18. Once I have estimated NNa,y a
                                                    , estimates of the missing Na,y
                                                                                  I
                                                                                     terms
                                            D
                                           Na,y
follow from the fact that I already know        ,
                                             NaD , and NaI .
                                           NaD
  In practice I implement smooth cohorts assuming constant group cohort shares between
cohorts age 17 and cohorts age 26-29 within each calendar year of census data, i.e. setting
         N                P
gy (.) = N17,y
           17
               where N17 = y N17,y . This implementation requires that group cohort shares
remain approximately stable across cohorts born 10 years apart. Sharp “baby booms” or
“baby busts” that alter cohort sizes arbitrarily over the course of a decade are permitted as
long as they are approximately balanced across parental groups. Below I show this simple
implementation performs as well or better than more complex estimators of cohort share
trends.
   Under the assumption of parallel trends with hD   a,y  hIa,y = ⇢ and smooth group cohort
shares, I can solve for the implied estimate of the unobserved parameter ⇢ as

                                         J
                                                           !
                                         X   I
                                           N̂a,j
                                 ⇢ˆ =               hD
                                                     a,j       hI                        (5)
                                               I
                                         j=1 N̂a


I can therefore estimate average schooling for independent children in parental group y as




                                               9
ĥIa,y = hD
          a,y ⇢ˆ, and estimates of overall educational attainment by parental groups, ĥa,y ,
follow from equation (2). This yields a non-parametric estimate of the CEF E [hi,t |yi,t 1 ]
grouped into J bins of the parental characteristic (education or income). For parental
education, I use all parental educational attainment levels available in that year’s census
data with some modest trimming described below, typically yielding J in the range of
10 12. For parental income, I use J = 10 and divide the sample into parental income
deciles based on the population adult income distribution. As long as CEFs are linear,
regressions of ĥa,y on y will yield unbiased estimates of ↵ and from equation (1) for each
calendar year. This approach can also yield estimates of ↵ and        in any subgroup with
enough data to implement the correction.
  I estimate educational IM in both parental education and parental income groups. In
Appendix C, I discuss interpretation of these two diﬀerent educational IM measures in
relation to each other, and in relation to IM measures based on children’s income, using
a standard Beckerian model of parental investments in children’s schooling (Solon, 2004).
Under the strong assumptions of this stylized model, the coeﬃcient from a regression
of children’s education on parental education equals the coeﬃcient from a regression of
children’s log income on parental log income, i.e. the “intergenerational income elasticity.”
This result should not be interpreted literally, but only to suggest these two IM statistics
may be similar in magnitude and highly correlated empirically. I find some support for
this prediction across U.S. states in the main text below, as well as in survey data in
Appendix C. Theory also suggests that my two measures of educational IM–in parental
education and parental income–depend on diﬀerent underlying parameters and therefore
can in theory exhibit arbitrarily diﬀerent variation over time and groups.


4. Data
I estimate IM on U.S. decennial census data from 1940 to 2000 (Ruggles et al., 2015). These
censuses contains data on education, earnings, and relationship to head of all household
members. I also make use of 100% complete-count census data in years 1930 and 1940
to construct a panel dataset of adult children in 1940 linked to parental characteristics in
1930 (Minnesota Population Center and Ancestry.com, 2013). I am not able to estimate
educational IM in the 1950 census because it only contains income and education for one
person per family. I also rely heavily on a number of additional panel datasets described




                                             10
below.
  Educational attainment. To measure education in census data I rely on the detailed
IPUMS variable EDUCD, which represents highest grade completed in all years.7 For the
“child” generations I focus on ages 26-29. At these ages most people have completed edu-
cation, and experimentation in panel datasets revealed that educational mobility statistics
stabilize around these ages. Table I presents highest grade attained by age and year for
whites and blacks separately in census data. Education tends to increase as children age,
though in several cases substantial cohort eﬀects are apparent.
   For “parent” generations I use average education of dependent children’s mother and
father, or education of the available parent in one-parent families.8 I drop the small share
of families with zero parental education; inspection suggested that many of these families
likely represent measurement error. I also find that the bottom 2% of the parental education
distribution, after excluding zeros, often yields zero or wrong-signed associations with child
outcomes, and I therefore drop these parents as well.9
  Margo (1986) documents that before 1920, many blacks and some whites, especially in
the South and in rural areas, attended ungraded schools. For these relatively low-education
individuals, educational attainment may represent years enrolled and therefore overstate
highest grade attained. Note this problem does not aﬀect CEFs with respect to parental
income. Goldin (1998), consistent with earlier evidence in Denison (1985) and Folger and
Nam (1967), documents an education recall bias whereby older cohorts report inflated high
school graduation rates in the 1940 census. Under the plausible assumption that children’s
education correlates more strongly with actual parental education than with factors that
motivate parents to exaggerate their education, this pattern would tend to flatten my
estimated relationships between child and parent education in 1940, attenuating IM gains
1940-70. This problem also does not aﬀect CEFs measured in parental income. The ability
to compare educational IM estimates in both parental education and parental income
illustrates another significant advantage of my approach. While other survey datasets
 7
   Categories change slightly over the 1940-2000 period. I count GEDs and regular high school degrees
    as 12 years of schooling, associate’s degrees as 14 years of schooling, college degrees as 16 years, and
    graduate or professional school as 17 years. Results are not sensitive to counting GEDs as 11 years, or
    counting “some college” anywhere in the 13-15 range.
 8
   All main results are similar when I use mother’s education, father’s education, or head’s education.
    I focus on average of mother’s and father’s education because it incorporates maximum information
    about parental SES while also permitting inclusion of single-parent families.
 9
   Card and Krueger (1992a) also find that the bottom 2% of the education distribution behaves
    anomolously in a diﬀerent application, and drop these observations from their sample.




                                                    11
discussed below do contain information on parental education for the earliest cohorts in
my sample, there are no other datasets containing information on parental income in these
early cohorts.
   Parental income. I define parental income in census data as the sum of mother’s and
father’s labor earnings using the IPUMS variable INCWAGE.10 Parental income is missing
or zero for a significant share of families in many years. Many zeros reflect self-employment
and many also likely represent measurement error. Rather than impute income for these
families, I exclude families with no reported labor income from estimates of educational
mobility with respect to parental income. In the robustness section I show the main results
are identical if I impute income for these families. Moreover, I show that mobility with
respect to parental education is identical in families with missing and non-missing labor
income, strongly suggesting that families with non-missing labor income exhibit mobility
behavior representative of the full population. Throughout the text I focus on parental
income in deciles both to facilitate comparability across years, and because schooling CEFs
turn out to be more linear in parental income deciles than levels or logs.
  Dependent status. I define children as “dependents” if they live in households headed
by their mother or father. I therefore count children living with grandparents and other
relatives as “independent” in the sense that I am not able to observe their parental income
or education with confidence.11 There is some ambiguity in dependent status of young
adults in “group living” situations such as dormitories, prisons, and barracks in census
data. In the robustness section I show the main results are robust to other reasonable
choices in coding of dependent status.
   Table II presents dependency rates by age, race and year in census data from 1940 to
2000. The table documents that over 87% of whites and over 73% of blacks still live with
parents at age 17 in every year 1940 to 2000. Most “independent” children before age 18
live with grandparents or other relatives, rather than heading their their own households.
As might be expected, panel data indicates that lower-SES children are more likely to be

10
   I exclude capital income because it is not available in 1940, apart from an indicator for the presence of
    non-wage income over $50.
11
   Children coded as “grandchildren” of heads may also live with their parents in the same three-generation
    household, but those parents will only be coded in relation to the head as “child” or “child-in-law.” This
    makes parents of children indistinguishable from aunts and uncles of children in grandparent-headed
    households. Among children living with grandparents, in all years about 30% have no “candidate”
    parents in the household, 30-40% have one candidate parent, 20% have two candidate parents, and
    10-20% have more than two candidate parents.




                                                     12
living apart from parents at these early ages. Though my methodology assumes I can link
all children to parents at some age before 18, I show results are unlikely to be aﬀected by
this issue in the robustness section.
     Additional Panel datasets. I incorporate several additional panel datasets both to assess
the key “parallel trends” assumption underlying the empirical strategy, and to compare
IM estimates on true panel data with those obtained from census data using my correc-
tion. These additinonal datasets include the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997 (NLSY79 and NLSY97), the Oc-
cupational Change in a Generation 1973 survey (OCG73), and the General Social Survey
(GSS). The PSID, NLSY79 and NLSY97 are panel data sets that track children after they
split into new households and go back to 1968, 1979 and 1997, respectively. The OCG73
is a cross-sectional data set that collected information on adults and their retrospective
parental characteristics during adolescence. The GSS is an annual cross-sectional survey
that collects retrospective information on parental income and education during adoles-
cence, and begins in 1972 for the US. I provide details of sample selection and variable
choices in these datasets as well as the main census dataset in Appendix D. 12


5. Validation of Two Assumptions
5.1. Validation of Parallel Trends
Figure II presents non-parametric visual evidence on the validity of the parallel trends
assumption in the PSID, NLSY79 and NLSY97 for CEFs of children’s education with
respect to parental income deciles and parental education levels, pooling child ages 26-29
and restricting to whites. The assumption appears surprisingly reasonable, though clearly
not perfect. In addition to being approximately parallel, the curves are not far apart from
each other in levels, implying results will be relatively insensitive to the smooth cohorts
assumption.
  Figure II suggests that these CEFs are approximately linear. I therefore test the parallel
12
     I omit several other datasets for various reasons. The Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey does not con-
      tain information on children’s dependent status (correspondence with personnel at WLS). The NLSY
      Original Cohorts have highly incomplete data on parental income and education. I only make limited
      use of OCG62 data because this survey only contains father’s education, and only in 2-year bins. The
      Children of the NLSY79 survey still only contains children whose mothers gave birth at relatively young
      ages, and therefore do not yield a representative sample for IM estimation.




                                                      13
trends assumption more formally and quantify potential violations using regressions of the
following form:

                        hji,y = ↵ + y + ⇢1 {j = D} +          ⇥ y ⇥ 1 {j = D} + eji,y                      (6)

for individuals i with parental group y and dependent status j, where                          captures the
eﬀect of parental group status on children’s education, ⇢ captures a level shift in children’s
education across dependent and independent children, and captures diﬀerences in the
trend in parental group status across dependent and independent children. Taken literally,
the parallel trends assumption expresses the null hypothesis that = 0. However, the key
question is not whether we reject this null hypothesis, which is inevitable given suﬃcient
data. The key question is whether appears suﬃciently small and stable relative to
to allow useful inferences about overall IM variation based on the subsample of children
living with parents at ages 26-29.
  Table III presents estimates from this regression in parental education for every available
dataset with reliable information on parental education during adolescence and children’s
dependency status in young adulthood. Estimates of the shared slope term are large and
highly statistically significant in every sample. In contrast, estimates of the interaction
term are typically small and often statistically insignificant. The few major exceptions–
the 1990s in the PSID, blacks in the NLSY97–appear somewhat random relative to similar
estimates in other datasets.
   Table IV presents analogous tests for parallel trends in parental income deciles. Once
again, estimates of the shared slope term are large and highly significant, while estimates
of the interaction term are typically small and often statistically insignificant. Moreover,
the large estimate of for blacks in the parental education regressions is not replicated in
the parental income regressions. In the results below using dependent children in census
data, I estimate IM variation (across time, regions, races, and other dimensions) that is
often too large to be easily explained by estimates of in this range .13
   In order to test parallel trends before the 1980s, I create a panel dataset by linking
children ages 10 to 17 (when most children live at home) in the 1930 census with children

13
     As a point of comparison, I have re-run these parallel trend tests in children’s earnings at ages 26-
      29, rather than children’s education. For this child outcome I find overwhelmingly evidence to reject
      parallel trends. This suggests that the evidence failing to strongly reject parallel trends in children’s
      education is a substantive finding capturing something about reality, not an artifact of how I construct
      the data.




                                                       14
ages 20 to 27 in the 1940 census. This allows me to plot children’s schooling outcomes by
parental home value and rent groups (income and education are not available in the 1930
census). I also restrict to boys due to changes in surnames of girls after marriage.14
  Figure III plots children’s final schooling at ages 24-27 by parental home value and rent
deciles, and for both whites and blacks. For whites, dependent and independent children
at ages 24-27 have virtually identical schooling CEFs. For blacks, the parallel trends
assumption also holds, though the data are noisy in higher deciles. For blacks, though not
for whites, allowing for a level shift fits the data significantly better.15 Similar patterns
arise when cutting each race on region of birth. These results line up well with the results
for later decades. Therefore, the parallel trends assumption is surprisingly reasonable over
the entire sample period and for nearly all subgroups and datasets with suﬃcient power to
implement a meaningful test.


5.2. Intuition for Parallel Trends
When testing the parallel trends assumption in Section 5.1, I am often unable to reject not
only parallel but overlapping trends in dependent and independent children’s education
at ages 26-29 with respect to parental SES (⇢ = 0), or in other words exogeneity of
dependent status conditional on parental SES. This finding conflicts with the intuition
that children often live with parents in order to finance additional education. However,
this issue typically arises in studies that focus on earlier ages of young adulthood (e.g, ages
16-24 as in Card and Lemieux, 2000). By ages 26-29, children may choose to live at home
for reasons that are much less directly related to education.
   To explore this possibility I examine determinants of dependent status in young adult-
hood in the PSID and NLSY79 at diﬀerent ages. In Table V I regress a dummy for depen-
14
   I link children across censuses based on five variables: year of birth, state of birth, sex, race, first name
    and last name. I require exact, unique matches, except for allowing year of birth to be oﬀ by one year
    in either direction. Out of 8.8 million children in the 1940 census, I match 2.5 million or 28%, and
    about 60% of these matches are unique for a final match rate of about 17%, which is similar to prior
    research (Long and Ferrie, 2013; Abramitzky et al., 2014). The resulting panel contains 1.5 million
    children aged 20-27 with outcomes observed in 1940 matched to their parental characteristics at ages
    10-17 in 1930. For simplicity I forego more sophisticated matching algorithms that incorporate machine
    learning (e.g., Feigenbaum, 2015).
15
   Why does schooling decline so dramatically for blacks with the highest parental rent expenditures? There
    are very few blacks in these cells, and many of them may have reported rent incorrectly, for example
    reporting annual rent in place of monthly rent. This type of measurement error would generate the
    observed pattern, and is also consistent with the lack of a similar decline for blacks with the highest
    home values.




                                                      15
dent status on education, marital status, sex, and parental income decile as well as a full
set of year dummies. Column (1) presents the results for children age 18-25 in the PSID,
clustering standard errors at the individual level. All four regressors are highly significant,
though marital status is overwhelmingly the most important variable both economically
and statistically.16 In Column (2), I repeat this regression for children ages 26-29. Inter-
estingly, at these later ages the economic significance of the education coeﬃcient is much
reduced, and the R2 of the regression falls dramatically.
  As marital status remains the overwhelmingly most important predictor of dependent
status at these later ages, I examine determinants of marital status in Columns (3)-(4).
Once again, observable variables have statistically and economically significant impacts on
marital status at earlier ages, but much weaker impacts on marital status at later ages.
In Columns (5)-(8) I repeat the analysis in NLSY79 data and document similar findings.
These results suggest that, among the 10-20% of children who choose to coreside with
parents in their late 20s, factors only indirectly related or unrelated to education potentially
play a large role. Such factors may include quality of parent-child relationships, early-career
labor market shocks (Kaplan, 2012), marriage market luck17 , availability of spare bedrooms
in the parental home, job matches within commuting distance of parents, and so forth.
   Parallel trends with ⇢ 6= 0, as opposed to conditional exogeneity, are harder to understand
from an economic perspective. What is the intuition for this specific form of endogeneity?
Some insight can be gained from a simple two-type example. Let g represent a continuous
measure of parental SES. Suppose there are two types of children: high-ability types H
disposed toward higher levels of schooling hH (g), and low-ability types L disposed toward
lower levels of schooling hL (g) < hH (g) 8g. Assume both types exhibit higher schooling
in higher-status parental households such that h0H , h0L > 0. Let pD (g) 2 [0, 1] indicate
the probability a dependent child is the high type, and likewise let pI (g) indicate the
probability an independent child is a high type. We can now write average schooling
among dependent and independent children as

                              hD = pD (g) hH (g) + (1           pD (g)) hL (g)
                               hI = pI (g) hH (g) + (1          pI (g)) hL (g) .


16
     Without marital status, the R2 of the regression falls from 0.406 to 0.134.
17
     Observables become statistically and economically insignificant predictors of age-at-first-marriage when
      restricting to individuals marrying after age 26.




                                                      16
The parallel trends assumption requires:

                                       d (hD hI )
                                                  = 0,                                  (7)
                                           dg

which can be shown to imply that

                             0     0       (hH       hL )2 ⇣ 0    0
                                                                      ⌘
                           hH    hL =                       pD   pI                     (8)
                                                 ⇢
where ⇢ = hD (g) hI (g) 6= 0 equals the constant gap between parallel schooling CEFs as
                                                  0   0     0    0
above. One way to satisfy this condition is with hH hL = pD pI = 0, or parallel trends
with respect to parental SES for both schooling of high versus low types, and prevalence
of high types among dependents versus independents. The second way to satisfy equation
(8) requires violations in parallel trends in these two terms to cancel each other out.
  I examine the key terms in equation (8) empirically in the NLSY79. I operationalize
“high types” H empirically as children with above-median AFQT scores. Therefore let p
denote the probability of exhibiting above-median AFQT, and let h denote educational
attainment. The top panel of figure IV plots pD and pI by parental income deciles on
the left, and plots hH and hL by parental income deciles in the right, all for children
at age 27, based on parental income at age 17. The bottom panel repeats this exercise
for parental education rather than parental income. These trends are roughly consistent
                       0     0    0     0
with the notion that hH hL ⇡ pD pI ⇡ 0 for both measures of parental SES, roughly
supporting the plausibility of equation (8). Of course, this result just pushes the puzzle
back one step. Therefore an interesting question for future research is what types of
behavioral economic models might generate parallel but non-overlapping trends as well as
these additional parallel trend relationships.


5.3. Validation of Smooth Cohorts
The smooth cohort shares assumption allows me to impute parental SES shares to the
pool of unallocated independent children at each age 26-29. I employ a simple method
to select and validate an estimator of group cohort shares using only information about
cohort shares of children under age 18, who all have high dependency rates. In this section
I assume 100% dependency rates under age 18; in the robustness section I address the fact
that a significant minority of children under 18 also do not live with parents. The approach




                                             17
I take is to evaluate potential estimators of total group cohort shares at ages 16 and 17
using group cohort shares up through age 7. If estimators perform well at these ages when
true group cohort shares are observed with accuracy, then it is more plausible that the
same estimators will perform well when using group cohort shares up through age 17 to
predict group cohort shares at ages 26-29.18
  The approach is easy to understand visually. Figure V plots the share of children living
with parents in diﬀerent income deciles by age in the 1940 100% sample for whites and
blacks. While group shares up through age 7 do not perfectly predict group shares at
age 17, the deviations are economically small. This suggests that in 1950, we should be
able to predict group cohort shares at ages 26-29 using group cohort shares at ages up
through 17. To formalize this intuition I regress group cohort shares in cohorts age 16 to
17 on group cohort shares in cohorts younger than age 8. Tables VII and VI present the
results of these regressions. Columns (1)-(3) experiment with diﬀerent estimators, pooling
all years 1940-2000. The simplest estimator based on group cohort share at age 7 performs
better than more complex estimators. I therefore rely on this simple estimator for all main
results, both due to its performance in this exercise, and because it is more stable for
smaller subgroups.
   Columns (6)-(12) examine this estimator by year. The estimators are highly statistically
significant in every year. If group cohort shares are stable over ten-year periods, these
results indicate that the composition of dependent children in cohorts age 17 contains a
great deal of information about the composition of children in cohorts ages 26-27 (and
probably 26-29). Second, the coeﬃcients on the estimators are typically close to one, with
some variation over time that does not line up sharply with the main patterns documented
below in any particularly disturbing way. The predictions for parental education groups

18
     It might seem that I could observe parental group cohort sizes almost perfectly for children under age
      28 in the prior census, since ten years previously most of these children were still dependents under
      age 18. This is not true for several reasons. First, both income and education are not observed in
      1930, preventing the use of this method to estimate parental group cohort sizes in 1940. Since CEFs
      cannot be estimated in the 1950 census, it is critical that I develop a method that can be applied to
      the 1940 census to study long-term mobility trends in the U.S. context. Second, parental group status
      may change in systematic ways over ten-year intervals. For example, parents of 16-17 year-olds in the
      bottom income decile in 1960 may not systematically be in the bottom income decile as parents of
      26-27 year-olds in 1970. This consideration is less important for parental education, but still may exist
      due to survey methodology variation or reporting biases discussed above. A less serious problem is
      that ten years of death and international migration take place between censuses. This problem would
      be small in my application because few 16-17 year-old children die before turning 26-27 during this
      period, and because I restrict samples to native-born children.




                                                       18
are somewhat better than for parental income groups in the sense of having coeﬃcients
close to one and high R2 , though both are quite good. Tables A.1 and A.2 display similar
patterns for black children. These results suggest the smooth cohorts assumption is quite
reasonable. Moreover, in the robustness section below I find that the main results are not
highly sensitive to plausible degrees of mismeasurement in group cohort shares.


6. Results
6.1. Historical Trends
Figure VI presents the two estimated CEFs in 1940 before and after the correction for
independent children. The correction turns out to aﬀect levels much more than slopes
because dependency rates turn out to be roughly stable across parental groups at ages
26-29 in census data. The correction also aﬀects blacks more than whites due to the larger
share of young adult blacks living independently. The figure illustrates the fact that relative
mobility is strongly correlated with absolute upward mobility because the CEFs “pivot” at
high levels of parental income and education, and that education is approximately linear
in parental education and parental income rank.19 These patterns are similar to findings
in Chetty et al. (2014a), but 60 years earlier in time.
  In order to summarize many CEFs parsimoniously I estimate intercepts and slopes using
the simple regression equation:

                          2000
                          X                              2000
                                                         X
                hy,t =            ↵t · 1 {year = t} +            t   · 1 {year = t} · y + "y,t ,     (9)
                         t=1940                         t=1940


where hy,t represents a child outcome measure in census year t for children in parental group
y (either education or income). I focus primarily on the slope coeﬃcients t as measures
of relative IM, because intercepts largely reflect secular trends in schooling. When I re-
estimate equation (9) in ranks below, intercepts provide more useful measures of absolute
upward IM separate from secular trends in education levels. I estimate equation 9 on data
collapsed to the level of year ⇥ parental SES group ⇥ race.20 Given that I am collapsing

19
   Note that dropping the bottom 2% of the parental education distribution as discussed in Section 4 is
    important for achieving approximate linearity of CEFs in parental education.
20
   National results pooling races are very similar to the results for whites only, as expected given that
    approximately 90% of the U.S. population is white over the sample period.




                                                    19
millions of observations into dozens of bins, standard errors are likely conservative relative
to those that would be obtained from similar regressions in microdata even with various
forms of clustering.
     Tables VIII-IX display estimated intercepts and slopes of CEFs in parental education
levels, for whites and blacks separately. Tables X-XI present analogous estimates for mobil-
ity in parental income decile. Column (1) from these tables contains estimated intercepts
and slopes for whites and blacks. For whites, the slope in parental education falls from 0.50
in 1940 to 0.39 in 1960, or about 20%, and remains relatively stable up through 2000.21
The slope in parental income deciles similarly falls from 0.37 in 1940 to 0.25 in 1960, or by
about 25%. The post-1940 mobility gains of black children are especially remarkable, with
slopes in parental income and education both falling by over 50%. These results show that
20th century black-white economic convergence (see, for example, Smith, 1984; Margo,
1986) can be understood not only as blacks converging toward whites, but as poor blacks
converging toward rich blacks, and rising mobility more generally.22 These post-1940 mo-
bility gains are economically large, potentially contributing about 0.25 percentage points
of aggregate earnings growth over the 1940-70 period.23
   How do these estimates compare to estimates in panel/retrospective datasets that do
not require any adjustment for independent children? Figure VII plots the IM estimates
in parental education from Column (1) in Tables VIII-IX alongside estimates from many
other sources. For comparability I average children’s education at ages 26-29 in these other
datasets across cells defined by decade ⇥ parental SES ⇥ race, and then estimate intercepts
and slopes on these aggregated data. I define decade “1980”, for example, to include cohorts
turning ages 26-29 in 1980-89. Note that survey data estimates for cohorts in decades before
1970 rely entirely on retrospective reports from increasingly elderly respondents, and may
21
   Formal tests for equality of parameter estimates across years with very diﬀerent point estimates generally
    yield p-values well below 5%. In particular, slopes in 1940 are always statistically diﬀerent from slopes
    in 1960-80.
22
   Recall that I am collapsing the data into population distributions of parental income and education, so
    diﬀerences in black and white IM statistics reflect genuine diﬀerences in the shapes of estimated CEFs,
    not reversion to diﬀerent group means along identical and nonlinear CEFs.
23
   To see this, consider the impact of the increase in relative mobility with respect to parental income.
    Suppose relative educational mobility in 1970 remained at the 1940 level, so that schooling at the top
    decile in 1970 were held constant at its observed value but schooling of all lower deciles were decreased
    to reflect the steeper slope from 1940. This would reduce average schooling in 1970 by about 0.75 years.
    If annual earnings increase by 10% for each additional year of education, this change would account
    for 0.25 percentage points of aggregate earnings growth over the 1940-1970 period. I estimate that
    total household earnings over this period grew at an annual rate of 3.4%, suggesting increasing relative
    mobility increased annual earnings growth by 8% over this high-growth period.




                                                    20
therefore suﬀer from mortality attrition (Costa, 2015) and recall error (National Center for
Education Statistics, 1984).
  Reassuringly, Figure VII indicates that estimates from these various datasets are similar
in magnitude and exhibit a decline in slopes after 1940 that is larger for blacks. However,
there are also some important discrepancies. First, the decline in IM in census data is
somewhat larger over the 1940-60 period (ignoring 1930) than that in the OCG73 and
GSS55, for both whites and blacks. This pattern could easily be generated by selective
mortality of lower-SES respondents at older ages. Second, the overall magnitude of the
slopes in most survey datasets appear somewhat higher in most years for whites, relative
to census estimates, suggesting diﬀerent sample selection or additional measurement error.
Most importantly, survey datasets strongly suggest a substantial increase in slopes for
whites after 1980 that is not captured by census estimates. A decrease in educational
mobility since 1980 would be consistent with prior work documenting post-1980 increases
in gaps between high-income and low-income children in educational attainment (Acemoglu
and Pischke, 2001; Belley and Lochner, 2007; Bailey and Dynarski, 2011) as well as test
scores (Reardon, 2011). 24
  What explains this post-1980 discrepancy in time trends? Inspection of underlying
CEFs reveals that children of parents with college degrees or higher in census data have
conspicuously “too little” education in many decades compared both to similar children in
panel datasets and to children of less educated parents in census data. If I exclude children
of parents with college and graduate degrees, the estimated trend in slopes remains similar
up through 1990 but exhibits a significant increase 1990-2000 that is consistent with the
time trend in panel data (increasing from 0.39 in 1990 to 0.47 in 2000, nearly as high as
the slope of 0.51 in 1940). I conclude that the imputation method is accurately detecting
a post-1940 mobility increase, but failing to detect a decrease in mobility in recent decades
due to a particular violation of parallel trends by children in the highest-education families.
   Figure VIII plots IM estimates in parental income deciles from Column (1) in Tables
X-XI. There is no other nationally representative dataset containing credible information
about parental income for cohorts who reach their late 20s before 1968. It is therefore both
novel and reassuring to document that IM with respect to parental income also increases
after 1940 for both races, and more so for blacks. Once again the census estimates appear

24
     As discussed in the literature review, most research on income-based IM has found no trend since 1980
      (Hertz, 2007; Lee and Solon, 2009; Harding et al., 2009; Chetty et al., 2014b), with the exception of
      Aaronson and Mazumder (2008).




                                                     21
to miss a possible decline in mobility after 1980, although estimates from other datasets
are less clear on this point.
  So far I have focused on estimates of IM based on education levels. Increases in IM
based on education levels may reflect changes in educational inequality across generations
rather than changes in positional transition matrices. In Appendix B, I adjust for changes
in educational inequality by estimating two alternative educational IM statistics that are
not subject to this concern: (1) rank-rank elasticities in parental education and income,
and (2) correlation coeﬃcients in parental education levels. While I find that the parallel
trends assumption looks more tenuous in education ranks, results for relative educational
IM based on ranks are very similar to results already discussed. Moreover, intercepts of
rank-rank CEFs can be interpreted as measures of absolute upward mobility distinct from
secular gains in education (Chetty et al., 2014a), and I find that by these measures absolute
upward mobility increased modestly for whites and dramatically for blacks after 1940 much
like relative mobility. The broad finding of large post-1940 IM gains are therefore quite
robust to the choice of IM statistic and are not driven by changes in educational inequality
across generations.


6.2. Heterogeneity
Even if the method provides estimates of post-1980 national time trends in educational IM
that are apparently biased, it may still shed light on cross-sectional variation in IM across
places and subgroups in all years if biases are similar across subgroups within years. To
examine this possibility as it applies to spatial variation in IM, I compare my educational
IM estimates with newly-available estimates of income-based IM across states in the 2000s.
Chetty et al. (2014a) have recently made available rank-rank income CEF slopes and
intercepts by “commuter zone” (CZ) in the U.S. using the population of U.S. tax records
spanning 1996-2012. I average their income-based rank-rank slopes up to the state level.25 I
then construct education rank-rank slopes on census data by state, adjusted to account for
independent children, as described in Appendix B. Note that Chetty et al. (2014a) measure
children’s residential location around age 15. I can either measure children’s location at
25
     The resulting state-level intercepts and slopes should come close to what would be obtained from a
      rank-rank regression on state-wide micro-data. Such a regression would average the CZ-level slopes
      with weights proportional to the variance of parental income rank in each CZ (Angrist and Pischke,
      2009). I use unweighted averages, although I experimented with weighting by CZ-level Gini coeﬃcients
      and interquartile ranges as two proxies for parental income rank variance, and found these alternative
      weights had virtually no impact on the results.




                                                      22
ages 26-29, or at time of birth. I choose time of birth because many individuals will have left
their home states as of ages 26-29.26 This comparison is far from ideal because educational
IM and income-based IM measure diﬀerent concepts. Unfortunately, the tax data do
not contain educational attainment and I am unaware of any other dataset containing
state-level IM. As discussed above, however, economic theory suggests educational and
income-based IM may be closely linked.
  Figure VII plots educational rank-rank mobility estimates from census data against
income rank-rank mobility estimates from tax data. The correlation between the intercepts
in Panel (a) is 0.61, while the correlation between the slopes in Panel (b) is 0.55. These
results strongly suggest that the method here is indeed capturing genuine variation in IM
across states in the recent period, and is therefore likely useful for studying spatial variation
in IM in earlier years. This finding is valuable because there is currently no alternative
dataset available for estimating IM across states in earlier decades.
  I now present estimates of educational IM across various subgroups by year from 1940
to 2000 in Tables VIII-IX. Given the results above, time trends should be interpreted
with some caution, especially after 1980. I focus on relative educational IM estimates with
respect to parental education, noting any important diﬀerences for results based on parental
income deciles. Columns (2)-(3) show IM gains were similar for boys and girls. Columns
(4)-(5) break out results into South and North, where “North” includes all non-southern
regions. These results replicate lower IM in the South in the 2000s (Chetty et al., 2014a),
but show this gap is quite small in longer-term historical context. Surprisingly, IM gains
in the South were similarly large for whites and blacks with respect to parental education,
and only slightly larger for blacks with respect to parental income. Given that over 75% of
blacks in 1940 lived in the South compared to 25% of whites, these regional convergence
trends account for most of the larger mobility gains of blacks nationally. Columns (6)-(7)
of Tables VIII-IX compare mobility in areas defined by the census as “Urban” and “Rural”
in years where this variable is available. Both absolute and relative mobility are higher in
urban areas for both whites and blacks. The urban/rural mobility gap has also tended to
decline over time, much like the North-South mobility gap.27

26
   Note that state-level schooling mobility estimates in census data are quite noisy because IPUMS only
    provides small random samples after 1940, the education distribution is much lumpier than the income
    distribution, and the state size distribution is skewed. To increase precision, I therefore average the
    separately-adjusted CEFs from the 1980, 1990 and 2000 censuses into one pooled CEF for each year,
    race and state of birth before estimating slopes and intercepts.
27
   The one exception to this convergence pattern is that the urban/rural mobility gap increased for blacks




                                                   23
  Columns (8)-(9) of Tables VIII-IX report estimated intercepts and slopes for CEFs of
annual enrollment at “high school ages” 16-18 and “college ages” 19-21, rather than final
educational attainment at ages 26-29 as in columns (1)-(7). Note that the vast majority
of children live at home at ages 16-18, implying much weaker concerns about represen-
tativeness of dependent children. For both whites and blacks, in both parental income
and education, high school enrollment accounts for all of the post-1940 increase in relative
educational mobility. In contrast, relative mobility in terms of college enrollment exhibits
no decline over this period, and once again fails to detect a post-1980 decline in college
enrollment mobility that others have previously estimated in survey data (e.g., Lochner
and Monge-Naranjo, 2011; Bailey and Dynarski, 2011; Belley and Lochner, 2007). This
long-term pattern suggests that low-SES children have plausibly never successfully gained
ground on high-SES children in college attainment since the start of the 20th century, in
sharp contrast to high school attainment. These findings on high school enrollment mo-
bility provide strong additional evidence that post-1940 mobility gains are not driven by
changes in selective dependency decisions.


7. Determinants of Trends in Educational IM
What accounts for the large gains in educational IM after 1940? Findings above suggest
the importance of increasing supply of and/or demand for high school education for cohorts
reaching high school in 1930-1950 (born ~1915-35), especially factors aﬀecting all genders
and races in the South.
  These findings immediately cast doubt on several potential explanations. Post-1940
G.I. Bills almost exclusively benefited men, and yielded few benefits for southern blacks
(Turner and Bound, 2003). School integration reforms beginning in the late 1950s and
the Civil Rights gains of the 1960s arrive too late to explain the time trend in IM, and
also cannot explain major IM gains for southern whites. The Great Migration and other
regional population shifts are also hard to square with black and white mobility both
rising to similar extents within the South and within rural areas.28 For similar reasons,
the belated black high school movement (Anderson, 1988) is not a likely explanation, and
    between 1940-60 before converging 1960-1990. Note that intercept and slope estimates for rural blacks
    in 1960 only cover income deciles 1-7 due to a lack of suﬃcient high-income rural blacks.
28
   Holding constant state of birth (or state of residence) population shares at their 1940 level has almost
    no impact on national mobility trends for whites or blacks. Of course, migration may have played an
    important role in sustaining wage gains in the South by tightening labor markets (Wright, 1986).




                                                   24
in Appendix E I use newly-digitized data on the spread of black high schools to document
additional evidence casting doubt on this explanation. The Great Depression could have
temporarily constrained educational demand among lower-SES families, leaving room for
“catch-up” after 1940; however the Great Depression was not a disproportionately southern
phenomenon (Rosenbloom and Sundstrom, 1999).

Growth, Inequality, and Other Factors: State-Level Panel Data Analysis. Prior
literature suggests many other factors that may relate to the observed mobility trends,
including per-capita income levels and inequality (Loury, 1981; Becker and Tomes, 1986;
Murphy et al., 1991; Galor and Tsiddon, 1997; Owen and Weil, 1998), urbanization (Goldin,
1998), black population shares (Margo, 1990; Card and Krueger, 1992b), teen birth rates
(Edin and Kefalas, 2011; Kearney and Levine, 2012), compulsory schooling laws (Ace-
moglu and Angrist, 2001; Lleras-Muney, 2002), educational inputs (Card and Krueger,
1992b,a; Chetty et al., 2011; Jackson et al., 2015), the demand for teen labor (Cogan,
1982; Margo and Finegan, 1993), and migration (Long and Ferrie, 2013). Many of these
factors changed simultaneously during the “transformation” of the southern economy after
1930 (e.g. Wright, 1986, 1987).
   In order to explore basic descriptive correlations of IM with this wide range of factors,
I construct a long-term panel dataset of IM statistics by state of birth and year. In order
to probe robustness of these correlations I estimate three bivariate regression models for
each explanatory variable: OLS, fixed eﬀects (FE) and first-diﬀerences (FD). Formally, for
mobility statistic Ms,t and covariate Xs,t calculated on individuals born in state s and ages
20-29 in year t 2 [1940, 2000], I estimate the following regressions:29

                                 Ms,t =      OLS Xs,t     + es,t (OLS)
                                 Ms,t =      F E Xs,t   +   s   +   t   + ✏s,t (FE)
                      Ms,t    Ms,t   1   =   FD   (Xs,t     Xs,t 1 ) + ⌘t + "s,t (FD)

Even with controls for state and year eﬀects, the estimates here cannot be interpreted as
causal determinants of IM. Nonetheless, the panel dimension of these data are new and
therefore enrich descriptive understanding of IM variation in the U.S. context.
  Table A.6 presents summary statistics for the dependent and independent variables in
29
     I combine ages 20-29 in this section, as opposed to 26-29 in the main section, in order to maximize
      statistical power.




                                                    25
the analysis for whites and blacks separately. The immense variation in mobility and all
independent variables highlights the novel 60-year timeframe of the analysis and the wide
spatial heterogeneity of the United States. I focus on mobility Ms,t, defined as slopes with
respect to parental education.30 In order to characterize these variables in years that are
most plausibly related to IM, I match them to IM statistics by the year in which children
underlying the IM statistics would have been teenagers when possible, and otherwise by
the year in which these children were in their 20s.
   Table XII presents results separately for whites and blacks. For both races, higher IM
is robustly associated with higher state earnings, lower inequality, lower black population
share, higher minimum school dropout age, higher relative teacher wages, and to some
extent higher out-migration rates, while correlations appear less robust for share urban,
teen employment rates, and class size . 31 In many cases, coeﬃcients are similar even when
including state and year fixed eﬀects. Most of these findings are consistent with correlates
of income IM in Chetty et al. (2014a) for the 2000s, including large correlations with black
population share (for both whites and blacks), inequality, and K-12 school quality. The
negative association between inequality and IM has been termed the “Great Gatsby Curve”
(Krueger, 2012; Corak, 2013), and to my knowledge has only been documented previously
in cross-sectional data in the modern period. Results here extend this result to mid-20th
century variation across U.S. states, and show that the association remains significant in
panel data regressions controlling for state-of-birth and year fixed eﬀects. The estimates
suggest that a 10 percentage point increase in the interquartile household earnings gap
within a state-of-birth group has historically decreased relative educational IM (1   ) by
.03, suggesting that the post-1940 decline in inequality (Goldin and Margo, 1992) by itself
would predict a large share of observed post-1940 educational IM gains.
  The most striking discrepancy with earlier work is that I find a robust positive correlation
of educational IM with state household earnings, whereas Chetty et al. (2014a) find a
near-zero correlation of IM with mean household income levels in the 2000s. In Table
XIII, I probe this result further by regressing IM jointly on state household earnings and
household earnings inequality, using IM defined in terms of parental education and parental

30
     Results are similar for absolute mobility (intercepts of CEFs), and for CEFs in parental income deciles.
31
     The results presented above almost all become underpowered if I allow for linear time trends that vary
      by state. Some of the results survive time trends that vary by region. The results are largely robust
      to dropping 1940, and dropping the South, but become underpowered when dropping both 1940 and
      the South together. The results become more significant if I weight by the precision of the regressions
      used to estimate the mobility statistics.




                                                      26
income separately. While precision declines, the point estimates are robust and in some
specifications both variables retain statistical significance. Therefore broad-based economic
growth, rather than just growth per se, is historically associated with educational IM.
     One plausible reason for this discrepancy with earlier work is that, over the longer-run
sample period examined here, state household earnings levels correlate with broad pro-
cesses of industrialization, urbanization, and political liberalization, particularly in the
South (Wright, 1986). There are many reasons why the “Old South” may have yielded
lower educational IM for both whites and blacks. Political institutions in the South ac-
tively excluded poor whites as well as blacks using poll taxes, literacy tests, and other
impediments to voting (e.g., Husted and Kenny, 1997), and many states loosened these
restrictions by the 1950s well before the Voting Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965.32 Wright
(1986) presents anecdotal evidence that many elite southerners opposed large investments
in public education. Perhaps as a consequence of these political factors, the South spent
less on public schooling, had lower-quality public schools by many other measures, and
had much lower high school graduation rates than other regions of the U.S. throughout
the first half of the 20th century, and many of these diﬀerences decline dramatically across
cohorts attending high school between 1930 and 1950-60 when southern IM increases in my
data (Ayres, 1920; Wright, 1986; Card and Krueger, 1992a; Goldin, 1998). An interesting
question for future research, then, is whether broad economic and political transforma-
tions in other times and places (e.g., Taiwan, South Korea, Botswana, etc.) have also been
associated with improvements in IM.

High School, College and Educational Institutions. The fact that high school attain-
ment has equalized across SES groups over time, while college attainment has if anything
become more unequal, points to a potential role for institutional diﬀerences in these two
educational margins. High schools, in contrast with colleges, are characterized by public
finance, compulsary initiation, and automatic enrollment. Prior work on college access
documents the importance of financial obstacles (Dynarski and Scott-clayton, 2013; Fack
and Grenet, 2015) and frictions arising from voluntary and active enrollment (Dynarski and
Scott-Clayton, 2008; Bettinger et al., 2012; Carrell and Sacerdote, 2013), while other work
shows that defaults can be sticky even in high-stakes choice environments (e.g., Carroll
et al., 2009; Chetty et al., 2013). It is therefore possible that institutions governing college
32
     Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and North Carolina dropped their poll tax in 1945, followed by South
      Carolina and Tennessee in 1951.




                                                   27
education in the U.S. are less amenable to educational IM than institutions governing high
school education.
  A diﬀerent explanation points to quality problems in the K-12 system that may aﬀect
low-SES children disproportionately. Table XII documents a strong association between
relative teacher pay and IM. Relative teacher pay and teacher quality have declined dra-
matically since 1940 (Hoxby and Leigh, 2004; Bacolod, 2007), and high school graduation
rates have been stagnant since the 1960s (Heckman and Lafontaine, 2010). It is therefore
also possible that the public primary school system successfully prepared many low-SES
children to attend high school in the 1940-70 period, but the public K-12 system in recent
decades has failed to prepare low-SES children to attend college.


8. Robustness
Missing/zero parental income and education. There is substantial variation in the fraction
of children with zero or missing values for parental characteristics. Table A.8 displays this
variation for whites and blacks, restricting to dependent children age 26-29. The fraction
of parental education values that are missing or zero is small in all years for both whites
and blacks. The fraction of missing parental income observations follows a U-shaped time
trend for both whites and blacks, and therefore does not seem likely to explain the observed
decline in mobility. The fraction of children with parents reporting zero income raises more
serious concerns, as these shares are very high in 1940 and fall significantly and steadily
over time.
  While it is reassuring that educational IM tells the same basic story in both parental
education and parental income, I examine robustness of results using parental income in
three ways. First, I impute income for families with missing or zero reported income, recal-
culate population income deciles, and include these families in the analysis.33 Table XIV
replicates my basic results in columns (1)-(2) and presents the results based on imputed
income in columns (3)-(4). The main patterns of rising IM after 1940 and larger IM gains
33
     I implement this by calculating average household earnings among all individuals with non-zero earnings
       in cells defined by year, race, age, sex, education, marital status, and state or country of birth. I
       assign cell means to individuals with zero and missing earnings based on this set of characteristics,
       roughly following Autor et al. (1998). In households with two earners I take the maximum of these
       two predictions. For households with zero earnings I follow Neal (2006) and adjust for selection by
       multiplying imputed household earnings by 0.6. While this method is obviously ad hoc, it provides a
       rough check on whether households with zero and missing earnings are likely to be driving the main
       results.




                                                      28
for blacks are unchanged. Second, I examine mobility with respect to parental education
separately for families reporting zero and positive income. If IM with respect to parental
education is similar in these two groups, it suggests that the excluded families are unlikely
to exhibit such diﬀerent IM from the included families as to generate substantial bias in
the main results. Figure A.6 plots education elasticities for children with positive and
zero/missing parental income, by year, for whites and blacks separately, and indicates that
mobility patterns are indistinguishable in these two samples.
 Third, basic calculations suggest the increase in mobility for whites is too large to be
accounted for by the decline in the share of families reporting zero income. Note that the
share of families reporting zero income falls by 14 percentage points between 1940 and
1960. The worst-case scenario is that these 14 percentage points of families are “perfectly
mobile” with relative IM of zero. In that case the true 1940 slope would actually be
(0.14 (0) + 0.86 (0.5) =) 0.43, which is still higher than the estimated slope of 0.39 in 1960.
It should be clear from the result in Figure A.6 discussed above that perfect mobility for
this group is so conservative as to be implausible. Finally, note that the trend in share of
missing and zero income is similar for whites and blacks, despite the large diﬀerences in
white and black estimated mobility trends.

   Definition of dependent status. There is some ambiguity in dependent status of young
adults in “group living” situations such as college dormitories, prisons, and military barracks
in census data (e.g., Bureau of the Census, 1988; National Research Council, 2006, p. 47).
For my primary results I count all children living in dormitories, prisons and military
barracks at ages 26-29 as independents. Figures A.4 and A.5 compare the estimated slopes
and intercepts of education CEFs in parental income and education for the primary sample
and an alternative sample that excludes children in “group living” situations. The results
are nearly identical with the one exception of an anomalously flat slope of the education
CEF in 1970, which reflects an oddly low level of estimated final schooling among children
of high-education parents in that year.
   Missing dependents at age 17. I rely on cohorts of age 17 in each year to assign the
share of independent children to parental SES groups in cohorts of ages 26-29. However, as
discussed above, a significant minority of children are not living with identifiable parents at
age 17, especially in earlier years and especially among black children. Examination of this
issue in panel datasets revealed, unsurprisingly, that low-SES teenagers are less likely to be
living with parents. In order to explore the sensitivity of the results to this type of problem,



                                              29
I scale up the number⇣ of 17-year-olds
                                ⇣        in⌘⌘lower-SES groups for my imputation, using the
simple formula Ny 1 + 0.4 ⇥ 1 ymax     y
                                               where Ny denotes the number of dependent
children in a given year and race in parental group y and ymax
                                                            y
                                                               rises linearly in parental SES
group from 0 to 1. I therefore increase the relative number of 17-year-olds in lower-SES
groups by a large amount. Columns (5)-(6) in Table XIV present the results based on
parental income decile groups. Estimates are barely aﬀected.34


9. Conclusion
In this paper I develop a new method to estimate educational IM on cross-sectional U.S.
census data. The method overcomes the problem that most children cannot be linked to
parents by ages of school completion, and thereby allows for estimation of final educational
outcomes by parental income and education. The new methodology in conjunction with
multiple additional datasets yields several important new historical facts. Educational
IM increased significantly after 1940 (1911-14 birth cohorts) before stabilizing and then
declining after 1980 (1951-54 birth cohorts). Post-1940 educational IM gains plausibly
increased aggregate annual earnings growth by 0.25 percentage points over the 1940-70
period. IM gains were particularly large in the South for both whites and blacks, implying
larger IM gains for blacks nationally due to their greater geographic concentration in the
South.
   The increase in relative educational IM after 1940 stemmed from greater high school en-
rollment, rather than college enrollment. The GI Bills, the Civil Rights Movement, school
desegregation, the black high school movement, and the Great Migration do not account
for post-1940 IM gains. I construct a novel long-term panel dataset by year and state of
birth to explore descriptive determinants of IM. As Chetty et al. (2014a) find for income-
based IM across places in the 2000s, I find that educational IM (for both whites and blacks)
correlates with black population shares, income inequality, and educational quality, even
conditional on state and year fixed eﬀects. Unlike Chetty et al. (2014a), I find a robust pos-
itive association of state income levels with educational IM. This discrepancy likely stems
from the much larger forces of modernization accompanying economic growth after 1940,
particularly in the South where lower-SES voters gained political power and K-12 public
school input gaps narrowed dramatically. I also point out that institutional diﬀerences in
34
     This adjustment also barely aﬀects IM estimates based on parental education groups, which I omit for
      brevity.




                                                    30
the K-12 and college systems including public finance, defaults and compulsion, as well as
quality problems in the K-12 system, may play a role in the contrast between post-1940
gains and post-1980 declines in educational IM. However, it is also possible that post-1980
declines in IM represent a mechanical “aftershock” of the same forces underlying post-1940
gains in IM (Nybom and Stuhler, 2014).
  Identifying causal determinants of long-term trends in educational IM therefore remains
an important task for future research. The methods developed here can further this research
by expanding IM measurement to times, places and groups that are only accessible in large,
cross-sectional household datasets such as population censuses.




                                            31
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION


A. Mobility Statistics in a Model of Parental
   Borrowing Constraints
How do educational mobility statistics relate to earnings mobility statistics? And how does
mobility with respect to parental education relate to mobility with respect to parental in-
come? In this section I derive steady-state expressions for these diﬀerent mobility statistics
in a stylized model of family borrowing constraints and educational investments developed
in Solon (2004) based on Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986), generalizing the setup in Solon
(2004) slightly to allow for heritable determinants of child income other than human capital
(e.g., family connections).
   Let a parent with one child maximize a Cobb-Douglas utility function

                               Ui = (1         ↵) ln Ci,t         1   + ↵ ln yi,t                       (10)

   where i indexes individuals, t indexes a generation, Ci,t 1 denotes parent’s own consump-
tion, yi,t denotes the child’s future pre-tax income, and ↵ governs the trade-oﬀ between
own consumption and children’s income. The parent maximizes utility subject to a budget
constraint

                               (1     ⌧ ) · yi,t   1   = Ci,t         1   + Ii,t   1                    (11)
where ⌧ is the average and marginal tax rate on parental income, yi,t 1 denotes parental
pre-tax income, and Ii,t 1 denotes financial investments in children’s human capital. These
financial investments yield decreasing marginal returns subject to the human capital pro-
duction function

                            hi,t = + ✓ ln (Ii,t             1   + Gi,t 1 ) + ei,t                       (12)
where represents the minimum schooling level in society, ✓ represents the productivity of
financial investments in human capital, Gi,t 1 represents government spending on human
capital of child i, and ei,t captures human capital transmitted to children from parents
through channels other than financial investment. Assume that government education
spending is allocated progressively such that
                                    Gi,t   1
                                               ⇡'               ln (yi,t 1 ) ,                          (13)
                                    yi,t   1

where ' indicates the universal subsidy as a share of income, and                      captures progressivity
of the subsidy schedule.




                                                       32
     Assume a log-linear earnings equation in schooling in the tradition of Mincer:

                                         ln yi,t = µ + phi,t + "i,t                                     (14)

where p indicates the return to schooling, µ is the minimal income level in society, and
"i,t captures income transmitted to children from parents through channels other than
observed human capital.
   Let heritability of both ei,t and "i,t be governed by the same AR(1) process such that

                                          ei,t =        ei,t   1 + ⌫i,t                                 (15)
                                          "i,t =        "i,t   1 + ui,t                                 (16)

where indicates the degree of human capital and income inherited from parents outside
of monetary investment channels. The assumption that one parameter governs both these
inheritance processes is made for analytical convenience.
   As pointed out in Becker and Tomes (1986), if parental income yt 1 exceeds a certain cut-
oﬀ level, then parents in this model will leave financial bequests to children, and marginal
parental income has no causal eﬀect on children’s human capital or income.35 I assume
that parental income is below this threshold, such that parents wish to borrow from their
children’s future income but are prevented from doing so by a complete failure of the human
capital loans market.
   Assume all dynasties are in steady state. Using known results on autoregressive models
(Greene, 2002, pg. 266), and letting x,x0 denote the OLS coeﬃcient from a regression of
x on x0 , it can be shown that


                                                      p✓ (1         )+
                                      ht ,ht   1   =
                                                     1 + p✓ (1         )
                                                   = ln yt ,ln yt 1 .

   This result suggests that intergenerational education and income elasticities reflect sim-
ilar underlying features of social systems and should be similar in magnitude. While this
result cannot be taken literally for many reasons36 , I find it is roughly consistent with
the data. My estimated education elasticities since 1980 (around 0.4) are quite similar to

35
   As the model is written, parents cannot increase child income directly with bequests because human
    capital is the only instrument available for transfers. To add savings, augment the parent’s budget
    constraint to yi,t = Ci,t +Ii,t +Si,t and augment the child’s earnings function to ln (yi,t Si,t ) = µ+ph.
    In this extended model, for parental income above a critical value saving is positive and parental income
    has no causal impact on children’s schooling but still has a positive regression coeﬃcient due to the
    non-financial transmission parameter , as expected.
36
   For example, changes in the distribution of earnings Autor et al. (2008) and the curvature of earnings
    functions (Lemieux, 2006; Heckman et al., 2006; Goldin and Katz, 2010) directly violate the steady
    state and functional form assumptions of the model.




                                                        33
intergenerational income elasticities in prior literature (Solon, 1999). Figure IX.b is also
consistent with this result, establishing a strong correlation between rank-rank education
and income elasticities across U.S. states in recent decades. In Appendix C, I provide
additional support for a historical link between educational and income mobility using
the OCG62 and OCG73. Of course, educational and income mobility are clearly distinct
objects and both are interesting in their own right.
  Again assuming steady state, it can also be shown that slopes of education CEFs in
parental education and parental income are related by:
                                         ✓                           ◆
                                       1
                         ht ,ln yt 1 =     ht ,ht 1
                                                                   2
                                                                                        (17)
                                       p            1   ✓ (1    ) "

where "2 denoting the variance of income conditional on human capital. Due to this
additional parameter, comparative statics of ht ,ln yt 1 are more ambiguous than for ht ,ht 1 .
In this simple model, the finding that these two mobility statistics exhibit similar historical
trends does contain some empirical content, suggesting for example that trends are not
driven by changes in "2 .37


B. Mobility or Inequality? Rank-Rank Elasticities and
   Correlation Coeﬃcients
Above I focus on educational elasticities for convenience and ease of interpretation. How-
ever, elasticity trends depend both on trends in positional mobility and trends in cross-
sectional inequality. For some purposes, we may wish to measure these two social objectives–
mobility and inequality–with statistics that are mechanically independent. I estimate two
such additional mobility statistics: rank-rank elasticities, and correlation coeﬃcients.
   I use the same method developed above to estimate intergenerational elasticities in ed-
ucation ranks. Educational attainment can be mapped into ranks by choosing a method
to resolve ties; I choose the midpoint of the probability mass interval occupied by an ed-
ucational category. I rank parental education (average of mother plus father, calculated
as described in text) separately by year, and I rank children’s education during ages 26-29
separately by age and year. I continue ranking parental income as in main text. I re-test
the parallel trends assumption for education ranks in Tables A.3-A.4. The assumption
appears approximately true for education ranks in parental income ranks, though educa-
tion ranks in parental education ranks look more problematic, with dependent children
often displaying statistically and economically flatter slopes (i.e., higher mobility). These
violations suggest that the census method will likely overstate mobility overall, and may
overstate mobility for blacks, in recent decades. These problems must be kept in mind
when interpreting trends in this section.
37
     I have confirmed empirically that the conditional variance of income does not evolve in a way that would
       explain trends in ht ,ln yt 1 .




                                                      34
   Despite these problems, education ranks aﬀord two advantages: they facilitate compari-
son of IM over time as the underlying distributions of educational attainment evolve, and
they allow interpretation of intercepts as measures of absolute upward mobility distinct
from secular gains in education. The disadvantages are that rank-based IM cannot be
interpreted in terms of human capital units, and ranks can be unstable for discrete random
variables with lumpy distributions such as educational attainment.
   Table A.5 displays rank-based absolute and relative mobility estimates in census data
that are analogous to those in Tables VIII-IX. For whites (Columns 1 and 3), rank CEFs
in parental income suggest limited gains in absolute upward mobility, but significant gains
in relative mobility. Rank CEFs in parental education indicate no gains in absolute upward
mobility, but do suggest gains in relative mobility that are roughly consistent with results
for education levels. For blacks (Columns 2 and 4), rank CEFs exhibit large improvements
in both absolute upward and relative mobility over time, especially during the 1940-60
period.
   While ranks do a better job than levels at distinguishing mobility trends from inequality
trends, due to the lumpiness of the education distribution ranks are still not conclusive in
this respect. The intergenerational correlation also abstracts from changes in educational
inequality, and equals the intergenerational elasticity multiplied by the ratio of the standard
deviation in parental education over the standard deviation in children’s education. I
construct these standard deviation ratios for whites and blacks in every year, and adjust
the estimated elasticities accordingly. Figure A.1 displays the time trends in child-parent
educational correlations for both whites and blacks.38 The trends are similar to those
displayed in Figure VII for education elasticities.


C. Did Higher Educational Mobility Lead to Higher
   Income Mobility?
How have changes in educational mobility translated into income mobility? Validation
of state-level estimates against income mobility in tax data indicates the answer is yes
for recent cohorts (see Section 6). Here I also address this question for earlier cohorts in
the OCG1962 and OCG1973 surveys, which contain parental education levels and larger
samples than the PSID or NLSY79. I first ask if education aﬀects income of children from
diﬀerent parental groups in similar ways. If that were the case, it would suggest we can
link these two concepts together with this shared return to schooling as assumed in the
model of Appendix (A).
   To proceed, I decompose children’s earnings into three factors: returns to education, re-
turns to parental group status unrelated to education, and diﬀerential returns to education
38
     For correlation coeﬃcients, the conservative standard errors based on collapsed data used above result
      in confidence intervals that are too wide to be useful. In this case I therefore make a less conservative
      assumption of a Moulton structure in children’s education with respect to parental education, and
      adjust standard errors of correlation coeﬃcients with Moulton factors by race and year.




                                                       35
by parental group status, by estimating regressions of the form

logEarningsg,educ = ↵ +    · educ +   g   · 1 {fatherEduc = g} +  · 1 {fatherEduc = g} · educ
                                                                   g
                                                                                          (18)
for individuals in 10-year birth cohort groups separately on OCG73 and OCG62 data.
Here captures a shared return to schooling, g captures eﬀect of parental background on
earnings through non-education channels such as family connections, and g captures dif-
ferential returns to schooling by parental status due to factors such as educational quality.
   Table A.7 Columns (1)-(5) present the results. I do not reject the hypothesis that
returns to schooling ( ) are the only determinant of children’s earnings for any cohort in
either OCG data set. I am unable to reject the hypothesis that other factors ( g and g )
changed in ways that could have oﬀset the educational gains of children from low-SES
parents. However, the point estimates decline across cohorts, which would amplify eﬀects
of increasing educational mobility on income mobility.
   Therefore changes in children’s education likely imply changes in children’s earnings
across all parental status groups. I now ask if higher income mobility can be observed
directly in the OCG data. For this exercise, I estimate children’s education and income
slopes separately with respect to father’s education, allowing the intercept and slope of
this relationship to change across cohorts. Specifically, I estimate equations of the form

childOutcomeg,c = ⇡ + · fatherEduc + ⌘c · 1 {cohort = c} +                  = c} · fatherEduc
                                                                   c · 1 {cohort
                                                                                          (19)
for individuals in the same 10-year cohorts as before, where childOutcomeg,c is either log
earnings or education, father’s education varies from 7 to 17 years of completed schooling,
⇡ and capture the intercept and slope of the outcome CEF, respectively, and the ⌘c and
  c terms capture changes in the intercept and slope, respectively, across cohorts. I select
cohorts that correspond roughly to cohorts of 26-29 year-olds in the 1940, 1950 and 1960
censueses. These cohorts have earnings that can be observed after age 27 in OCG data
sets (except for the 1940 birth cohort in OCG62) and span the key educational mobility
gains documented above.
   Table A.7 Columns (6)-(9) present the results. The education IM statistics are similar
to those estimated above on census data, and display similar increases in intercepts and
decreases in slopes as in census data, although much less precisely. First note that a return
to one year of schooling around 10% per year suggests that education by itself can explain
about 75% (= 0.1 ⇥ 0.429/0.055) of the gains from having higher-education parents. I
have also replicated this pattern in the 1930-40 matched census panel for parental groups
defined by home value and rent; there education by itself can explain about 50% of the
gains from having higher-status parents.
   Second, note that the gains in educational mobility with respect to parental education
that I document above suggest the CEF rotated up by about one year for children of the
lowest-education parents. Returns to schooling of 10% per year therefore imply that the
income CEF in parental education should increase by 0.1 log points in the intercept and,



                                               36
given the domain of father’s education from 7-17 years, should decrease the slope by about
0.01 log points. This is close to the results in Column (7) for the OCG1973, though again
results are imprecise. In OCG1962, I cannot observe income for the cohort corresponding
to the 1960 census with precision, and results are too imprecise to be useful for the cohort
corresponding to 1950. Overall, these results do suggest that gains in educational mobility
imply gains in income mobility, but are too noisy to demonstrate this conclusively. This
is not surprising given that the motivation for this paper stems from a lack of any precise,
long-term historical time series data on intergenerational income mobility.


D. Data Appendix
Census
I use publicly-available U.S. Decennial Census data from IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2015). I
also use 100% samples of the 1930 and 1940 censuses from the IPUMS collaboration with
Ancestry.com.
   I set age, relation to head, sex, race, earnings, and education to missing if allocated using
quality flags.
   In some cases I work with random samples of households that have no minorities or
foreign-born members to facilitate analysis, scaling person and household weights accord-
ingly.
   I recode “relation to head” as “head” for all individuals who are not reporting relation
to head as one of head, spouse, or child. I then define “dependent” as children living with
parent(s), defining all remaining children as independent. As discussed in the text, this
method treats all individuals who cannot be directly linked to their parents as “indepen-
dent.”
   I set earnings to missing for individuals outside the age range of 25-65. All earnings are
deflated with CPI-Urban to 2000 dollars.

Panel Study of Income Dynamics
Include all observations in the PSID in order to maximize power (including the Survey
Research Center, the Survey of Economic Opportunity), which is especially important for
results on blacks.
  Use individual weights for current years to adjust for diﬀerential selection probabilities
and attrition.
  Impute schooling in future years for individuals who previously reported nonmissing
schooling values.
  Construct household earnings as in the census: set labor earnings to missing for indi-
viduals outside ages 25-65, use labor earnings only, sum earnings of both parents when




                                              37
present otherwise use earnings of single parent. Exclude households with zero total house-
hold income from percentile calculations. Use family income when children are 17, and
either 16 or 17 in years after 1997 when PSID becomes biannual. Calculate deciles in this
parental income variable separately in each calendar year, using current-year individual
sample weights of children.
   Define “dependent” as any individual living with parent(s), otherwise independent.
   For education of parents, I check for any nonmissing mother and father education re-
sponses during years when children are ages 12-17 and dependent, and take median of
reported education values if they diﬀer across these years within individual parents, and
then average these values for head and spouse to obtain parental education. I construct
education ranks for parents in each calendar year separately using current-year individual
sample weights of children.
   Define child race based on parent race. I first identify the mode of races reported by
individual parents when children are ages 12-17. If both parents are white, I define the
child as white. If either parent is black, I define the child as black. I drop children for
whom neither parent is either white or black.
   Define decade labelled “1980” as outcomes observed in calendar years 1980-89, decade
1990 as outcomes observed in calendar years 1990-99, etc.

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979
Restrict to nationally representative sample using “sample type” between values 1 and 8.
   Recode all education variables to conform to census: years over 20 coded as 17.
   Use mother and father’s education as reported by adult respondents from memory, and
average them as with census.
   Define “dependent” as any individual for whom head reports relation as 4-5 (mother or
father), 24-25 (mother or father-in-law), 47 (“parent”), 50-51 (foster parents before 1993)
or 51-52 (foster parents after 1993).
   Use sampling weights provided by NLSY in all calculations.

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997
All choices similar to NLSY79.
   Define “dependent” as any individual for whom head reports relations 3-12 (various types
of parents), and as “independent” otherwise.

General Social Survey
Recode all education variables to span 1-17 grades as in census.
  Take average of adult respondents reported mother’s and father’s education.
  Use number of adults in household as weights, as recommended in GSS documentation.




                                            38
   Define “dependent” as any individual for reporting relation to head as “child,” and as
“independent” otherwise.

Occupational Change in a Generation 1973
Similar to GSS. Use weights provided in survey.

Occupational Change in a Generation 1962
Similar to GSS. Use weights provided in survey. Note only father’s education available,
and only in two-year intervals.


E. The Black High School Movement
One potential explanation for the sharp increase in black mobility after 1940 is the extreme
scarcity of black high schools in Southern states with segregated school systems (Anderson,
1988).39 In 1940, many southern blacks would have had to pay out of pocket for private
and often faraway high schools. Much prior research has documented the importance
of supply-side educational quality improvements in accounting for black-white education
and earnings gaps (e.g., Smith and Welch, 1989; Margo, 1990; Card and Krueger, 1992b;
Donohue III et al., 2002; Aaronson and Mazumder, 2011), but I am not aware of prior
research quantifying impacts of the black high school movement in southern states. Once
again, black high schools are unlikely to provide a full explanation given the similar IM
gains of whites in the South.
   To explore the role of black high schools in more detail I have compiled archival data on
the evolution of black high schools by state from the series “Accredited Secondary Schools
in the United States” from various years 1928-1944 (Phillips and United States Oﬃce of
Education, 1929; Carr and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1930; United States Oﬃce of
Education, 1933; Carr and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1934; United States Oﬃce
of Education, 1937; Carr and of Education, 1939; United States Oﬃce of Education, 1943;
Carr and of Education, 1944) and the series “Directory of Secondary Day Schools” from
years 1949 and 1952 (Rice and United States Oﬃce of Education, 1949, 1952). The volumes
from 1928-44 contain data on the number of accredited white and black high schools in
every state, while the last two volumes from 1949-52 contain data on all white and black
high schools, allowing me to assess whether accredited public high schools proxy well for
all public high schools. The share of all black high schools that are accredited in 1949 and
1952 varies around 30-50% across states with segregated schools, though it is lower in a
few states. To obtain a measure of high school density, I divide the number of white and
black high schools by the number of age 14-17 white and black children, respectively. I
then regress total public black high schools per-capita on accredited black high schools per
39
     I thank Robert Margo for suggesting this explanation.




                                                    39
capita. I obtain coeﬃcients of 1.03 (SE=.18) in 1949 and .82 (SE=.15) in 1952. These
findings suggest that accredited black high schools per capita are plausibly a good proxy
for total black high schools per capita in earlier years. I match high school density in 1928
and 1952 to 26-29 year-olds by state of birth in the 1940 and 1970 censuses, respectively.40
   Figure A.2 plots black and white public high schools per capita, by state, over the years
1928-1952. The figure illustrates the extreme relative scarcity of black high schools in
the U.S. South in 1928, along with striking heterogeneity in convergence over the next 24
years. I exploit this variation using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerences approach by plotting changes
in black mobility across southern states with above- and below-median changes in black
high school density. The “treatment” implied by this comparison is large: an additional
increase of .002 high schools per black high-school age child, which is about two-thirds of
average white high school density in 1952 in the South. Figure A.3 plots non-parametric
education CEFs with respect to parental education in these two groups of states in 1940
and 1970. The figure shows roughly equal gains in mobility for blacks in states with small
vs. large gains in black high school density. This result casts further doubt on the idea that
the black high school movement accounts for black educational mobility gains 1940-70.41




40
   I use the 1970 census rather than the 1960 census for reasons of statistical power; results are similar in
    either case.
41
   I find similar results using a variety of additional diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence estimators that compare states
    with high vs. low growth in black high school density, high vs. low initial black high school density in
    1940, high vs. low growth in relative density of black vs white high schools.




                                                    40
References
Aaronson, D. and B. Mazumder (2008): “Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the
 United States, 1940 to 2000,” Journal of Human Resources, 43, 139–172.

——— (2011): “The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on Black Achievement,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 119, 821–888.

Abramitzky, R., L. P. Boustan, and K. Eriksson (2014): “A Nation of Immigrants:
 Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 122, 467–506.

Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist (2001): “How large are the social returns to education?
 Evidence from compulsory schooling laws,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by
 B. S. Bernanke and K. S. Rogoﬀ, National bureau of economic research, vol. 15.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (2001): “Changes in the wage structure, family in-
 come, and children’s education,” European Economic Review, 45, 890–904.

Anderson, J. D. (1988): The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860-1935, Chapel Hill:
 The University of North Carolina Press, 1 edition ed.

Angrist, J. D. and S. Pischke (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics : An Empiri-
 cist’s Companion, Princeton University Press.

Autor, D., L. Katz, and M. Kearney (2008): “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
 Revising the Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300–323.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and A. B. Krueger (1998): “Computing Inequality: Have
 Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1169–
 1214.

Ayres, L. P. (1920): An Index Number for State School Systems, Department of educa-
 tion, Russell Sage foundation.

Bacolod, M. P. (2007): “Do Alternative Opportunities Matter? The Role of Female La-
 bor Markets in the Decline of Teacher Quality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
 89, 737–751.

Bailey, M. J. and S. M. Dynarski (2011): “Inequality in Postsecondary Education,”
 in Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances, ed.
 by G. J. Duncan and R. J. Murnane, Russell Sage Foundation, 117–132.

Becker, G. S. and N. Tomes (1979): “An equilibrium theory of the distribution of
 income and intergenerational mobility,” Journal of Political Economy.




                                          41
——— (1986): “Human capital and the rise and fall of families.” Journal of labor economics,
 4, 1–47.

Belley, P. and L. Lochner (2007): “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability
 in Determining Educational Achievement,” Journal of Human Capital, 1, 37–89.

Benabou, R. and E. A. Ok (2001): “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution:
 the POUM Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012): “The
 role of application assistance and information in college decisions: results from the H&R
 Block FAFSA Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1205–1242.

Bhattacharya, D. and B. Mazumder (2011): “A nonparametric analysis of black-
 white diﬀerences in intergenerational income mobility in the United States,” Quantitative
 Economics, 2, 335–379.

Black, S. E. and P. J. Devereux (2011): “Recent Developments in Intergenerational
 Mobility,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Elsevier B.V., vol. 4, 1487–1541.

Bratberg, E., J. Davis, B. Mazumder, K. Vaage, M. Nybom, and
 D. Schnitzlein (2015):         “A Comparison of Intergenerational Mobility
 Curves in Germany, Norway, Sweden and the U. S,” URL: http://folk. uib.
 no/secaa/Public/Trygd2014/InternationalMobilityCurves20Feb2015. pdf.

Bratsberg, B., K. RÃžed, O. Raaum, R. Naylor, M. JaÂšntti, T. Eriksson,
 and E. OÂšsterbacka (2007): “Nonlinearities in Intergenerational Earnings Mobility:
 Consequences for Cross-Country Comparisons*,” The Economic Journal, 117, C72–C92.

Braun, S. and J. Stuhler (2015): “The Transmission of Inequality Across Multiple
 Generations: Testing Recent Theories with Evidence from Germany,” Tech. rep., Mimeo,
 November 2014, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Bureau of the Census (1988): 1980 Census of Population and Housing: The coverage
 of population in the 1980 census, U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1993): “Comment on Trends in College Entry
 among Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics by Robert M. Hauser,” in Studies of Supply and
 Demand in Higher Education, ed. by C. T. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild, University of
 Chicago Press, January, 61–120.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992a): “Does School Quality Matter ? Returns to
 Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” The Journal
 of Political Economy, 100, 1–40.




                                           42
——— (1992b): “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct Assess-
 ment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 151–200.

Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2000): “Adapting to Circumstances: The Evolution of Work,
 School,and Living Arrangements among North American Youth,” in Youth Employment
 and Joblessness in Advanced Countries, ed. by D. Blanchflower and R. B. Freeman,
 171–214.

Carr, M. J. S. and U. S. O. of Education (1939): Accredited Secondary Schools in
 the United States. Bulletin, 1939, No. 2, Oﬃce of Education, United States Department
 of the Interior.

——— (1944): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States, 1944. Bulletin, 1944,
 No. 4, US Oﬃce of Education, Federal Security Agency.

Carr, M. J. S. and United States Office of Education (1930): Accredited Sec-
 ondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1930, No. 24, Oﬃce of Education, United
 States Department of the Interior.

——— (1934): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1934, No. 17,
 Oﬃce of Education, United States Department of the Interior.

Carrell, S. E. and B. Sacerdote (2013): “Why Do College Going Interventions
 Work?” Working Paper 19031, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009):
 “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
 1639–1674.

Checchi, D., A. Ichino, and A. Rustichini (1999): “More equal but less mobile?:
 Education financing and intergenerational mobility in Italy and in the US,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 74, 351–393.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and
 D. Yagan (2011): “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Aﬀect Your Earnings?
 Evidence from Project Star,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1593–1660.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, S. Leth-Peterson, T. H. Nielsen, and T. Olsen
 (2013): “Active vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts:
 Evidence from Denmark,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 0–83.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2015): “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenera-
 tional Mobility: Childhood Exposure Eﬀects and County-Level Estimates,” Unpublished
 Manuscript.




                                          43
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014a): “Where is the land of
 Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1553–1623.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez, and N. Turner (2014b): “Is the
 United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility,”
 American Economic Review, 104, 141–147.

Clark, G. (2014): The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility,
 Princeton University Press.

Cogan, J. (1982): “The Decline in Black Teenage Employment: 1950-70,” The American
 Economic Review, 72, 621–638.

Corak, M. (2006): “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults ? Lessons from a Cross
 Country Comparison of Generational Earnings Mobility,” IZA Discussion Paper 1993.

——— (2013): “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobil-
 ity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27, 79–102.

Costa, D. L. (2015): “Health and the Economy in the United States from 1750 to the
 Present,” Journal of Economic Literature, 53, 503–570.

Denison, E. F. (1985): Trends in American Economic Growth, 1929-1982, Brookings
 Institution Press.

Donohue III, J. J., J. J. Heckman, and P. E. Todd (2002): “The Schooling of
 Southern Blacks: The Roles of Legal Activism and Private Philanthropy, 1910-1960,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Dynarski, S. and J. Scott-clayton (2013): “Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from
 Research,” The Future of Children, 23.

Dynarski, S. M. and J. E. Scott-Clayton (2008): “Complexity and Targeting in
 Federal Student Aid: A Quantitative Analysis,” Tax Policy and the Economy, 22, 109–
 150.

Edin, K. and M. J. Kefalas (2011): Promises I Can Keep: Why Poor Women Put
 Motherhood before Marriage, Berkeley: University of California Press, revised ed.

Erikson, R. and J. H. Goldthorpe (1992): The Constant Flux: A Study of Class
 Mobility in Industrial Societies, Oxford England : New York: Oxford University Press.

Fack, G. and J. Grenet (2015): “Improving College Access and Success for Low-Income
  Students: Evidence from a Large Need-Based Grant Program,” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 1–34.



                                           44
Feigenbaum, J. J. (2015):        “Automated Census Record Linking,” Unpublished
  Manuscript.

Folger, J. K. and C. B. Nam (1967): Education of the American Population, U.S.
 Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

Galor, O. and D. Tsiddon (1997): “Technological Progress, Mobility, and Economic
 Growth,” The American Economic Review, 87, 363–382.

Goldin, C. (1998): “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread
 of Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” The Journal of Economic History,
 58, 345–374.

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2010): The Race between Education and Technology, Cam-
 bridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.

Goldin, C. and R. A. Margo (1992): “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure
 in the United States at Mid-Century,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 1–34.

Greene, W. H. (2002): Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.

Grusky, D. B., T. M. Smeeding, and C. M. Snipp (2015): “A New Infrastructure
 for Monitoring Social Mobility in the United States,” The ANNALS of the American
 Academy of Political and Social Science, 657, 63–82.

Harding, D. J., C. Jencks, L. M. Lopoo, and S. E. Mayer (2009): “The changing
 eﬀect of family background on the incomes of American adults,” in Unequal Chances:
 Family Background and Economic Success, ed. by S. Bowles, H. Gintis, and M. O.
 Groves, Princeton University Press.

Heckman, J. J. and P. a. Lafontaine (2010): “the American High School Graduation
 Rate: Trends and Levels.” The review of economics and statistics, 92, 244–262.

Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006): “Earnings Functions, Rates
 of Return and Treatment Eﬀects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond,” Handbook of the
 Economics of Education, 1.

Hertz, T. (2007): “Trends in the Intergenerational Elasticity of Family Income in the
 United States,” Industrial Relations, 46, 22–50.

Hertz, T., T. Jayasundera, P. Piraino, S. Selcuk, N. Smith, and A. Ve-
 rashchagina (2008): “The Inheritance of Educational Inequality: International Com-
 parisons and Fifty-Year Trends,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7.

Hilger, N. G. (2016): “Upward Mobility and Discrimination: the Case of Asian-
  Americans,” Unpublished Manuscript.



                                         45
Hoxby, C. M. and A. Leigh (2004): “Pulled Away or Pushed Out? Explaining the
 Decline of Teacher Aptitude in the United States,” The American Economic Review, 94,
 236–240.

Husted, T. A. and L. W. Kenny (1997): “The Eﬀect of the Expansion of the Voting
 Franchise on the Size of Government,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 54–82.

Jackson, C. K., R. C. Johnson, and C. Persico (2015): “The Eﬀects of School Spend-
  ing on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms*,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, qjv036.

Jantti, M., B. Bratsberg, K. Roed, O. Raaum, R. Naylor, E. Osterbacka,
  A. Bjorklund, and T. Eriksson (2006): “American Exceptionalism in a New Light:
  A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic Countries, the United
  Kingdom and the United States,” IZA DP 1938.

Johnson, D. S., C. Massey, and A. O’Hara (2015): “The Opportunities and Chal-
  lenges of Using Administrative Data Linkages to Evaluate Mobility,” The ANNALS of
  the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 657, 247–264.

Kaplan, G. (2012): “Moving Back Home: Insurance against Labor Market Risk,” Journal
 of Political Economy, 120, 446–512.

Kearney, M. S. and P. B. Levine (2012): “Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United
 States So High and Why Does It Matter?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26,
 141–66.

Krueger, A. B. (2012): “The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States,”
 Tech. rep., Washington D.C.

Lee, C.-I. and G. Solon (2009): “Trends in intergenerational income mobility,” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 91, 766–772.

Lemieux, T. (2006): “The "Mincer Equation" Thirty Years after Schooling, Experience
  and Earnings",” in Jacob Mincer: A Pioneer of Modern Labor Economics.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2002): “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Eﬀec-
  tive? An Analysis from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics, 45, 401–435.

Lochner, L. J. and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011): “The Nature of Credit Constraints
 and Human Capital,” American Economic Review, 101, 2487–2529.

Long, J. and J. Ferrie (2013): “Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great
 Britain and the United States Since 1850,” American Economic Review, 103, 2041–2049.




                                           46
Loury, G. C. (1981): “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,”
 Econometrica, 49, 843–867.

Margo, R. A. (1986): “Race and Human Capital : Comment,” The American Economic
 Review, 76, 1221–1224.

——— (1990): Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History,
 Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 1 edition ed.

Margo, R. A. and T. A. Finegan (1993): “The Decline in Black Teenage Labor-Force
 Participation in the South, 1900- 1970: The Role of Schooling,” The American Economic
 Review, 83, 234–247.

Mayer, S. E. and L. M. Lopoo (2008): “Government spending and intergenerational
 mobility,” Journal of Public Economics, 92, 139–158.

Mazumder, B. (2005): “Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility
 in the United States Using Social Security Earnings Data,” Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 87, 235–255.

——— (2015): “Estimating the Intergenerational Elasticity and Rank association in the
 US: Overcoming the current limitations of tax data,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
 Working Paper 2015-04.

Mazumder, B. and M. Acosta (2015): “Using Occupation to Measure Intergenerational
 Mobility,” The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 657,
 174–193.

Minnesota Population Center and Ancestry.com (2013): “IPUMS Restricted
 Complete Count Data: Version 1.0 [Machine-readable database],” Tech. rep., University
 of Minnesota, Minneapolis.

Mitnik, P. A., V. Bryant, M. Weber, and D. B. Grusky (2015): “New Estimates
 of Intergenerational Mobility Using Administrative Data,” Working Paper.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1991): “The allocation of talent:
 implications for growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 503–530.

National Center for Education Statistics (1984): “High School and Beyond, a
 National Longitudinal Study for the 1980s: Quality of Responses of High School Students
 to Questionnaire Items,” Tech. rep.

National Research Council (2006): Once, Only Once, and in the Right Place: Resi-
 dence Rules in the Decennial Census, Washington, D.C: National Academies Press.




                                          47
Neal, D. (2006): “Chapter 9: Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?” in
 Handbook of the Economics of Education, Elsevier, vol. 1, 511–576.

Nybom, M. and J. Stuhler (2014): “Interpreting Trends in Intergenerational Mobility,”
 Tech. rep.

Olivetti, C. and M. D. Paserman (2015): “In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter):
 Intergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940,” American Economic Review,
 105, 2695–2724.

Olivetti, C., M. D. Paserman, and L. Salisbury (2014): “Intergenerational Mo-
 bility Across Three Generations in the 19th Century : Evidence from the US Census,”
 Unpublished Manuscript.

Owen, A. L. and D. N. Weil (1998): “Intergenerational earnings mobility, inequality
 and growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 41, 71–104.

Phillips, F. M. and United States Office of Education (1929): Accredited Sec-
 ondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1928, No. 26, Bureau of Education, De-
 partment of the Interior.

Piketty, T. (1995): “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 110.

Reardon, S. F. (2011): “The Widening Academic Achievement Gap Between the Rich
 and the Poor: New Evidence and Possible Explanations Sean F. Reardon,” in Whither
 Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances, ed. by G. J.
 Duncan and R. J. Murnane, Russell Sage Foundation.

Rice, M. C. and United States Office of Education (1952): Directory of sec-
  ondary day schools, 1951-52: showing accredited status, enrollment, staﬀ, and other
  data, Washington, D.C.: Federal Security Agency, Oﬃce of Education.

Rice, M. F. C. and United States Office of Education (1949): Directory of
  secondary schools in the United States, Circular (United States. Oﬃce of Education)250,
  Washington: U. S. Govt. Print. Oﬀ.

Rosenbloom, J. L. and W. A. Sundstrom (1999): “The Sources of Regional Variation
 in the Severity of the Great Depression: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing, 1919-1937,”
 The Journal of Economic History, 59, 714–747.

Ruggles, S. J., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek (2015):
 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]., Min-
 neapolis: University of Minnesota.




                                           48
Smith, J. P. and F. R. Welch (1989): “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 27, 519–564.

Smith, P. J. (1984): “Race and Human Capital,” The American Economic Review, 74,
  685–698.

Solon, G. (1992): “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” The Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 82, 393–408.

——— (1999): “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Handbook of Labor
 Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier Science B.V., vol. 3.

——— (2004): “A Model of Intergenerational Mobility Variation over Time and Place,”
 in Generational Income Mobility in North America and Europe, ed. by M. Corak, Cam-
 bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1979, 38–47.

——— (2015): “What Do We Know So Far about Multigenerational Mobility?” Working
 Paper 21053, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Stephens, Jr., M. and D.-y. Yang (2014): “Compulsory Education and the Benefits
  of Schooling,” The American Economic Review, 104, 1777–1792.

Stuhler, J. (2014): “Mobility Across Multiple Generations,” Unpublished Manuscript.

Torche, F. (2015): “Analyses of Intergenerational Mobility An Interdisciplinary Review,”
 The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 657, 37–62.

Turner, S. and J. Bound (2003): “closing the gap or widening the divide: the eﬀects
 of the G.I. bill and world war II on the educational outcomes of black americans,” The
 Journal of Economic History, 63.

United States Office of Education (1933): Accredited Secondary Schools in the
 United States. Supplement to Bulletin, 1930, No. 24, Oﬃce of Education, United States
 Department of the Interior.

——— (1937): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Supplement to Bulletin,
 1934, No. 17, Oﬃce of Education, United States Department of the Interior.

——— (1943): Accredited Secondary Schools in the United States. Bulletin, 1942, No. 3.
 Supplement to Bulletin, 1939, No. 2, US Oﬃce of Education, Federal Security Agency.

Wright, G. (1986): Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since
 the Civil War, New York: Basic Books.

——— (1987): “The economic revolution in the American South,” The Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 161–178.



                                          49
50
                                     Table I: Educational Attainment by Age, Year, and Race
     Notes: Table presents highest grade attained by age and year for whites and blacks separately in census data.
51
                       Table II: Percent of Children Living at Home with Parents by Age, Year, and Race
     Notes: Table presents share of children living at home with identifiable parents by age and year for whites and blacks separately
     in census data.
52
                                          Table III: Parallel Trends in Parental Education
     Notes: Each column displays estimates of equation (6) for children’s schooling at ages 26-29 by parental income deciles.
     Parental characteristics measured when children are age 17, or earlier in adolescence if not observed at age 17. Children’s
     schooling excludes zeros. Parental education defined as average of mother’s and father’s educational attainment, or educational
     attainment of the single parent when second parent not observed. Children with parental education in the bottom 2% of the
     parental education distribution excluded. Sample weights used in all calculations.
53
                                       Table IV: Parallel Trends in Parental Income Deciles
     Notes: Each column displays estimates of equation (6) for children’s schooling at ages 26-29 by parental income deciles.
     Parental characteristics measured when children are age 17, or earlier in adolescence if not observed at age 17. Children’s
     schooling excludes zeros. Parental income defined as sum of mother’s and father’s earnings when possible, otherwise as total
     family income. Children with zero parental income at age 17 excluded from the parental income figures. Parental income
     deciles calculated separately by year. Sample weights used in all calculations.
54
                                      Table V: Determinants of Dependent and Marital Status
     Notes: Table reports regression estimates in PSID and NLSY79 samples described in text. Columns (1) and (5) regress dummies
     for dependent status on various regressors in sample restricting to ages 22-25. Columns (2) and (6) repeat these regressions for
     samples age 26-29, and indicate much smaller coeﬃcients and R2 at these older ages. Columns (3) and (7) regress dummies for
     married on various regressions in sample restricting to ages 18-25. Columns (4) and (8) repeat these regressions for samples age
     26-29, and again indicate much smaller coeﬃcients and R2 at these older ages. All regressions use sample weights and restrictions
     described in text.
55
                      Table VI: Validation of Group Cohort Size Predictors in Parental Education, Whites
     Notes: Documents ability to predict group cohort sizes at later ages with group cohort sizes at earlier ages. Columns (1)-(3)
     regress actual parental education group cohort shares at ages 16-17 on predicted parental education group cohort shares at
     ages 16-17 and a constant, where each column uses a diﬀerent predictor. Columns (4)-(10) run the regression in Column (1)
     separately by census year 1940-2000. Regressions for white-only sample. All regressions weighted by the square root of the cell
     size.
56
                       Table VII: Validation of Group Cohort Size Predictors in Parental Income, Whites
     Notes: Documents ability to predict group cohort sizes at later ages with group cohort sizes at earlier ages. Columns (1)-(3)
     regress actual parental income group cohort shares at ages 16-17 on predicted parental income group cohort shares at ages 16-17
     and a constant, where each column uses a diﬀerent predictor. Columns (4)-(10) run the regression in Column (1) separately by
     census year 1940-2000. Regressions for white-only sample. All regressions weighted by the square root of the cell size.
              Table VIII: Mobility Estimates in Parental Education, Whites
Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of children’s schooling CEFs with respect to
parental education for whites. Estimates correspond to ↵t and t from Equation (9).
Regressions weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes.




                                              57
               Table IX: Mobility Estimates in Parental Education, Blacks
Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of children’s schooling CEFs with respect to
parental education for blacks. Estimates correspond to ↵t and t from Equation (9). Regressions
weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes.




                                             58
             Table X: Mobility Estimates in Parental Income Deciles, Whites
Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of children’s schooling CEFs with respect to
parental income deciles for whites. Presents estimates of ↵t and t from Equation (9).
Regressions weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes.




                                              59
             Table XI: Mobility Estimates in Parental Income Deciles, Blacks
Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of children’s schooling CEFs with respect to
parental income deciles for blacks. Estimates correspond to ↵t and t from Equation (9).
Regressions weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes.




                                              60
              Table XII: Mobility Regressions on State-Year Panel 1940-2000
Notes: Table displays estimates from bivariate regressions of educational mobility CEF slopes
(child education on parent education) on various covariates. OLS, fixed eﬀect and first-diﬀerence
models described in text. Standard errors clustered at state-of-birth level. All regressions
unweighted. Mobility varies by year, state-of-birth and race. All other variables vary by year
and state-of-birth, or year and state. White and black samples vary due to requirement that
CEFs underlying mobility statistics be non-missing for at least 60% of parental group levels.
Mobility statistics for state-of-birth panel analysis constructed on children age 20-29. Dropout
age, class size and relative teacher wage matched to to census from year at which age 20-29
year-old children would have been approximately age 14, and are only matched to censuses
1940-70 using data from Stephens and Yang (2014). Log household earnings and earnings
inequality constructed from household earnings distribution (head + spouse) for heads of
household age 30-65 in year children turn 20-29 and living in child’s state of birth. Migration
and urbanization constructed from age 20-29 year-olds by state of birth and year.




                                               61
62
                Table XIII: Mobility Regressions on Income Level and Inequality in State-Year Panel, 1940-2000
     Notes: Table presents OLS, FE and FD regressions of mobility by state-of-birth, year and race on average log of household
     earnings and interquartile gap in log of household earnings. Constants omitted from table for convenience.
63
                              Table XIV: Educational IM Under Alternative Assumptions, 1940-2000
     Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of children’s schooling CEFs with respect to parental income deciles for blacks.
     Estimates correspond to ↵t and t from Equation (9). Regressions weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes. Columns
     (1)-(2) replicate basic results with respect to parental income deciles which exclude families with zero parental income. Columns
     (3)-(4) include families with zero parental income, imputing their income based on demographic characteristics as described in
     text. Columns (5)-(6) scale up the number of dependents at age 17 disproportionately for lower-SES families to account for
     children who have already become independent at these ages, then re-calculates the adjustment for missing independent children.
64
                      Table A.1: Validation of Group Cohort Size Predictors in Parental Education, Blacks
     Notes: Columns (1)-(3) regress actual parental education group cohort shares at ages 16-17 on predicted parental education
     group cohort shares at ages 16-17 and a constant, where each column uses a diﬀerent predictor. Columns (4)-(10) run the
     regression in Column (1) separately by census year 1940-2000. Regressions for black-only sample. All regressions weighted by
     the square root of the cell size.
65
                       Table A.2: Validation of Group Cohort Size Predictors in Parental Income, Blacks
     Notes: Columns (1)-(3) regress actual parental income group cohort shares at ages 16-17 on predicted parental income group
     cohort shares at ages 16-17 and a constant, where each column uses a diﬀerent predictor. Columns (4)-(10) run the regression
     in Column (1) separately by census year 1940-2000. Regressions for black-only sample. All regressions weighted by the square
     root of the cell size.
66
                         Table A.3: Parallel Trends for Child Education Rank in Parental Income Decile
     Notes: Each column displays estimates of equation (6) for children’s education rank at ages 26-29 by parental income deciles.
     Parental characteristics measured when children are age 17, or earlier in adolescence if not observed at age 17. Children’s
     schooling excludes zeros. Parental income defined as sum of mother’s and father’s earnings when possible, otherwise as total
     family income. Children with zero parental income at age 17 excluded from the parental income figures. Parental income
     deciles calculated separately by year. Sample weights used in all calculations. Regressions on collapsed data weighted by
     square of cell size.
67
                        Table A.4: Parallel Trends for Child Education Rank in Parental Education Rank
     Notes: Each column displays estimates of equation (6) for children’s education rank at ages 26-29 by parental education rank.
     Parental characteristics measured when children are age 17, or earlier in adolescence if not observed at age 17. Children’s
     schooling excludes zeros. Parental education rank defined as the percentile of the average of mother’s and father’s educational
     attainment, where ties are assigned the minimum rank over the tied interval. Sample weights used in all calculations.
     Regressions on collapsed data weighted by square of cell size.
Table A.5: Rank-Rank Educational Mobility Estimates in Parental Income and Education
Notes: Displays estimated intercepts and slopes of age 26-29 children’s schooling rank CEFs
with respect to parental income and education ranks. All ranks on scale from 0 to 100. Ranks
computed on full population for each age and year for children, and for each year for parents
pooling ages 26-65. Parental income rank ignores zeros. Ties in all rankings are assigned
midpoints of rank intervals. Bottom 2% of reported educational attainment in each year
dropped from sample. Estimates correspond to ↵t and t from Equation (9). Regressions
weighted by square root of estimated cell sizes.




                                              68
69
                                   Table A.6: Summary Statistics for Variables in Panel Analysis
     Notes: Table displays summary statistics for whites and blacks separately. Mobility varies by year, state-of-birth and race. All
     other variables vary by year and state-of-birth, or year and state. White and black samples vary due to requirement that CEFs
     underlying mobility statistics be non-missing for at least 60% of parental group levels. Mobility statistics for state-of-birth
     panel analysis constructed on children age 20-29. “HS per capita” and “HS PC” refer to number of public high schools per age
     14-17 year-old children in state-of-birth and year, and are only matched to census years 1940, 1960 and 1970 from high school
     data sets in years 1928, 1949 and 1952, respectively to match age at high school attendance as closely as possible with available
     data. Dropout age, class size and relative teacher wage matched to to census from year at which age 20-29 year-old children
     would have been approximately age 14, and are only matched to censuses 1940-70 using data from Stephens and Yang (2014).
     Log household earnings and earnings inequality constructed from household earnings distribution (head + spouse) for heads of
     household age 30-65 in year children turn 20-29 and living in child’s state of birth. Migration and urbanization constructed
     from age 20-29 year-olds by state of birth and year.
70
                            Table A.7: Returns to Schooling by Parental Group and IM Statistics in OCG
     Notes: Documents similar returns to schooling across father’s education groups, and children’s schooling and log earnings CEFs in father’s
     education, together suggesting that educational mobility gains likely increased income mobility gains. Displays various regressions on
     OCG1962 and OCG1973 data. Columns (1)-(5) assess whether the returns to schooling diﬀer by parental background. Columns (6)-(9)
     assess whether changes in mobility can be observed directly in OCG data. All regresssions restricted to whites. Underlying data collapsed
     prior to regression to child’s education by father’s education by cohort cells in columns (1)-(5) and to father’s education by cohort level in
     columns (6)-(9). Sample weights used in collapse but not in regressions. Note father’s education can take on any integer values between 7
     and 17 in OCG1973 sample, but can only take on values of 8, 10, 12, 14, 16 in OCG1962. Columns (1)-(5) regress log of earnings on years
     of schooling, father’s education, and the interaction of these two variables, separately for each 10-year birth cohort and OCG data set.
     Columns (6) and (7) regress education and log of earnings, respectively, on father’s education, 10-year cohort dummies, and the
     interaction of these two variables in the OCG73 data. Columns (8) and (9) repeat the exercise in columns (6) and (7), respectively, on the
     OCG62 data.
71
          Table A.8: Percent of Children with Missing and Zero Values for Parental Characteristics, by Year and Race
     Notes: Sample restricted to children living with parents age 26-29 in census data.
                              14




                                                                                                                     1
                                         12




                                                                                                                     .8
                  Highest Grade Attained




                                                                                                                     Fraction Dependent
                                 10




                                                                                                                                 .6
                         8




                                                                                                                         .4
                 6




                                                                                                                     .2
                              4




                                                                                                                     0
                                              10   12      14     16      18    20    22    24     26    28     30
                                                                                Age

                                                        Schooling [left axis]         Dependency Rate [right axis]



                Figure I: Schooling and Dependency Status by Age in 1980
Notes: Red line plots fraction of native-born white children living with parents by age in 1980.
Blue line plots average schooling of native-born children by age in 1980.




                                                                                72
                15




                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                              Child's Years of Schooling Completed
 Years of Schooling Completed
                        14




                                                                                                                         14
              13




                                                                                                               13
   12




                                                                                                    12
                11




                                                                                                                  11
                                1    2   3   4         5       6        7     8     9   10                                             5              10                       15             20
                                                 Parental Income Decile                                                                          Parent's Years of Schooling Completed

                                             Dependent                Independent                                                                     Dependent                 Independent



                                    (a) Parental Income, PSID                                                                          (b) Parental Education, PSID
                16




                                                                                                                1516
                   15
 Child's Education




                                                                                              Child's Education
                                                                                                        14
         14




                                                                                               13
                13




                                                                                                                  12
                12




                                1    2   3   4         5       6        7     8     9   10                                             5              10                        15            20
                                                 Parental Income Decile                                                                                    Parental Education

                                             Dependent                Independent                                                                     Dependent                 Independent



                                (c) Parental Income, NLSY79                                                           (d) Parental Education, NLSY79
                16




                                                                                                                  16
                   15




                                                                                                                15
 Child's Education




                                                                                              Child's Education
         14




                                                                                                      14
                13




                                                                                                                  13
                12




                                                                                                                  12




                                1    2   3   4         5       6        7     8     9   10                                             8    10             12             14             16   18
                                                 Parental Income Decile                                                                                    Parental Education

                                             Dependent                Independent                                                                     Dependent                 Independent



                                (e) Parental Income, NLSY97                                                               (f) Parental Education, NLSY97

   Figure II: Highest Grade Attained at Ages 26-29 by Parental Characteristics at Age 17
Notes: Figures based on data from PSID, NLSY79, and NLSY97 pooling years 1968-2011, 1994-
2011, and 1997-2011 respectively. Parental characteristics measured when children are age 17,
or earlier in adolescence if not observed at age 17. Children’s schooling at ages 26-29 set to
missing when reported as zero. Children with zero parental income at age 17 excluded from
parental income figures. Income deciles calculated separately by year. Parental education defined
as average of mother’s and father’s education, or education of single parent when necessary.
Children with parental education in bottom 2% of distribution excluded from parental education
figures. Sample weights used in all calculations.




                                                                                             73
                14




                                                                                                            13          12
                            13
 Years of Schooling Completed




                                                                                            Years of Schooling Completed
                                                                                                                  11
                     12




                                                                                                             10
              11




                                                                                                       9
       10




                                                                                                8
 9




                                                                                                            7
                8




                                                                                                            6
                                 1   2   3    4       5      6      7      8     9   10                                      1   2   3    4       5      6      7      8     9   10
                                             Parental Home Value Decile                                                                  Parental Home Value Decile

                                             Dependent             Independent                                                           Dependent             Independent



(a) By Parental Home Value, Whites                                                         (b) By Parental Home Value, Blacks
                13




                                                                                                            11
                            12




                                                                                                                       10
 Years of Schooling Completed




                                                                                            Years of Schooling Completed
                     11




                                                                                                                 9
              10




                                                                                                         8
        9




                                                                                                   7
 8




                                                                                            6
                7




                                                                                                            5
                                 1   2   3   4        5     6       7      8     9   10                                      1   2   3   4        5     6       7      8     9   10
                                             Parental Home Rent Decile                                                                   Parental Home Rent Decile

                                             Dependent             Independent                                                           Dependent             Independent



                                 (c) By Parental Rent, Whites                                                                (d) By Parental Rent, Blacks

                                     Figure III: Final Schooling at Ages 24-27 in 1940 by Parental Group Status
Notes: Figures plot highest grade attained for ages 24-27 by parental home value or rent deciles
based on matched 1930-1940 census data. Families with zero rent and earnings in 1930 excluded.
Deciles calculated on full population of parents with any children age 10-17 in 1930, including all
non-farm owner-occupied or renter-occupied units, weighting by number of children.




                                                                                          74
                                                                                                       16
                            1




                                                                                                                     15
                            .8




                                                                                     Child's Highest Grade Completed
                                                                                                            14
                     Pr(High Skill)
                            .6




                                                                                                 13
                            .4




                                                                                     12                11
                            .2




                                      6   7   8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17                                                 6   7   8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
                                              Average Parental Education                                                          Average Parental Education

                                                 p_dep               p_indep                                                          h_high                  h_low




                                                               (a) Parental Education
                            1




                                                                                                       15
                            .8




                                                                                      Child's Highest Grade Completed
                                                                                                                 14
                     Pr(High Skill)
                          .6




                                                                                                    13
                            .4




                                                                                     12                11
                            .2




                                      1   2    3   4    5    6   7    8   9    10                                         1   2    3   4    5    6   7    8      9    10
                                                Parental Income Decile                                                              Parental Income Decile

                                                 p_dep               p_indep                                                          h_high                  h_low




                                                                  (b) Parental Income

 Figure IV: Ability Composition and Educational Attainment by Parental Group Status
Notes: Figure shows that conditions required for parallel trends appear reasonable in data from
NLSY79. The left figure in panel (a) displays the probability that children are above-median
AFQT separately for dependents and independents by average parental educational attainment.
The right figure in panel (a) displays final schooling for above- and below-median AFQT children
at ages 26-29 by parental educational attainment. Parental education defined as average of mother
and father, or education of one parent if education of both parents not available. Panel (b) repeats
panel (a) but with respect to parental income deciles. Parental income deciles defined using sum
of mother’s and father’s earnings when child age 17.




                                                                                    75
                  .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 .13 .14 .15
                                  Group Share




                                                               1   3   5     7    9     11     13   15 17        19   21   23   25   27   29
                                                                                                    Age

                                                                           1st Decile               5th Decile              10th Decile


                                                                                         (a) Whites
                                        .3
                  Group Share
                           .2           .1
                                        0




                                                               1   3   5     7    9     11     13   15 17        19   21   23   25   27   29
                                                                                                    Age

                                                                           1st Decile               5th Decile              10th Decile


                                                                                             (b) Blacks

     Figure V: Share of Dependent Children in Parental Income Decile by Age, 1940
Notes: Figures plot frequencies for white native-born children living with parents by age and
race in 1940 100% IPUMS data sample.




                                                                                                76
                    5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                     Child's Highest Grade Completed
                                     4




                                                       0   2   4       6       8       10    12     14               16   18
                                                                   Parent's Highest Grade Completed

                                                                   White, Dependents                  White, Total
                                                                   Black, Dependents                  Black, Total


                 (a) Education CEF in Parental Education, Before and After Ad-
                     justment
                                 9 10 11 12 13 14
                    Child's Highest Grade Completed
                    6   7    8       5




                                                       1   2   3       4         5       6        7        8         9    10
                                                                           Parental Income Decile

                                                                   White, Dependents                  White, Total
                                                                   Black, Dependents                  Black, Total


                 (b) Education CEF in Parental Income Decile, Before and After
                     Adjustment

  Figure VI: Final Schooling Attainment at ages 26-29 by Parental Group Status, 1940
Notes: Figure plots estimated final schooling pooling separate estimates for ages 26-29, using
the correction for independent children described in the text. Uncorrected estimates restrict to
dependent children who can be linked with parents directly.




                                                                                 77
                                   .8           .7
                      Slope of Educ-Educ Gradient
                    .2    .3    .4 .1.5   .6




                                                     1930   1940      1950    1960     1970     1980   1990       2000
                                                                               Year Age 20

                                                             Census          PSID             NLSY79          NLSY97
                                                             OCG73           GSS55            GSS27



                                                                             (a) Whites
                                   .8          .7
                     Slope of Educ-Educ Gradient
                    .2   .3    .4   .5
                                   .1     .6




                                                     1930   1940      1950    1960     1970     1980   1990       2000
                                                                               Year Age 20

                                                             Census          PSID             NLSY79          NLSY97
                                                             OCG73           GSS55            GSS27



                                                                             (b) Blacks

            Figure VII: Educational Mobility in Parental Education, 1930-2000
Notes: Figure plots slopes from regression of child education on parental education by year. Child
and parental education defined and adjusted for independentts as described in text. “Year” in
census denotes year cohorts turn ages 26-29. “Year” in PSID, NLSY79, and NLSY97 denotes
decades, e.g. “1980” reflects cohorts turning 26-29 in 1980-89. “Year” in OCG73, GSS55 and
GSS27 defined as year cohorts would have turned 20-29. “GSS55” and “GSS27” refer to cohorts
in the GSS age 55-65 and 27-37, respectively, over the years 1972-2012. All estimates use sample
weights and exclude bottom 2% of parental education distribution.




                                                                                78
                                     .8
                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
                    Slope of Educ-IncDecile Gradient
                                     0




                                                       1940   1950   1960        1970       1980      1990   2000
                                                                              Year Age 20

                                                                            Census           PSID
                                                                            NLSY79           NLSY97



                                                                        (a) Whites
                                     .8
                    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
                    Slope of Educ-IncDecile Gradient
                                     0




                                                       1940   1950   1960        1970       1980      1990   2000
                                                                              Year Age 20

                                                                            Census           PSID
                                                                            NLSY79           NLSY97



                                                                            (b) Blacks

         Figure VIII: Educational Mobility in Parental Income Decile, 1940-2000
Notes: Figure plots slopes from regression of child education on population parental income decile
by year. Child education and parental income decile defined as described in text. Census estimates
adjusted for independents as described in text. “Year” in census defined as year available cohorts
turn ages 26-29. “Year” in PSID, NLSY79, and NLSY97 defined as decades, e.g. “1980” reflects
cohorts of children turning 26-29 during the years 1980-89. All estimates make use of sample
weights and exclude zero incomes.




                                                                                79
                                                                 45
                                                                                                                                                                                  North Dakota




                    Schooling Rank-Rank Intercept in Census Data
                                                                                                                                   Vermont




                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                     Montana
                                                                                                                           Rhode Island
                                                                                                                           Connecticut                             South Dakota
                                                                                                                        Massachusetts                                                Nebraska
                                                                                                                              New York
                                                                                                                                New Jersey             Wisconsin           Minnesota
                                                                                                                             New Hampshire




                                         35
                                                                                                                                                                             Iowa
                                                                                                                                       Illinois
                                                                                                                                                          Kansas
                                                                                           Delaware                    Oregon
                                                                                                                               California
                                                                                                                                    Colorado       Idaho
                               30                                                                                  OhioMaine                      Pennsylvania                Wyoming
                                                                                                                    Michigan             Oklahoma
                                                                                   Mississippi                                 Missouri
                                                                                                                    Maryland Nevada
                                                                                                                                        Texas
                                                                              North CarolinaAlabama                    Indiana
                                                                                                                            Washington
                                                                              South Carolina           Virginia
                                                                                                                New Mexico
                                                                                            Tennessee Arizona
                                                                                                            Arkansas
                                                                                                            Kentucky                                                Utah
                                                                                                 Florida                        West Virginia
                    25




                                                                                                        Louisiana
                                                                                     Georgia

                                                                      35                           40              45                 50                                                         55
                                                                                                   Income Rank-Rank Intercept in Tax Data


                                                                                               (a) Absolute Upward Mobility
                                                             .45
                    Schooling Rank-Rank Slope in Census Data




                                                                                                                                                        Georgia
                                                                                                                                  West Virginia                               Louisiana
                                                                                                                                               Virginia
                                                                                                                                  Florida Kentucky
                                                                       Utah                                                                        Arkansas
                                                     .4




                                                                                                                               Pennsylvania
                                                                                                                                         Indiana
                                                                                                                                          Tennessee NorthAlabama
                                                                                                                                                          Carolina
                                                                                                          Washington
                                                                                                 New Mexico                  Missouri                  South Carolina                      Mississippi
                                                                           Wyoming                                    Michigan         Maryland
                                                                                                         Arizona
                                                                                          Nevada                  New York
                                                                                                                       Texas Illinois
                                                                              Colorado               Iowa                                  Ohio         Delaware
                                                                                                                            New Jersey
                                           .35




                                                                                                          Maine          Oklahoma
                                                                                                             Kansas
                                                                               California        Minnesota

                                                                       Idaho
                                                                                              South Dakota                         Connecticut
                                                                                         Nebraska Massachusetts
                                                                                                 Wisconsin
                                  .3




                                                                                                                        Rhode Island

                                                                                              Oregon
                                                                                        Montana
                                                                                                   New Hampshire
                                                                                          North Dakota
                        .25




                                                                                                      Vermont
                                             .2




                                                                           .25                            .3           .35                .4                                                     .45
                                                                                                       Income Rank-Rank Slope in Tax Data


                                                                                                         (b) Relative Mobility

        Figure IX: Comparison of IM Estimates by State in Census and Tax Data
Notes: Panel (A) plots intercepts from regression of child education rank on parental education
rank in census data with adjustment for independents, against intercepts from regression of child
income rank on parental income rank in U.S. population tax records. Panel (B) plots slopes from
the same regressions. All races pooled. Education measured as highest grade attained. Education
ranks computed on national sample for each age and year separately with midpoints of rank
intervals assigned to mass points. Children’s education measured at ages 26-29. Points weighted
by estimated total number of children age 26-29 in census. Census regressions pool data from
1980, 1990 and 2000 censuses. Description of income rank-rank mobility estimates available in
Chetty et al. (2014a).




                                                                                                                               80
                                                          .6
                Correlation of Child and Parental Education
                .3             .4            .5




                                                               1940   1960              1980     2000
                                                                                 Year

                                                                             White       Black



          Figure A.1: Child-Parent Educational Correlations by Race, 1940-2000
Notes: Correlations constructed as elasticities multiplied by ratio of standard deviation of
parental average education over standard deviation of child average education. Standard errors
assume Moulton error structure.




                                                                               81
                                                                    Alabama                    Arkansas                     Delaware                    Florida




                                                      .01
                                                      .005
                                                      0
                                                                     Georgia                   Kentucky                     Louisiana                  Maryland




                                                      .01
                                                      .005
                                                      0
                                                                   Mississippi               North Carolina                 Oklahoma                 South Carolina




                                                      .01
                                                      .005
                                                      0




82
                            High Schools per Capita
                                                                   Tennessee                     Texas                       Virginia                West Virginia




                                                      .01
                                                      .005
                                                      0
                                                             1930 1935 1940 1945 1950   1930 1935 1940 1945 1950     1930 1935 1940 1945 1950   1930 1935 1940 1945 1950

                                                                                                              Year
                                                                                                     White                        Black


                    Figure A.2: Black and White High Schools per Capita in U.S. South by State, 1928-1952
     Notes: Figure plots number of black and white high schools divided by number of black and white children, respectively, ages
     14-17 in each state.
                               14
                Child's Highest Grade Completed
                   6        8  4   10    12




                                                  0           5                   10               15                20
                                                                  Parent's Highest Grade Completed

                                                      1940, Above Median Increase           1940, Below Median Increase
                                                      1970, Above Median Increase           1970, Below Median Increase



Figure A.3: Black Mobility in Southern States with Big vs. Small Increases in Black High
            School Density
Notes: Figure plots highest grade completed at age 20-29 in Southern states with above- and
below-median increases in black public high schools per capita. High schools per capita
measured in 1928 and 1952.




                                                                             83
                                                                 11.5
                            Schooling-Schooling Gradient Intercept
                         9.5       10       10.5       11




                                                                        1940   1960                  1980         2000
                                                                                         Year

                                                                                 Include Group Living as Indeps
                                                                                 Exclude Group Living


                                                                                (a) Intercepts
                                                            .4
                         Schooling-Schooling Gradient Slope
                              .25       .3      .2.35




                                                                        1940   1960                  1980         2000
                                                                                         Year

                                                                                 Include Group Living as Indeps
                                                                                 Exclude Group Living


                                                                                  (b) Slopes

Figure A.4: Intercepts and Slopes of Schooling CEFs in Parental Education by Sample and
            Year
Notes: Figure documents that education CEFs in parental education are not sensitive to diﬀerent
ways of classifying children as independent, by year, for whites and blacks. Presents estimated
intercepts and slopes from linear regressions of children’s highest grade attained on parent’s highest
grade attained, using data grouped at the year by race by parental education level. Sample weights
are used to construct cell means, and regressions on collapsed data are weighted by the square of
cell size.




                                                                                       84
                                                             14
                         Schooling-Income Gradient Intercept
                               11       12   10   13




                                                                  1940          1960                  1980         2000
                                                                                          Year

                                                                                  Include Group Living as Indeps
                                                                                  Exclude Group Living


                                                                   (a) Intercepts = Absolute Upward Mobility
                                             .4
                         Schooling-Income Gradient Slope
                           .2      .25     .3.15  .35




                                                                  1940          1960                  1980         2000
                                                                                          Year

                                                                                  Include Group Living as Indeps
                                                                                  Exclude Group Living


                                                                         (b) Slopes = Relative Mobility

Figure A.5: Intercepts and Slopes of Schooling CEF in Parental Income Deciles by Sample
            and Year
Notes: Figure documents that education CEFs in parental income are not sensitive to diﬀerent
ways of classifying children as independent, by year, for whites and blacks. Presents estimated
intercepts and slopes from linear regressions of children’s highest grade attained on parental income
decile, using data grouped at the year by race by parental income decile level. Sample weights
are used to construct cell means, and regressions on collapsed data are weighted by the square of
cell size.




                                                                                        85
                                                                .6
                        Slope of Gradient in Parental Education
                               .3          .4 .2      .5




                                                                     1940         1960                  1980                   2000
                                                                                               Year

                                                                            Positive Income           Missing or Zero Income


                                                                                      (a) Whites
                                                                .8
                        Slope of Gradient in Parental Education
                               .2          .4 0       .6




                                                                     1940         1960                  1980                   2000
                                                                                               Year

                                                                            Positive Income           Missing or Zero Income


                                                                                      (b) Blacks

Figure A.6: Slopes of Schooling CEFs in Parental Education by Missing Income Status and
            Year
Notes: Figure documents that education elasticities are similar in families with positive house-
hold earnings and families with missing/zero household earnings, by year, for whites and blacks.
Presents estimated slopes from linear regressions of children’s highest grade attained on parent’s
highest grade attained, using data grouped at the year by race by parental education level. Sample
weights are used to construct cell means, and regressions on collapsed data are weighted by the
square of cell size.




                                                                                              86
