                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UPCODING: EVIDENCE FROM MEDICARE ON SQUISHY RISK ADJUSTMENT

                                        Michael Geruso
                                        Timothy Layton

                                      Working Paper 21222
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w21222


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           May 2015, Revised April 2018


We thank Colleen Carey, Joshua Gottlieb, and Amanda Kowalski for serving as discussants, as
well as seminar participants at the 2014 Annual Health Economics Conference, the 2014
American Society of Health Economists Meeting, the BU/Harvard/MIT Health Economics
Seminar, Boston University, Emory University, Harvard Medical School, the NBER Public
Economics Meeting 2015, the University of Illinois at Chicago, RTI, the Southeastern
Health Economics Study Group, and the University of Texas at Austin for useful comments.
We also thank Chris Afendulis, Marika Cabral, Vilsa Curto, David Cutler, Francesco
Decarolis, Liran Einav, Randy Ellis, Keith Ericson, Amy Finkelstein, Austin Frakt, Craig
Garthwaite, Jonathan Gruber, Jonathan Kolstad, Tom McGuire, Hannah Neprash, Joe Newhouse,
and Daria Pelech for assistance obtaining data and useful conversations. Layton gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the National Institute of Mental Health
(T32-019733). Geruso gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation and from grants 5 R24 HD042849 and 5 T32 HD007081 awarded to
the Population Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin by the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2015 by Michael Geruso and Timothy Layton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk Adjustment
Michael Geruso and Timothy Layton
NBER Working Paper No. 21222
May 2015, Revised April 2018
JEL No. H42,H51,I1,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

In most US health insurance markets, plans face strong incentives to “upcode” the patient
diagnoses they report to the regulator, as these affect the risk-adjusted payments plans receive.
We show that enrollees in private Medicare plans generate 6% to 16% higher diagnosis-based
risk scores than they would under fee-for-service Medicare, where diagnoses do not affect most
provider payments. Our estimates imply upcoding generates billions in excess public spending
and significant distortions to firm and consumer behavior. We show that coding intensity
increases with vertical integration, suggesting a principal-agent problem faced by insurers, who
desire more intense coding from the providers with whom they contract.


Michael Geruso
University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
mike.geruso@austin.utexas.edu

Timothy Layton
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Diagnosis-based subsidies have become an increasingly important regulatory tool in US health in-

surance markets and public insurance programs. Between 2003 and 2014, the number of consumers

enrolled in a market in which an insurer’s payment is based on the consumer’s diagnosed health

conditions increased from almost zero to over 50 million, including enrollees in Medicare, Medi-

caid, and state and federal Health Insurance Exchanges. These diagnosis-based payments to insurers

are known as risk adjustment, and their introduction has been motivated by a broader shift away

from public fee-for-service health insurance programs and towards regulated private markets (Gru-

ber, 2017). By compensating insurers for enrolling high expected-cost consumers, risk adjustment

weakens insurer incentives to engage in cream-skimming—that is, inefficiently distorting insurance

product characteristics to attract lower-cost enrollees as in Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976).1

    The intuition underlying risk adjustment is straightforward: diagnoses-based transfer payments

can break the link between the insurer’s expected costs and the insurer’s expected profitability of

enrolling a chronically ill consumer. But the mechanism assumes that a regulator can objectively

measure each consumer’s health state. In practice in health insurance markets, regulators infer an

enrollee’s health state from the diagnoses reported by physicians during their encounters with the

enrollee. This diagnosis information, usually captured in bills sent from the provider to the insurer,

is aggregated into a risk score on which a regulatory transfer to the insurer is based. Higher risk

scores trigger larger transfers. Insurers thus have a strong incentive to “upcode” reported diagnoses

and risk scores, either via direct insurer actions or by influencing physician behavior.2 By upcoding,

we mean activities that range from increased provision of diagnostic services that consumers value to

outright fraud committed by the insurer or provider. The extent of such practices is of considerable

policy, industry, and popular interest.3 Nonetheless, little is known about the extent of upcoding or

its implications: The few recent studies examining the distortionary effects of risk adjustment (e.g.,

Brown et al., 2014, Carey, 2014, and Einav et al., 2015) have all taken diagnosis coding as fixed for

a given patient, rather than as an endogenous outcome potentially determined by physician and

insurer strategic behavior. In contrast, in this paper we show that endogenous diagnosis coding is

an empirically important phenomenon that has led to billions in annual overpayments by the federal
   1 For example, during our study period, a diagnosis of Diabetes with Acute Complications in Medicare Advantage incre-

mentally increased the payment to the MA insurer by about $3,400 per year. This amount was set by the regulator to equal
the average incremental cost associated with this diagnosis in the traditional fee-for-service Medicare program.
   2 For example, insurers can pay physicians on the basis of codes assigned, rather than for visits and procedures.
   3 See, for example, CMS (2010); Government Accountability Office (2013); Kronick and Welch (2014); Schulte (2014).




                                                           1
government, as well as significant distortions to consumer choices.

    We begin by constructing a stylized model to assess the effects of upcoding in a setting where

private health plans compete for enrollees against a public option. We use the model to show that

when risk scores (and thus plan payments) are endogenous to the contract details chosen by the

private plans, three types of distortions are introduced. First, a wedge is introduced between the

efficient private contract and the private contract offered in equilibrium, with equilibrium contracts

characterized by levels of coding services (and, in some cases, other healthcare services) that are too

high in the sense that the marginal social cost of the services exceeds the marginal social benefit. Sec-

ond, the higher levels of coding in the private plans increases government subsidies paid to these

plans, increasing the cost of the program to taxpayers. Third, these differential subsidies cause equi-

librium plan prices not to reflect the underlying social resource cost of enrolling a consumer in the

plan, causing consumer choices to be inefficiently tilted toward the plans that code most intensely.

These results hold regardless of the legality of plans’ and physicians’ coding-related behaviors and

regardless of whether consumers attach positive value to coding services.

    We investigate the empirical importance of upcoding in the context of Medicare. For hospital and

physician coverage, Medicare beneficiaries can choose between a traditional public fee-for-service

(FFS) option and enrolling with a private insurer through Medicare Advantage (MA). In the FFS sys-

tem, most reimbursement is independent of recorded diagnoses. Payments to private MA plans are

capitated with diagnosis-based risk adjustment. As illustrated by our model, although the incentive

for MA plans to code intensely is strong, doing so is not costless and a plan’s response to this in-

centive depends on its ability to influence the providers that assign the codes. Thus, whether and to

what extent coding differs between the MA and FFS segments of the market is an empirical question.

    The key challenge in identifying coding intensity differences between FFS and MA, or within

the MA market segment across competing insurers, is that upcoding estimates are potentially con-

founded by adverse selection. An insurer might report an enrollee population with higher-than-

average risk scores either because the consumers who choose the insurer’s plan are in worse health

(selection) or because for the same individuals, the insurer’s coding practices result in higher risk

scores (upcoding). We develop an approach to separately identify selection and coding differences

in equilibrium. The core insight of our research design is that if the same individual would generate

a different risk score under two insurers and if we observe an exogenous shift in the market shares



                                                   2
of the two insurers, then we should also observe changes in the market-level average of reported risk

scores. Such a pattern could not be generated or rationalized by selection, because selection can

affect only the sorting of risk types across insurers within the market, not the overall market-level

distribution of reported risk scores.4 A key advantage of our strategy is that the data requirements

are minimal, and it could be easily implemented in future assessments of coding in Health Insurance

Exchanges or state Medicaid programs. Our focus on empirically disentangling upcoding from selec-

tion distinguishes our study from prior, policy-oriented work investigating upcoding in the context

of Medicare (e.g. Kronick and Welch, 2014).5

     To identify coding differences, we exploit large and geographically heterogeneous increases in

MA enrollment within county markets that began in 2006 following the Medicare Modernization

Act. We simultaneously exploit an institutional feature of the MA program that causes risk scores to

be based on prior year diagnoses. This yields sharp predictions about the timing of effects relative

to changing market penetration in a difference-in-differences framework. Using the rapid within-

county changes in penetration that occurred over our short panel, we find that a 10 percentage point

increase in MA penetration leads to a 0.64 percentage point increase in the reported average risk

score in a county. This implies that MA plans generate risk scores for their enrollees that are on

average 6.4% larger in the first year of MA enrollment than what those same enrollees would have

generated under FFS. This is a large effect. A 6.4% increase in market-level risk is equivalent to

6% of all consumers in a market becoming paraplegic, 11% developing Parkinson’s disease, or 39%

becoming diabetic. While these effects would be implausibly large if they reflected rapid changes

to actual population health, they are plausible when viewed as reflecting only endogenous coding

behavior. Our results also suggest that the MA coding intensity differential may ratchet up over time,

reaching 8.7% by the second year of MA enrollment.

     To complement our main identification strategy at the market level, we also provide individual-

level evidence for a sample of Massachusetts residents. We track risk scores within consumers as
   4 The idea that changes in a population average outcome can be used to infer marginal impacts is well-known in applied

econometrics, with applications including Gruber, Levine and Staiger (1999), Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010), and
Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014).
   5 Kronick and Welch (2014) provide evidence that risk scores have grown more rapidly over time in MA relative to FFS.

Other analyses, including Government Accountability Office (2013), follow a similar strategy. An important difference
from our analysis is that comparing the growth rate of risk scores in the FFS population to the growth rate of risk scores in
the MA population would not be robust to selection on health. Further, by focusing on differences in risk score growth rates
rather than levels, the Kronick and Welch (2014) strategy cannot estimate a parameter of interest here—the difference in
risk scores and implied payments for a consumer choosing MA versus FFS. Nonetheless, it is the strongest prior evidence
that MA codes intensively relative to FFS.


                                                             3
they transition from an employer or individual-market commercial plan to Medicare at the age 65

eligibility threshold. We present event study graphs comparing the groups that eventually choose

MA and FFS. We show that during the years prior to Medicare enrollment when both groups were

enrolled in similar employer and commercial plans, level differences in coding intensity were stable.

Following Medicare enrollment, however, the difference in coding intensity between the MA and FFS

groups spikes upward, providing transparent visual evidence of a coding intensity effect of MA. This

entirely separate identification strategy based on the Medicare eligibility threshold confirms the size

of our estimates from the main analysis and allows us to examine mechanisms and individual-level

heterogeneity underlying the aggregate MA/FFS coding intensity differences.

     These empirical findings have specific implications for the Medicare program as well as broader

implications for the regulation of private insurance markets. Medicare is the costliest public health in-

surance program in the world and makes up a significant fraction of US government spending. Even

relative to a literature that has consistently documented phenomena leading to significant overpay-

ments to or gaming by private Medicare plans (e.g., Ho, Hogan and Scott Morton, 2014; Decarolis,

2015; Brown et al., 2014), the size of the overpayment due to manipulable coding is striking.6 Absent

a coding correction, our estimates imply excess payments of around $10.2 billion to Medicare Advan-

tage plans annually, or about $650 per MA enrollee per year. In 2010, toward the end of our study

period, the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS) began deflating MA risk payments

due to concerns about upcoding, partially counteracting these overpayments.7 To provide further

context for the size of the effects that we estimate, we draw on estimates of demand response from

the prior literature on MA. These estimates imply that completely removing the hidden subsidy due

to upcoding would reduce the size of the MA market by 17% to 33%, relative to a counterfactual in

which CMS made no adjustment.

     We view our results as addressing an important gap in the literature on adverse selection and the

public finance of healthcare. Risk adjustment is the most widely implemented regulatory response to

adverse selection. A few recent studies, including Curto et al. (2014) and Einav and Levin (2014), have
   6 Decarolis (2015) investigates how Medicare Part D insurers manipulate bids to game payment formulas and drive up
payments; Ho, Hogan and Scott Morton (2014) estimate excess public spending arising from consumers’ inattention to
health plan choice and insurers’ endogenous responses to that inattention; and Brown et al. (2014) estimate the increase in
excess payments to MA plans due to uncompensated favorable selection following the implementation of risk adjustment.
Brown et al. (2014) find the largest public spending impacts, at $317 per enrollee per year.
   7 In 2010 CMS began deflating MA risk scores via a “coding intensity adjustment” factor. This deflator was set at 3.41%

in 2010; was increased to 4.91% in 2014; and is set to increase again to 5.91% in 2018. Our results indicate that even the
most recent deflation is both too small and fails to account for large coding differences across MA plan types.


                                                            4
begun to recognize the potential importance of upcoding, but the empirical evidence is underdevel-

oped. The most closely related prior work on coding has shown that patients’ reported diagnoses

in FFS Medicare vary with the local practice style of physicians (Song et al., 2010) and that coding

responds to changes in how particular codes are reimbursed by FFS Medicare for inpatient hospital

stays (Dafny, 2005; Sacarny, 2014). Ours is the first study to model the welfare implications of differ-

ential coding patterns across insurers and to provide empirical evidence of the size and determinants

of these differences.

    Our results also provide a rare insight into the insurer-provider relationship. Because diagnosis

codes ultimately originate from provider visits, insurers face a principal-agent problem in contract-

ing with physicians. We find that coding intensity varies significantly according to the contractual

relationship between the physician and the insurer. Fully vertically integrated (i.e., provider owned)

plans generate 16% higher risk scores for the same patients compared to FFS, nearly triple the ef-

fect of non-integrated plans. This suggests that the cost of aligning physician incentives with in-

surer objectives may be significantly lower in vertically integrated firms. These results connect to

a long literature concerned with the internal organization of firms (Grossman and Hart, 1986) and

the application of these ideas to the healthcare industry (e.g., Gaynor, Rebitzer and Taylor, 2004 and

Frakt, Pizer and Feldman, 2013), as well as to the study of the intrinsic (Kolstad, 2013) and extrinsic

(Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014) motivations of physicians. Our results also represent the first direct

evidence of which we are aware that vertical integration between insurers and providers may facil-

itate the “gaming” of health insurance payment systems. However, these results likewise raise the

possibility that strong insurer-provider contracts may also facilitate other, more socially beneficial,

objectives, including quality improvements through pay-for-performance incentives targeted at the

level of the insurer. This is an issue of significant policy and research interest (e.g., Fisher et al., 2012;

Frakt and Mayes, 2012; Frandsen and Rebitzer, 2014), but as Gaynor, Ho and Town (2015) describe in

their recent review, it is an area in which there is relatively little empirical evidence.

    Finally, our results connect more broadly to the economic literature on agency problems in mon-

itoring, reporting, and auditing. Here, insurers are in charge of reporting the critical inputs that will

determine their capitation payments from the regulator. But the outsourcing of regulatory functions

to interested parties is not unique to this setting, with examples in other parts of the healthcare system

(Dafny, 2005), in environmental regulation (Duflo, Greenstone and Ryan, 2013), in financial markets



                                                      5
(Griffin and Tang, 2011), and elsewhere. Our results point to a tradeoff in which the tools used to bet-

ter align regulator and firm incentives in one way (here, risk adjustment to limit cream-skimming)

may cause them to diverge in other ways (as coding intensity is increased to capture subsidies).



2     Background

We begin by outlining how a risk-adjusted payment system functions, though we refer the reader

to van de Ven and Ellis (2000) and Geruso and Layton (2017) for more detailed treatments. We then

briefly discuss how diagnosis codes are assigned in practice.


2.1    Risk Adjustment Background

Individuals who are eligible for Medicare can choose between the FFS public option or coverage

through a private MA plan. All Medicare-eligible consumers in a county face the same menu of MA

plan options at the same prices. Risk adjustment is intended to undo insurer incentives to avoid

sick, high cost patients by tying subsidies to patients’ health status. By compensating the insurer

for an enrollee’s expected cost on the basis of their diagnosed health conditions, risk adjustment can

make all potential enrollees—regardless of health status—equally profitable to the insurer on net (in

expectation) even when premiums are not allowed to vary across consumer types. This removes

plan incentives to distort contract features in an effort to attract lower-cost enrollees, as in Rothschild

and Stiglitz (1976) and Glazer and McGuire (2000). Risk adjustment was implemented in Medicare

starting in 2004 and was fully phased-in by 2007.

      Formally, plans receive a risk adjustment subsidy, Si , from a regulator for each individual i they

enroll. The risk adjustment subsidy supplements or replaces premiums, p, paid by the enrollee with

total plan revenues given by p + Si . In Medicare Advantage, Si is calculated as the product of an

individual’s risk score, ri , multiplied by some base amount, C, set by the regulator: Si = C · ri .8 In

practice in our empirical setting, C is set to be approximately equal to the mean cost of providing FFS

in the local county market for a typical-health beneficiary, or about $10,000 per enrollee per year on

average in 2014.9
    8 Across
           market settings, C can correspond to the average premium paid in the full population of enrollees, as in the
ACA Exchanges, or some statutory amount, as in Medicare Advantage.
  9 Historically, county benchmarks have been set to capture the cost of covering the “national average beneficiary” in the

FFS program in that county, though Congress has made many ad hoc adjustments over time. In practice, benchmarks can



                                                            6
      The risk score is determined by multiplying a vector of risk adjusters, xi , by a vector of risk ad-

justment coefficients, Λ. Subsidies are therefore Si = C · xi Λ. Risk adjusters, xi , typically consist of a

set of indicators for demographic groups (age-by-sex cells) and a set of indicators for condition cate-

gories, which are based on diagnosis codes contained in health insurance claims. In Medicare, as well

as the federal Health Insurance Exchanges, these indicators are referred to as Hierarchical Condition

Categories (HCCs). Below, we refer to xi as “conditions” for simplicity. The coefficients Λ capture

the expected incremental impact of each condition on the insurer’s expected costs, as estimated by

the regulator in a regression of total spending on the vector xi in some reference population (in this

case FFS). Coefficients Λ are normalized by the regulator so that the average risk score is equal to

1.0 in the relevant reference population. In Medicare, risk scores for payment in year t are based on

diagnoses in t − 1. The important implicit assumption underlying the functioning of risk adjustment

is that conditions, xi , do not vary according to the plan in which a consumer is enrolled. In other

words, diagnosed medical conditions are properties of individuals, not individual × plan matches.


2.2    Diagnosis Coding in Practice

Typically, the basis for all valid diagnosis codes is documentation from a face-to-face encounter be-

tween the provider and the patient. During an encounter like an office visit, a physician takes notes,

which are passed to the billing staff in the physician’s office. Billers use the notes to generate a claim,

which includes diagnosis codes, that is sent to the insurer for payment. The insurer pays claims and

over time aggregates all of the diagnoses associated with an enrollee. Diagnoses are then submitted

to the regulator, who generates a risk score on which payments to the insurer are based.

      There are many ways for plans and providers to influence the diagnoses that are reported to

the regulator. Although we reserve a more complete description of these mechanisms to Appendix

Section A.2 and Figure A1, we note that insurers can structure contracts with physician groups such

that the payment to the group is a function of the risk-adjusted payment that the insurer itself re-

ceives from the regulator. This directly passes through coding incentives to the physician groups.

Additionally, even after claims and codes are submitted to the insurer for an encounter, the insurer

or its contractor may perform a chart review—automatically or manually reviewing physician notes

and patient charts to add new codes that were not originally translated to the claims submitted by
vary from such historical costs and can also vary somewhat by plan due to a “bidding” process. See Appendix A.1 for full
details.


                                                           7
the submitting physician’s office. Such additions may be known only to the insurer who edits the

reports sent to the regulator, with no feedback regarding the change in diagnosis being sent to the

physician or her patient.

      Plans may also directly encourage their enrollees to take actions that result in more intensive

coding, using financial incentives (including, simply, lower copays for evaluation and management

visits) or incentivizing enrollees to complete annual “risk assessments.” These are inexpensive to the

insurer, but can be used to document diagnoses that would otherwise have gone unrecorded in the

claims.10 Further, if an insurer observes that an enrollee who has previously received diagnoses for

a code-able condition has not visited a physician in the current plan year (as risk scores are based

on single-year diagnosis reports), the insurer can directly intervene by proactively contacting the

enrollee and sending a physician or nurse to the enrollee’s home. The visit is necessary in order to

code the relevant, reimbursable diagnoses for the current plan year and relatively low cost. As we

discuss in Section 8, this issue is of particular concern to the Medicare regulator, CMS, as these visits,

often performed by third-party contractors, appear to often be unmoored from any follow-up care or

even communication with the patient’s normal physician.

      None of the insurer activities targeted at diagnosis coding take place in FFS because providers

under the traditional system are paid directly by the government, and the basis of these payments

outside of hospital settings is procedures, not diagnoses. This difference in incentive structure be-

tween FFS and MA makes Medicare a natural setting for studying the empirical importance of dif-

ferential coding intensity.



3      Model of Risk Adjustment with Endogenous Coding

In this section, we present a stylized model of firm behavior in a competitive insurance market where

payments are risk adjusted. The model illustrates how distortions to public spending, consumers’

plan choices, and insurers’ benefit design can arise if risk scores are endogenous to a plan’s behavior.
    10 Note
          that the supply-side tools often advocated for in the context of preventative managed care—such as proactive
health risk assessments and outreach to chronically-ill patients—can serve to inflate risk scores. This is true regardless of
whether such patient management is motivated by increasing risk adjustment revenue or by patient health concerns.




                                                             8
3.1    Setup

We consider an insurance market similar to Medicare, where consumers choose between a public

option plan (FFS) and a uniform private plan alternative offered by insurers in a competitive market

(MA). An MA plan consists of two types of services and a price: {δ, γ; p}. Coding services, δ, include

activities like insurer chart review. These services affect the probability that diagnoses are reported.

We also allow them to impact patient utility. All other plan details are rolled up into a composite

healthcare service, γ. We allow that any healthcare service or plan feature may impact reported

diagnoses. For example, zero-copay specialist visits may alter the probability that a consumer visits

a specialist and thus the probability that a marginal (correct) diagnosis is recorded.11 Services δ and

γ are measured in the dollars of cost they impose on the MA plan.

      Denote the consumer valuations of δ and γ in dollar-metric utility as v(δ) and w(γ), respectively.

We assume utility is additively separable in v and w with v0 > 0, w0 > 0, v00 < 0, and w00 < 0. The FFS

option offers reservation utility of u for the mean consumer. Its price is zero. A taste parameter, σi ,

which is uncorrelated with net-of-risk adjustment costs, distinguishes consumers with idiosyncratic

preferences over the MA/FFS choice. The purpose of the assumption of orthogonality between the

taste parameter and costs is to simplify the exposition of the consequences of upcoding. The conclu-

sions we draw from this stylized model do not rely on this assumption.12 Utility of the MA plan is

thus v(δ) + w(γ) + σi . Using ζ i to capture mean zero ex ante health risk that differs across consumers,

expected costs in MA are ci, MA = δ + γ + ζ i .

      To narrow focus here on the distortions generated by upcoding even when risk adjustment suc-

ceeds in perfectly in counteracting selection, we make two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume

that consistent with the regulatory intent of risk adjustment, there is no uncompensated selection af-

ter risk adjustment payments are made: Risk adjustment payments net out idiosyncratic health risk

in expectation, allowing us to ignore the mean zero ζ i term when considering firm incentives, so that
  11 The  distinguishing characteristic of δ versus γ is the degree of responsiveness of risk scores to each service type.
                                                                           ∂ρ     ∂ρ
We assume coding services have greater marginal impacts on coding ( ∂δ > ∂γ ) at the levels chosen optimally or in a
competitive equilibrium. An alternative formulation with three services: services affecting coding only; affecting patient
utility only; affecting both utility and coding leads to the same results.
   12 The primary reason this assumption greatly simplifies exposition is that it allows a single price to sort consumers

efficiently across plans. In a more general setting, no single price can sort consumers efficiently, as in Bundorf, Levin and
Mahoney (2012) and Geruso (2017). Such forms of selection add complexity to describing the choice problem without
providing additional insights into the consequences of coding differences for consumer choices. This assumption also
intentionally rules out phenomena like selection on moral hazard (Einav et al., 2013), which would further complicate
exposition while adding little in terms of insight into the consequences of upcoding.



                                                             9
expected (net) marginal costs are equal to expected (net) average costs and are δ + γ. Solely to sim-

plify proofs and exposition, we assume further that there is no sorting by health status across plans

in equilibrium. This implies that the mean risk score within the MA plan is 1.13

      MA plans charge a premium p and receive a per-enrollee subsidy, Si , that is a function of the

risk score, ri, MA , the plan reports. Following the institutional features of Medicare, Si = C · ri, MA ,

where C is a base payment equal to the cost of providing FFS to the typical health Medicare benefi-

ciary in the local market. Defining ρi (δ, γ) ≡ ri, MA − ri, FFS as the difference between the risk score

each beneficiary would have generated in MA relative to the risk score she would have generated
                                                                            
in FFS, the average (per capita plan-level) MA subsidy is then C 1 + ρ(δ, γ) which simplifies to C

when we assume, counter to the empirical facts we document, that risk scores are fixed properties of

individuals and invariant to MA enrollment.


3.2      Planner’s Problem

To illustrate how the competitive equilibrium may yield inefficiencies, consider as a benchmark a

social planner who is designing an MA alternative to FFS, and whose policy instruments include

δ, γ, and the supplemental MA premium p. The planner takes as given the cost, zero price, and

reservation utility of the FFS option, though we return to the issue of the social cost of FFS further

below.14 The planner maximizes consumer utility generated by MA plan services, net of the resource

cost of providing them:


                                         maxδj ,γj [ v(δ) + w(γ) + σi − δ − γ ]                                            (1)


First order conditions with respect to γ and δ yield


                                                          v0 (δ∗ ) = 1                                                    (2a)

                                                        w0 (γ∗ ) = 1.                                                     (2b)
  13 A weaker assumption—that on net consumers of different costs may systematically sort to MA, but that such sorting
between MA and FFS is compensated as intended by risk adjustment—suffices. However, this alternative formulation
significantly complicates the notation and proofs without enhancing the intuitions generated by the model. See an earlier
version of this paper, available as Geruso and Layton (2015), for this alternative approach.
  14 We set the price of FFS Medicare at zero, as the (small) Part B premiums are paid regardless of the MA/FFS choice. We

also take as given the cost and reservation utility of the FFS Medicare option, but if these were free parameters, the socially
optimal MA plan could be iteratively determined by first determining the optimal level of FFS provision, C.




                                                              10
At the optimal provision of healthcare services and the optimal investment in coding, the marginal

consumer utility of γ and δ equal their marginal costs, which is 1 by construction.

      Next consider the price p∗ that efficiently allocates consumers to the FFS and MA market seg-

ments. In an efficient allocation, consumers choose the MA plan if and only if the social surplus

generated by MA for them exceeds the social surplus generated by FFS. This condition is


                                    v(δ) + w(γ) + σi − δ − γ > u − C                                   (3)


A consumer chooses MA only if her valuation of MA minus the premium exceeds her reservation

utility in the FFS option at its zero price. Thus consumers choose MA if and only if v(δ) + w(γ) +

σi − p > u. This criterion for a consumer choosing MA matches the efficient allocation condition in

(3) if p = δ + γ − C. Thus the planner sets the MA/FFS price difference equal to the resource cost

difference of the MA plan relative to FFS. This is the familiar result that (incremental) prices set equal

to (incremental) marginal costs induce efficient allocations.


3.3    Insurer Incentives and Coding in Equilibrium

We next consider an MA insurer who sets {δ, γ; p} in a competitive equilibrium. Competition will

lead to all insurers offering a contract that maximizes consumer surplus, subject to the zero-profit con-

dition, or else face zero enrollment. Because consumer preferences are identical up to a taste-for-MA

component that is uncorrelated with δ and γ and is uncorrelated with costs net of risk adjustment,

there is a single MA plan identically offered by all insurers in equilibrium. The zero profit condition

here is p + S = δ + γ. As described above, healthcare utilization as well as spending on coding tech-

nologies can result in higher subsidies because such activities affect reported risk scores, leading to
                                   
subsidies S(δ, γ) = C · 1 + ρ(δ, γ) under the rules of MA. The insurer’s problem, where we have

substituted for price from the zero profit condition, is then

                                                                            
                                                                          
                         maxδ,γ v(δ) + w(γ) − δ + γ − C 1 + ρ(δ, γ)                .                   (4)




                                                   11
and first-order conditions yield:

                                                                   ∂ρ
                                                     v0 (δ̃) = 1 − C                                                    (5a)
                                                                   ∂δ
                                                                  ∂ρ
                                                   w0 (γ̃) = 1 − C .                                                    (5b)
                                                                  ∂γ

                                                                                            ∂ρ       ∂ρ
If risk scores were exogenous to δ and γ and fixed at their FFS level, then                 ∂δ   =   ∂γ   = 0 and S would
amount to a lump sum subsidy. In this case service provision would be set to the socially optimal

level in a competitive equilibrium: v0 (δ̃) = 1, w0 (γ̃) = 1. Additionally, the competitive equilibrium

MA premium would be set equal to the premium that efficiently sorts consumers between MA and

FFS: p = δ + γ − C. Efficient plan design would be achieved.

      Generally, however, when the subsidy is endogenous to γ and δ, inefficiencies will arise. Given

diminishing marginal utility of δ and γ, and assuming that more coding services and more healthcare

services lead to higher risk scores, competition under endogenous risk scores induces MA insurers

to set the levels of both healthcare spending and coding inefficiently high: δ̃ > δ∗ and γ̃ > γ∗ . This is

because on the margin, insurers are rewarded via the subsidy for setting service provision above the

level implied by the tradeoff between satisfying consumer preferences and incurring plan costs. The

intuition here is the standard public finance result that taxes or subsidies that are responsive to an

agent’s behaviors induce inefficient behaviors relative to the first best. We show in Appendix Section

A.4 that identical distortions arise in the incentives for setting δ and γ in an imperfectly competitive

market with endogenous coding.15 Given the conditions in (5a, 5b), the competitive equilibrium

premium will be equal to p̃ = (δ̃j + γ̃ j ) − C (1 + ρ(δ̃, γ̃)) because the zero profit condition forces

the additional subsidy to be passed through to the consumer as a lower premium. This lower price

induces inefficient sorting, tilting consumer choices towards MA.


3.4       Welfare

Although our goal in this paper is not to estimate the welfare impacts of upcoding, modeling these

impacts is instructive for understanding the implications of the coding differences we identify. To
  15 In Appendix Section A.4, we show that the first order conditions for a monopolist produce the same incentives for
setting γ and δ as in the competitive case. Only premium pricing decisions are affected by imperfect competition, with
prices equal to marginal costs (net of the subsidy) plus a standard absolute markup term related to the inverse of the price
elasticity of demand. The intuition is that if an insurance carrier can pay a chart review contractor $1.00 to mine diagnosis
codes that generate $1.50 in risk adjustment revenues, they should be expected to do so regardless of market structure.




                                                             12
express welfare, let θ MA and θ FFS denote the fraction of the Medicare market enrolled in the MA and

FFS segments, respectively. Let Φ MA and Φ FFS tally the per-enrollee social surplus generated by each

option, excepting the idiosyncratic taste component, σ. Enrollment and surplus in the FFS and MA

segments are:

                                                                    
                                 θ FFS = F u − v(δ) − w(γ) + p(δ, γ)                                             (6a)

                                 θ MA = 1 − θ FFS                                                                (6b)

                                Φ MA ≡ v(δ) + w(γ) − δ − γ                                                       (6c)

                                Φ FFS ≡ u − C                                                                    (6d)


Here, θ FFS expresses the fraction of the population for whom idiosyncratic preferences for MA, σ ∼

F (·), are less than the mean difference in consumer surplus generated by FFS at its zero price relative

to the MA alternative at its price p(δ, γ).

    Welfare is the social surplus generated for enrollees in each of the MA and FFS market segments

minus the distortionary cost of raising public funds to subsidize (both segments of) the market. Using

N to denote the total number of Medicare beneficiaries, and using tildes to indicate the competitive

equilibrium outcomes with endogenous risk scores, equilibrium social surplus per capita is

                                              Z ∞                                                          
         W̃ = θ̃ MA Φ̃ MA + θ̃ FFS Φ FFS +
                                                                                                   
                                                                σdF (σ) − κ · C θ̃ MA 1 + ρ(δ̃, γ̃) + θ̃ FFS ,    (7)
                                               F −1 (θ̃ FFS )


where the integral term accounts for the variable component of surplus generated by idiosyncratic

tastes for MA among those who enroll in MA. The last term captures the distortionary cost of financ-

ing Medicare. It is the government’s expenditure on FFS plus its expenditure on MA, multiplied by

the excess burden of raising public funds, κ. Taking per capita FFS costs, C, as given and assuming

that the levels of δ and γ chosen by the MA plans generate risk scores that exceed the FFS risk scores,

public spending on the Medicare program increases for every consumer choosing MA instead of FFS.

Without differential coding, FFS and MA risk scores are the same (ρ = 0) and the public funds term

would reduce to κ · C, irrespective of the share of beneficiaries choosing MA.

    Next consider the welfare loss associated with endogenous coding by comparing the social sur-

plus in (7) to a (possibly infeasible) regime in which risk scores are exogenously determined and



                                                                13
service levels are optimally set. With W̃ defined as above, let W Exo denote the social surplus per

capita in a competitive equilibrium in which risk scores are exogenous to plan choices, which we

show above replicates the social planner’s solution in the same setting. Using stars to indicate plan

features (δ∗ , γ∗ ) and market outcomes (θ ∗ , Φ∗ ) in the case of first best service levels and exogenously

determined subsidies that do not depend on those levels, this difference is


          W̃ − W Exo =
                                                               
                                      −κ · C θ̃ MA · ρ(δ̃, γ̃)
                                      |         {z             }
                           (i) excess burden of additional government spending
                                                                    Z F−1 (θ̃ MA )
                       −(θ ∗MA − θ̃ MA )(Φ∗MA − Φ FFS ) +                               σdF (σ )   −θ̃ (Φ∗ − Φ̃ MA ) .            (8)
                                                                        F −1 (θ ∗MA )              | MA MA
                                                                                                         {z       }
                       |                        {z                                            }     (iii) inefficient contracts
                                             (ii) inefficient sorting


The expression, derived in Appendix A.5, reveals three sources of inefficiency that arise from linking

the MA subsidy to risk scores that plans can influence: (i) a subsidy “overpayment” to MA plans that

is not balanced by a reduction in FFS spending, thus expanding overall spending on the Medicare

program and the consequent public funds cost; (ii) an allocative inefficiency in which consumers sort

to the wrong FFS vs MA market segment because the MA prices are distorted; and (iii) a resource use

inefficiency in which plans over-invest in services that affect risk scores relative to the value of these

plan features to consumers.

     Although we are not able to estimate the necessary parameters for assessing the extent of each

of the three inefficiencies, our estimation recovers ρ(δ̃, γ̃), the differential coding intensity in MA

relative to FFS. We also alternatively examine various ρ j (δ̃j , γ̃ j ) for subsegments j of MA, such as

provider owned plans and non-profits. This parameter is key in quantifying term (i) in Equation

(8). Because the base payment C and the fraction of the market in MA (θ̃ MA ) are quantities that

are directly observable, we can calculate term (i) after recovering ρ(δ̃, γ̃). We do this in Section 8.1.

Note that this quantity reflects the difference between actual MA coding and FFS coding, not the

difference between actual MA coding and optimal MA coding, ρ(δ∗ , γ∗ ), which too could differ from

FFS coding.16
  16 Although   we motivate the potential overprovision of services that impact risk scores by appealing to insurer first
order conditions, any MA/FFS difference that leads to different risk scores in MA can be interpreted in light of the welfare
expression in (8). For example, suppose that physicians were completely non-responsive to insurer incentives to inflate risk
scores. Differences in consumer cost sharing or physician practice styles between FFS and MA could nonetheless have the
practical effect of generating different risk scores. In this case, term (i) would nonetheless correctly describe the differential
excess burden associated with providing Medicare through MA instead of FFS.




                                                                  14
     Term (ii) is a function of how many consumers choose MA in equilibrium relative to the first best:

θ ∗MA − θ̃ MA . In Section 8.2 we combine our estimates of ρ with parameters from the MA literature to

calculate how different the size of the MA market would be relative to what we observe if the differen-

tial MA subsidy to coding were removed, shedding some light on the size of this distortion. Term (iii)

reveals that even if consumers place positive value on the marginal coding services provided by plans

(i.e., v(δ̃) − v(δ∗ ) > 0), there is a welfare loss with endogenous risk scores because the incremental
                                                                                                  
                                                                                      ∗          ∗
valuation of the coding services is less than the incremental social cost v(δ̃) − v(δ ) < δ̃ − δ . In-

surers don’t internalize the full social cost of these services because the subsidy partially compensates
                                                 ∂ρ
them for coding-related activities at a rate C .
                                                 ∂δ
    Because our empirical strategy is not designed to recover consumer preferences over healthcare

services, we cannot estimate term (iii). The term nonetheless provides useful intuitions in interpreting

our results. For example, it implies that inefficiencies may also arise in the provision of non-coding

services such as annual wellness visits and lab tests if these have incidental impacts on the probability

that a diagnosis is captured. In the controversial case of MA home health risk assessments, even

if home visits provide value to enrollees, such valuations are likely to fall below the social cost of

provision and would not have been included in plans if insurers were responding only to consumer

preferences over healthcare services. Likewise, it is possible in principle that consumers get value out

of intensive coding, perhaps because physicians have more information about their conditions and

can thus provide better treatment. The model shows that while improved coding may be valued by

consumers, profit maximization implies that in equilibrium its value will be exceeded by its (social

resource) cost, so the additional coding is still inefficient.

     Equation (8) also informs how the government, as an actor, may or may not address the specific

inefficiencies caused by the coding incentive. The primary strategy currently used by regulators to

address the implicit MA overpayment is to deflate private plan risk scores, by some amount η. If η is

set equal to ρ, then the additional cost of public funds terms can be eliminated.17 However, this does

not eliminate welfare losses due to inefficient sorting (term ii), as the new net-of-subsidy MA price

still does not accurately reflect the differential cost of FFS vs. MA, or due to inefficient contracts (term

iii), as the insurer’s marginal incentives to code intensely are not changed by subtracting a fixed term
  17 In
                                                                                            
       this case the subsidy to MA plans of the type (δ̃, γ̃) equals κ · C 1 + ρ(δ̃, γ̃) − η = κ · C which is the same as the
corresponding term in W Exo , implying that the difference in public spending between W̃ − W Exo goes to zero.




                                                             15
from the subsidy.18,19

      Finally, we note that the welfare analysis here is relative to a first best in a setting with exoge-

nously determined subsidies. It assumes away other distortions in the MA market that affect prices

and the design of plan services. Although our focus is on the specific distortions generated by the

coding incentive, these are just one piece in the broader landscape of efficiency and welfare in the

MA program. A complete second best analysis must account for other simultaneous market failures,

including positive externalities generated by the MA program. Indeed, a popular argument in fa-

vor of MA is that it might create important spillover effects for FFS Medicare. Studies of physician

and hospital behavior in response to the growth of managed care suggest the possibility of positive

externalities in which the existence of managed care plans lowers costs for all local insurers (Baker,

1997; Glied and Zivin, 2002; Glazer and McGuire, 2002; Frank and Zeckhauser, 2000). Any positive

spillovers, such as the role of MA in lowering hospital costs in FFS Medicare (Baicker, Chernew and

Robbins, 2013), should be balanced alongside the additional welfare costs of MA discussed here.20

Such terms, dollar-denominated, could be directly added to Equation (8).


3.5    Upcoding, Complete Coding, and Socially Efficient Coding

Motivated by the model, we define upcoding in MA as the difference between the risk score a con-

sumer would receive if she enrolled in an MA plan and the score she would have received had she

enrolled in FFS: ρi (δ, γ) ≡ ri, MA − ri, FFS . It is simply the differential coding intensity between FFS

and MA, which maps to the first source of inefficiency documented in Equation (8). It is the param-

eter required to measure the excess spending (and, therefore the excess burden) associated with a

consumer choosing MA in place of FFS.

      As an alternative benchmark, one could define upcoding as many physicians do: the difference

between a reported risk score and the risk score that would be assigned to an individual if coding

were “complete” in the sense that the individual was objectively examined and all conditions were
  18 The   cost of public funds terms is also largely eliminated in settings such as the ACA Marketplaces where there is no
public option and risk adjustment is “budget neutral” (i.e. the overall level of government subsidies via the risk adjustment
system is zero), but again in equilibrium net-of-subsidy prices will not accurately reflect costs and insurers will offer
contracts with levels of both coding and healthcare services that are too high.
  19 Even within Medicare Advantage, if our assumption that the cost of coding and healthcare services is the same across

insurers (or, similarly, that consumers’ valuation functions for healthcare and coding services are identical across insurers)
were relaxed, insurers would receive differential subsidies that would cause additional price distortions and lead to further
inefficient sorting.
  20 It is also plausible that coding intensity could be inefficiently low in the absence of the risk score subsidy if coding

activities are shrouded attributes of plans and so not driven to efficient provision by competitive forces.


                                                             16
recorded. Even setting aside the practical and conceptual difficulties with such a definition,21 our

model highlights its welfare-irrelevance. A benchmark of complete coding does not consider the

social resource costs of the coding. This highlights an important distinction between the economist’s

and physician’s view of this phenomenon.

       A more useful alternative benchmark would be the difference between the equilibrium level of

coding services (δ̃) and the socially efficient level (δ∗ ). We cannot observe this, given that our data

contain no information on the marginal costs of providing coding-related services, and given that

our identifying variation is keyed to recovering coding differences rather than recovering consumer

valuations over various healthcare services. We view understanding the socially efficient level of

diagnosis coding as an important avenue for future research. In particular, this would be informative

as to the size of the third source of inefficiency from Equation (8), inefficient contract design.



4      Identifying Upcoding in Selection Markets

The central difficulty of empirically identifying upcoding arises from selection on risk scores. At the

health plan level, average risk scores can differ across plans competing in the same market either

because coding differs for identical patients, or because patients with systematically different health

conditions select into different plans. Our solution to the identification problem is to focus on market-

level, rather than plan-level, reported risk. Whereas the reported risk composition of plans can reflect

both coding differences and selection, risk scores calculated at the market level will not be influenced

by selection—that is, by how consumers sort themselves across plans within the market. Therefore,

changes in risk scores at the market level as consumers shift between plans within the market will

identify differences in coding practices between the plans.

       To see this, consider how the mean risk score in a county changes as local Medicare beneficiaries

shift from FFS to MA. As before, define the risk score an individual would have received in FFS

as ri,FFS = r̂i . Define the same person’s risk score had they enrolled in MA as ri,MA = r̂i + ρ + ei ,

where ρ is the mean coding intensity difference between MA and FFS across all i and where we allow

for individual-level heterogeneity in the difference between MA and FFS risk scores as captured by
    21 For
         example, take the case of determining diabetes via an A1C blood test: If a patient’s true A1C level flits back and
forth across a clinical threshold for diabetes over the course of a year, does he have diabetes this year? Further, given that
a reasonable assumption is that the American Diabetes Association will someday revise its guidance over such thresholds,
do we base our objective measure of diabetes today on the current thresholds, or must we be agnostic about the presence
of diabetes today, knowing that medical science will someday change the diagnostic criteria?


                                                             17
ei . Using 1[ MAi ] as the indicator function for choosing MA, an individual’s realized risk score is

then ri (1[ MAi ]) = r̂i + 1[ MAi ](ρ + ei ). Let e(θ ) be the average value of ei for the set of consumers

on the MA/FFS margin when the MA enrollment share equals θ. The county-level mean risk score
                                                                    Z θ MA          
                                                          MA
as a function of MA enrollment can thus be written as r (θ ) = r̂ +          ρ + e(t) dt, where
                                                                                             0
r̂ expresses the unconditional expectation of r̂i . The integral measures the mean MA/FFS coding

difference among the types choosing MA. In the simple case of no individual heterogeneity in the size

of the coding effect, r (θ MA ) = r̂ + ρθ MA and the derivative of the county-level risk score with respect

to changes in MA share exactly pins down the difference in coding intensity. That is, ∂r/∂θ MA = ρ.

In the more complex case in which there is arbitrary heterogeneity in ei , the slope ∂r/∂θ MA identifies

not the mean differential coding intensity across all i, which is ρ, but rather the coding difference

(ρ + ei ) for the marginal consumers generating the change in market share. (See Appendix A.6.)

     Figure 1 provides a graphical intuition of this idea for the simple case of a constant additive effect

of MA enrollment on risk scores. We depict two market segments that are intended to align with FFS

and MA, though the intuitions apply to considering coding differences across MA plans within the

MA market segment as well. In the figure, all consumers choose either FFS or MA. The market

share of MA increases along the horizontal axis. The MA segment is assumed to be advantageously

selected on risk scores, so that the risk score of the marginal enrollee is higher than that of the average

enrollee. Thus, the average risk within the MA segment (r MA ) is lower at lower levels of θ MA .22 The

top panel shows three curves: the average risk in FFS (r FFS ), the average risk in MA (r MA ), and the

average risk of all enrollees in the market (r).

     In the top panel of Figure 1, we plot the baseline case of no coding differences across plans (ρ = 0,

ei = 0 ∀ i). As long as there is no coding difference between the plans or market segments, the market-

level risk (r), which is averaged over all enrollees, is constant in θ. This is because reshuffling enrollees

across plan options within a market does not affect the market-level distribution of underlying health

conditions. Nor does it affect risk scores if the mapping from health to recorded diagnoses does

not vary with plan choice (which is by assumption here). In the bottom panel of Figure 1 we add

differential coding. For reference, the dashed line in the figure represents the counterfactual average

risk that MA enrollees would have been assigned under FFS coding intensity, r FFS
                                                                              MA . The key difference
  22 Note  that this figure does not describe selection on costs net of risk adjustment, but rather selection on risk scores.
This is because our goal here is to distinguish between risk score differences due to coding and risk score differences due to
selection. If selection existed only along net costs (and not risk scores), then estimating coding intensity differences would
be trivial. One could directly compare the means of risk scores across plans.


                                                             18
in the bottom panel is that if coding intensity differs, market-level risk r changes as a function of

MA’s market share. This is because even if the population distribution of actual health conditions is

stationary, market-level reported risk scores would change as market shares shift between plans with

higher and lower coding intensity. As the marginal consumer switches from FFS to MA, she increases

θ MA by a small amount and simultaneously increases the average reported risk (r) in the market by a

small amount (by moving to a plan that assigns her a higher score). Thus the slope ∂r/∂θ MA identifies

ρ. We estimate this slope in the empirical exercise that follows.

      The core intuition of Figure 1 holds if the data generating process involves multiplicative rather

than additive effects of plans on an individual’s baseline risk.23 The core intuition of Figure 1 also

holds if there is arbitrary consumer heterogeneity in ei , though in that case, there is no single coding

difference to identify. When ei varies with θ, the slope will also vary with θ. In that case, estimates of

∂r/∂θ MA are “local,” identifying the average coding difference across the set of consumers who are

marginal to the variation in MA penetration used in estimation, analogous to the treatment on the

treated. Given that during our sample period we observe within-county changes in MA penetration

across all empirically relevant penetration ranges (omitting only very high ranges of θ not observed

in practice) this local approximation is likely to reflect the average coding difference for the set of

beneficiaries enrolled in the MA market during this period.24 Conveniently, this local estimate is

thus also the parameter of interest for determining excess public spending.

      Finally, although the bottom panel of Figure 1 depicts the empirically relevant case in which

the advantageously selected market segment is more intensely coded, the same intuition applies

regardless of the presence or pattern of selection. For illustration, in Appendix Figure A2, we depict

a case in which the advantageously selected plan codes less intensely, a case where coding differences

exist absent any selection, and a case in which selection is both nonlinear and non-monotonic.
  23 If  the data generating process for MA risk scores were multiplicative as in riMA = r̂i (1 + ρ), then
                 Z θ MA             
                                               ∂r
r (θ MA ) = r̂ +          ρ · r̂i (t) dt and        = ρ · r̂i (θ ), where r̂i (θ ) is the FFS risk score of the consumer type on the
                   0                         ∂θ MA
MA/FFS margin. Thus if E[r̂i (θ )] varied with θ and differed from 1.0, our estimates of ∂r/∂θ MA should be adjusted by
dividing by E[r̂i (θ )]. We provide evidence in Appendix A.6 that county-level means of r̂i are not strongly correlated with
θ, and that E[r̂i ] is very close to one, so that ∂r/∂θ MA ≈ ρ.
   24 For small changes in θ, the slope ∂r        identifies differential coding intensity (ρ + ei ) for the marginal type generating
                                            ∂θ MA
the change in market share. For larger, discrete changes in θ, such as those we exploit in estimation within counties over
time, the slope we estimate will be (ρ + ei ) averaged over the consumers on the MA/FFS margin in the range of θs we
observe. See Appendix A.6 for a full discussion.




                                                                19
5      Setting and Empirical Framework

5.1        Data

Estimating the slope ∂r/∂θ MA requires observing market-level risk scores at varying levels of MA

penetration. We obtained yearly county-level averages of risk scores and MA enrollment by plan

type from CMS for 2006 through 2011.25 MA enrollment is defined as enrollment in any MA plan

type, including managed care plans like Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and Preferred

Provider Organizations (PPOs), private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans, and employer MA plans. In our

main specifications, we consider the Medicare market as divided between the MA and FFS segments

and collapse all MA plan types together. We later estimate heterogeneity in coding within MA, across

its various plan type components.26 MA penetration (θ MA ) is the fraction of all beneficiary-months

of a county-year spent in an MA plan. Average risk scores within the MA and FFS market segments

are weighted by the fraction of the year each beneficiary was enrolled in the segment.

      All analysis of risk scores in the national sample is conducted at the level of market averages,

as the regulator does not generally release individual-specific risk adjustment data for MA plans.27

We supplement these county-level aggregates with administrative data on demographics for the uni-

verse of Medicare enrollees from the Medicare Master Beneficiary Summary File (MBSF) for 2006-

2011. These data allow us to construct county-level averages of the demographic (age and gender)

component of risk scores, which we use in a falsification test.28

      Table 1 displays summary statistics for the balanced panel of 3,128 counties that make up our

analysis sample. The columns compare statistics from the introduction of risk adjustment in 2006

through the last year for which data are available, 2011. These statistics are representative of counties,

not individuals, since our unit of analysis is the county-year. The table shows that risk scores, which
    25 Thesedata come from the CMS Risk Adjustment Processing (RAPS) system. The RAPS dataset includes risk scores
for every Medicare enrollee, both those enrolled in MA and those enrolled in FFS. The FFS risk scores are constructed by
CMS using diagnoses found in FFS claims data. The MA risk scores are constructed by CMS using diagnoses submitted
to the RAPS by individual MA plans. These diagnoses may or may not appear on MA claims data, as some diagnoses are
extracted directly from physician notes instead of from claims. Similar data are unavailable before 2006, since diagnosis-
based risk scores were not previously generated by the regulator.
  26 We exclude only enrollees in the Program of All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) plans.
  27 CMS has not traditionally provided researchers with individual-level risk scores for MA enrollees (two exceptions are

Brown et al. (2014) and Curto et al. (2014)). A strength of our identification strategy, which could easily be applied in other
settings like Medicaid Managed Care and Health Insurance Exchanges, is that it does not require individual-level data.
  28 The regulator’s algorithm specifies that the demographic components (r A ) and diagnostic components (r DX ) of in-
                                                                                   i                                 ij
dividual risk
             scores are additively separable, which implies that the county averages are also additively separable:
r=    1
      Nc   ∑        riA + rijDX   = r A + r DX .
           i ∈ Ic



                                                              20
have an overall market mean of approximately 1.0, are lower within MA than within FFS, implying

that MA selects healthier enrollees.29 Table 1 also shows the dramatic increase in MA penetration

over our sample period, which comprises one part of our identifying variation.


5.2    Identifying Variation

We exploit the large and geographically heterogeneous increases in MA penetration that followed

implementation of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. The Act introduced Medicare Part D,

which was implemented in 2006 and added a valuable new prescription drug benefit to Medicare.

Because Part D was available solely through private insurers and because insurers could combine

Part D drug benefits and MA insurance under a single contract, this drug benefit was highly comple-

mentary to enrollment in MA. Additionally, MA plans were able to “buy-down” the Part D premium

paid by all Part D enrollees. This, along with increases in MA benchmark payments in some counties,

led to fast growth in the MA market segment (Gold, 2009). In the top panel of Figure 2, we put this

timing in historical context. Following a period of decline, MA penetration doubled nationally be-

tween 2005 and 2011. The bottom panel of the figure shows that within-county penetration changes

were almost always positive, though the size of these changes varied widely. A map of changes by

county, presented in Figure A3, shows that this MA penetration growth was not limited to certain

regions or to urban or rural areas.

      Our main identification strategy relies on year-to-year variation in penetration within geographic

markets to trace the slope of the market average risk curve, ∂r/∂θ MA . The identifying assumption in

our difference-in-differences framework is that year-to-year growth in MA enrollment within coun-

ties did not track year-to-year variation in the county’s actual population-level health. The assump-

tion is plausible because the incidence of the types of chronic conditions used in risk scoring (such as

diabetes and cancer) is unlikely to change sharply year-to-year. In contrast, reported risk can change

sharply due to coding differences when a large fraction of the local Medicare population moves to

MA. In support of the identifying assumption, we show that there is no correlation between within-

county changes in θ MA and within-county changes in a variety of demographic, morbidity, and mor-

tality outcomes that could in principle signal health-motivated demand shifts.
  29 For estimation, we normalize the national average to be exactly 1.0 in each year, so that coefficients can be read as

exact percentage changes. The normalization implies that changes in county-level risk scores are identified only relative to
yearly national means. The normalization aids interpretation, but has essentially no impact on the coefficients of interest.
See Appendix Table A1 for versions of the main results using non-normalized risk scores.


                                                            21
      We also exploit an institutional feature of how risk scores are calculated in MA to more narrowly

isolate the identifying variation. Under Medicare rules, the risk scores that are assigned to beneficia-

ries and used as a basis for payment in calendar year t are based on diagnoses derived from service

provision in calendar year t − 1. This implies, for example, that if an individual moves to MA from

FFS during open enrollment in January of a given year, the risk score for her entire first year in MA

will be based on diagnoses she received while in FFS during the prior calendar year. Only after the

first year of MA enrollment will the risk score of the switcher include diagnoses she received while

enrolled with her MA plan. The timing is more complex for newly-eligible Medicare beneficiaries.

In order for an MA enrollee to be assigned a diagnosis-based risk score, CMS requires the enrollee to

have accumulated a full calendar year of diagnoses. This implies that changes in θ driven by newly-

eligible enrollees should show up in reported risk scores with up to a two year lag.30 In all cases,

changes in risk scores due to upcoding should not occur in the same year as the identifying shift in

enrollment. We test this.


5.3    Econometric Framework

We estimate difference-in-differences models of the form:


                                  r sct = γc + γt +     ∑ βτ · θscτ
                                                                MA
                                                                       + f ( Xsct ) + esct ,                               (9)
                                                       τ ∈T


where r sct is the average market-level risk in county c of state s at time t, and θ MA denotes MA

penetration, which ranges from zero to one. County and year fixed effects are captured by γc and

γt , so that effects β are identified within counties across time. County fixed effects control for any

unobserved constant local factors that could simultaneously affect population health and MA enroll-

ment, such as physician practice style differences documented by Song et al. (2010) and Finkelstein,

Gentzkow and Williams (2016), as well as differences in medical infrastructure or consumer health

behaviors. Year fixed effects are included to capture any changes in the composition of Medicare at

the national level. Xsct is a vector of time-varying county characteristics described in more detail be-

low. The subscript τ in the summation indicates the timing of the penetration variable, θ, relative to
  30 Many individuals first enroll in MA soon after their 65th birthday (rather than January 1st ), and so will have incomplete

diagnosis records even at the start of the second calendar year of MA enrollment. In this interval, enrollees are given a
demographics-based risk score that ignores diagnoses. These facts imply that changes in θ due to the choices of newly-
eligible beneficiaries should affect reported risk scores with up to a two-year lag. See Figure A4.



                                                              22
the timing of the reported risk score. This specification allows flexibility in identifying the timing of

effects. Coefficients β τ multiply contemporaneous MA penetration (τ = t), leads of MA penetration

(τ > t), and lags of MA penetration (τ < t). Contemporaneous and leading βs serve as placebo tests,

revealing whether counties were differentially trending in the dependent variable prior to when risk

scores could have plausibly been affected by upcoding

      The coefficients of interest are β t−1 and β t−2 because of the institutional feature described above

in which risk scores are calculated based on the prior full year’s medical history, so that upcoding

could plausibly affect risk scores only after the first year of MA enrollment for prior FFS enrollees

and after the second year of MA enrollment for newly-eligible beneficiaries. A positive coefficient on

lagged penetration indicates more intensive coding in MA relative to FFS.



6      Results

6.1     Main Results

Table 2 reports our main results. The coefficient of interest is on lagged MA penetration. In column

1, we present estimates of the baseline model controlling for only county and year fixed effects. The

difference-in-differences coefficient indicates that the market-level average risk score in a county in-

creases by about 0.07—approximately one standard deviation—as lagged MA penetration increases

from 0% to 100%. Because risk scores are scaled to have a mean of one, this implies that an indi-

vidual’s risk score in MA is about 7% higher than it would have been under fee-for-service (FFS)

Medicare. In column 2, we add linear state time trends, and in column 3, we add time-varying con-

trols for county demographics.31 Across specifications, the coefficient on lagged MA penetration is

stable.32

      An alternative interpretation of these results is that, contrary to our identifying assumption, the

estimates reflect changes in underlying health in the local market. Although we cannot rule out

this possibility entirely, the coefficient estimates for the contemporaneous MA penetration variable,
    31 These
           controls consist of 18 variables that capture the fraction of Medicare beneficiaries in the county-year in five-year
age bins from 0 to 85 and 85+.
  32 In Appendix Table A2, we show that the results are not sensitive to the inclusion of additional time varying county-

level controls, including the share of the Medicare population that is dually-eligible for Medicaid, the share of the Medicare
population that is under-65, and other county-level indicators of health status, such as SNP enrollment and ESRD preva-
lence. In Appendix Table A3 we show that the results are not sensitive to trimming off the smallest and largest 1%, 5%, and
10% of counties by Medicare population size.



                                                              23
reported in the first row of Table 2, constitute a kind of placebo test. If there were a contemporaneous

correlation between MA penetration changes and changes in risk scores, it would suggest that the

health of the population was drifting in a way that was spuriously correlated with the identifying

variation. Contrary to this, the placebo coefficients are very close to zero and insignificant across all

specifications. Effects appear only with a lag, consistent with the institutions described above.33

     As discussed above, switchers from FFS to MA carry forward their old FFS risk scores for their

first MA plan year, but newly-eligible consumers aging into Medicare at 65 and choosing MA may not

have diagnosis-based risk scores assigned to them until after two calendar years of MA enrollment.

To investigate, in column 4 of Table 2 we include a second lag of θ in the regression. Each coefficient

represents an independent effect, so that point estimates in column 4 indicate a cumulative upcoding

effect of 8.7% (=4.1+4.6) after two years. This is consistent with a data generating process that causes

a two year lag in MA-driven diagnoses entering the risk scores for newly-eligible beneficiaries. But

it is also consistent with the possibility that even among switchers, for whom effects could begin

to be seen after a one year lag, coding intensity differentials ratchet up over the time a beneficiary

stays with an MA plan (Kronick and Welch, 2014). This is plausible, as some insurer strategies for

increasing coding intensity, such as prepopulating physician notes with past years’ diagnoses, require

a history of contact with the patient. We cannot distinguish between these phenomenon in these

aggregated data. However, in Section 7, we investigate this issue using a smaller individual-level

dataset. There we show how coding differences unfold over the first three years of MA enrollment.

     To put the size of our main estimate in context, a 6.4% increase in market-level risk (Table 2, col-

umn 3) would be associated with 6% of all consumers in a market becoming paraplegic, 11% devel-

oping Parkinson’s disease, or 39% becoming diabetic. The effects we estimate would be implausibly

large if they reflected true (high frequency) changes in underlying population health. However, if the

estimates reflect instead differential coding as we claim, then these magnitudes are closely consistent

with widely held beliefs about coding in MA. The Government Accountability Office has expressed

concerns that coding differences between MA and FFS are in the range of 5% to 7% (Government
  33 Inprinciple, we could extend the placebo test of our main regressions by examining leads in addition to the contem-
poraneous effect. In practice, we are somewhat limited by our short panel, which becomes shorter as more leads or lags
are included in the regression. Due to the length of time diagnosis-based risk adjustment has existed in Medicare, the data
extend back only to 2006. The most recent data year available to us is 2011. Therefore, including two leads and one lag of
penetration restricts our five year panel to just the three years: 2007 to 2009. Nonetheless, we report on an extended set of
leads and lags in Appendix Table A4. The table supports the robustness of our findings in Table 2, though sample size and
power are reduced in specifications with more leads and lags.




                                                             24
Accountability Office, 2013). However, as we show next, the mean MA/FFS coding difference masks

important heterogeneity not previously considered by regulators.


6.2    Falsification Tests

As further support of the identifying assumption, in Table 3 we conduct a series of falsification tests

intended to uncover any correlation between changes in MA penetration and changes in other time-

varying county characteristics not plausibly affected by upcoding. Each column in the table replicates

specifications from Table 2, but with alternative dependent variables. In columns 1 and 2, the depen-

dent variable is the demographic portion of the risk score. The demographic portion of the risk score

is based only on age and gender, which, unlike diagnoses, are not manipulable by the insurer. CMS

retrieves demographic data from the Social Security Administration. Both the lagged and contempo-

raneous coefficients are near zero and insignificant, showing no correlation between MA penetration

and the portion of the risk score that is exogenous to insurer and provider actions.34

      In columns 3 through 6 of Table 3, we test whether changes in MA penetration are correlated with

independent (non-insurer reported) measures of mortality and morbidity. Mortality is independently

reported by vital statistics. For morbidity, finding data that is not potentially contaminated by the

insurers’ coding behavior is challenging. The typical sources of morbidity data are the medical claims

reported by insurers. Here we rely on cancer incidence data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology,

and End Results (SEER) Program of the National Cancer Institute, which operates an independent

data collection enterprise to determine diagnoses. Cancer data is limited to the subset of counties

monitored by SEER, which accounted for 27% of the US population in 2011 and 25% of the population

over 65. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the county × year mortality rate among

residents age 65 and older. In columns 5 and 6, it is the SEER-reported cancer incidence in the county

× year among residents age 65 and older. Across all of the outcomes in Table 3, coefficients on
contemporaneous and lagged MA penetration are consistently close to zero. In Table A5 we show

that similar results hold when the dependent variables are various measures of the Medicare age

structure in the county × year. Each falsification test supports the assumption that actual county

population health was not changing in a way that was correlated with our identifying variation.
  34 An additional implication of the results in Table 3 (also consistent with our identifying assumption) is that conditional

on county fixed effects, MA plans were not differentially entering counties in which the population structure was shifting
to older ages, which are more generously reimbursed in the risk adjustment formula.



                                                             25
6.3    Heterogeneity and Provider Integration

Because diagnoses originate with providers rather than insurers, insurers face an agency problem

regarding coding. Plans that are provider-owned, selectively contract with physician networks, or

follow managed care models (i.e., HMOs and PPOs) may have more tools available for influencing

provider coding patterns. For example, our conversations with MA insurers and physician groups

indicated that vertically integrated plans often pay their physicians (or physician groups) partly or

wholly as a function of the risk score that physicians’ diagnoses generate. Within large physician

groups, leadership may further transmit this incentive to individuals by placing pressure on low-

scoring physicians to bring their average risk scores into line with the group. Integration, broadly

defined as the strength of the contract between insurers and providers, could therefore influence a

plan’s capacity to affect coding.

      To investigate this possibility, in Table 4 we separate the effects of market share increases among

HMO, PPO, and private fee-for-service (PFFS) plans. HMOs may be the most likely to exhibit integra-

tion, followed by PPOs. PFFS plans are fundamentally different. During most of our sample period,

PFFS plans did not have provider networks. Instead, PFFS plans reimbursed Medicare providers

based on procedure codes (not diagnoses) at standard Medicare rates. Thus, PFFS plans had access

to only a subset of the tools available to managed care plans to influence diagnoses recorded within

the physician’s practice. In particular, PFFS insurers could not arrange a contract with providers that

directly financially rewarded intensive coding. PFFS plans could, nonetheless, set lower copays for

routine and specialist visits than beneficiaries faced under FFS, which may have increased contact

with providers. PFFS plans could also utilize home visits and perform chart reviews.

      As in the main analysis, the coefficients of interest in Table 4 are on lagged penetration.35 Point

estimates in the table show that the strongest coding intensity is associated with managed care plans

generally, and HMOs in particular. Risk scores in HMO plans are around 10% higher than they would

have been for the same Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in FFS. PPO coding intensity is around 7%

higher than FFS. PFFS and employer MA plans, while intensely coded relative to FFS, exhibit rela-

tively smaller effects. Because today, PFFS comprises a very small (<1%) fraction of MA enrollment,

estimates of upcoding based on changes in the HMO/PPO shares (row 1 of columns 1 and 2) are
  35 These regressions also separately control for penetration by the remaining specialized plan types, which served a small

share of the Medicare market. These include Cost Plans, Special Needs Plans, and other temporary CMS demonstration
plans. Contemporaneous (year t) effects are entered as controls in the table but the coefficients on these are not displayed.



                                                             26
likely to be more informative of typical MA coding intensity differences today. Estimates inclusive of

PFFS (as in Table 2) are informative of the overall budgetary impact of MA during our study period.

     In the last column of Table 4, we report on a complementary analysis that classifies MA plans

according to whether the plan was provider-owned, using data collected by Frakt, Pizer and Feldman

(2013). We describe these data in Appendix Section A.8. The analysis uses provider ownership as an

alternative definition of insurer-provider integration. These results indicate that provider-owned

MA plans display coding intensity that is larger than the overall mean among MA plans. Provider

ownership is associated with risk scores that are about 16% higher than in FFS Medicare, while the

average among all other MA plans is a 6% coding difference.

     The results in Table 4 show that the overall average difference in coding intensity masks signif-

icant heterogeneity across plan types.36 This evidence suggests that the costs of aligning physician

and insurer incentives may decline significantly with vertical integration. The issue of vertical rela-

tionships in healthcare markets is a topic of considerable research interest (e.g., Gaynor, Rebitzer and

Taylor, 2004) and practical importance, but as Gaynor, Ho and Town (2015) describe in their recent

review, examination of vertical integration has generally suffered from “a paucity of empirical evi-

dence.” With the caveat that we cannot rule out the possibility that integrated plans produce different

risk scores for reasons unrelated to the closeness of the physician who assigns diagnoses and the plan

whose payment depends on it, we view these results as the first (even suggestive) evidence that ver-

tical integration facilitates gaming of the regulatory system. Although the coding phenomenon of

interest here is a socially inefficient behavior, our findings regarding integration also hint that strong

insurer-provider contracts could be important to the success of programs that target financial in-

centives at the level of insurers or large provider organizations but that are ultimately intended to

influence provider behavior. These include, for example, quality bonuses paid to insurers but based

on provider-influenced metrics.

     Although the internal organization of the MA plan strongly predicts coding intensity, local adop-

tion of electronic health records (EHRs) appears not to play a significant role. We investigated this

possibility using data on adoption of EHR by office-based physicians available from the Office of the

National Coordinator for Health Information Technology in the Department of Health and Human
  36 Ourresults are also likely to mask richer heterogeneity across individual plans with respect to coding intensity. Some
plans might even code less intensely than FFS because they have a strategy based on reduced utilization. We observe only
the mean overall effect (Table 2) or the mean effects by plan type (Table 4), so our results do not rule out the possibility that
some MA plans are less intensely coded than FFS.


                                                               27
Services. The exercise is described in detail in Appendix Section A.9, and the results are displayed in

Table A6. Interactions between lagged penetration and an indicator for high EHR adoption by physi-

cian offices in the local market yield coefficients very close to zero, though the standard errors do not

rule out small effects. We also investigated heterogeneity in coding intensity along for-profit/not-

for-profit status of plans but found no significant differences. (See Appendix A.10 and Table A7.)

      Finally, in Appendix Table A8, we examine effect heterogeneity along several margins of cross-

county differences, including the starting level of MA penetration, the change in MA penetration

over the sample period, the change in market concentration over the sample period, and the Medi-

care population size. Among these characteristics, there is some evidence that the coding impacts

of MA expansions are larger in county markets that began the sample period with lower MA pene-

tration, though we lack the statistical power to estimate this heterogeneity precisely. A larger effect

in counties with lower MA shares in 2007 could be consistent with favorable (compensated) selec-

tion into MA,37 combined with larger upcoding effects for relatively healthier consumers, though

the evidence is mixed: We investigate heterogeneity in coding across beneficiaries of different health

statuses in our individual-level analysis in the next section.



7     Individual-Level Evidence

We next turn to a smaller, individual-level dataset. In these data, we can exploit the within-person

change in insurance status that occurs when 64-year-olds age into Medicare at 65 and choose ei-

ther FFS or MA. This allows us to (i) demonstrate the robustness of our key empirical results to an

entirely different identification strategy, (ii) investigate the margins along which upcoding occurs,

and (iii) generate estimates that fully capture any practice-style spillovers into FFS in the longer-run

equilibrium.


7.1    Data: Massachusetts All-Payer Claims

We use the 2010-2013 Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Dataset (APCD) to track how reported diag-

noses for a person change when the person enrolls in MA. The APCD includes an individual identi-

fier that allows us to follow consumers across years and health plans as they change insurance status.
  37 Advantageous selection into MA implies that the marginal MA enrollee is healthier in low-penetration markets, all

else equal.



                                                         28
These data cover all private insurer claims data, including Medicare Advantage, Medigap, employer,

and individual-market commercial insurers. Therefore, we can observe a consumer in her employer

plan at age 64 and then again in her private MA plan at age 65.

     FFS claims to Medicare are not directly captured as they are exempted from the Massachusetts

regulator’s reporting requirements. To indirectly identify claims belonging to FFS enrollees, we fol-

low an approach developed by Wallace and Song (2016), and use data from private Medigap plans.

For FFS enrollees with supplemental Medigap coverage, Medigap pays some fraction of almost ev-

ery FFS claim, creating a duplicate record of the information in the FFS claim sent to Medicare in the

form of a Medigap claim we can observe.38 Conditional on the FFS enrollee having a Medigap plan,

we observe a complete record of all the diagnosis information needed to construct a risk score. To

the extent that our sample of observable FFS enrollees is a good proxy for the full FFS population in

Massachusetts with respect to changes in coding at age 65, we can estimate the differential change in

diagnoses at 65 among MA enrollees relative to FFS enrollees.39

     We focus on two groups of consumers in the data: all individuals who join an MA plan within

one year of their 65th birthday and all individuals who join a Medigap plan within one year of their

65th birthday. We divide enrollment spells into 6-month blocks and limit the sample to individuals

with at least six months of data before and after joining MA or Medigap. These 6-month periods

include different calendar months × years for different individuals. For example, for an individual

who enrolled in Medicare in March 2010, period -1 is September 2009 through February 2010, period

0 is March 2010 through August 2010, period 1 is September 2010 through February 2011, and so

on. For the pre-Medicare period we include all 6-month periods during which the individual was

continuously enrolled in some form of health insurance. For the post-Medicare period, we include

all 6-month periods during which the individual was continuously enrolled in either MA or Medigap.

Our final sample includes 34,901 Medigap enrollees and 10,337 MA enrollees. The mean number of

6-month periods prior to Medicare enrollment that we observe is 4.6 (just over 2 years), and the mean

number of 6-month periods after Medicare enrollment is 4.4. Additional details regarding the sample
  38 Nationally, about 31% of 65-year-old FFS enrollees have a supplemental Medigap policy.       The only claims that Medigap
does not pay any part of are hospital readmissions and lab claims (paid in full by FFS). Our analysis assumes these types
of claims contain no relevant diagnoses that are not also recorded on another claim for the beneficiary. For hospital read-
missions, it is unlikely that the new admission will include relevant diagnoses of a chronic condition that did not appear
in a prior admission. Differential treatment of lab claims is irrelevant for the calculation of risk scores because the CMS
algorithm that generates HCCs from claims ignores diagnoses recorded on lab claims.
  39 Note that this requirement is weaker than requiring that levels of risk scores are similar between FFS enrollees with and

without Medigap.


                                                             29
construction are included in Appendix Section A.11.

      We use diagnoses from the claims data to generate risk scores for each individual based on di-

agnosed conditions during each 6-month period in the individual’s enrollment panel. Risk scores

are calculated according to the same Medicare Advantage HCC model regardless of the plan type in

which the consumer is enrolled (i.e., employer, individual market, FFS, or MA). These risk scores do

not share the lagged property of the scores from the administrative data used in Sections 5 and 6 as

we calculate the scores ourselves based on current-year diagnoses. We normalize these risk scores by

dividing by the pre-Medicare enrollment mean of the 6-month risk score.


7.2    Risk Scores across the Age 65 Threshold

To recover the effect of entering MA relative to entering FFS on an individual’s risk score, we estimate

the following difference-in-differences regression:


                         rimt = β 0 + β 1 MAi + β 2 MAi × Postt + αt + Γm + eimt ,                       (10)


where rimt represents i’s risk score during 6-month period t, MAi is an indicator equal to one in

all periods for anyone who will eventually elect to join MA, Postt is an indicator equal to one for

periods of post-Medicare enrollment, αt represents fixed effects for each 6-month period relative to

initial Medicare enrollment, and Γm controls for a full set of month × year of Medicare entry fixed

effects (e.g., joined Medicare in June 2012). β 2 is the difference-in-differences coefficient of interest. It

measures the differential change in risk scores between the pre- and post-Medicare periods for indi-

viduals enrolling in MA vs. individuals enrolling in FFS. We also estimate versions of this regression

where we include individual fixed effects or match on pre-enrollment characteristics.

      We begin in Figure 3A by plotting the coefficients from an event study version of Equation (10)

where we interact MAi with each of the period fixed effects (αt ) instead of a single Post indicator.

This specification makes it simple to assess the existence of differential pre-trends, which here would

indicate that people who would eventually choose MA were already on a path to higher risk scores

prior to their actual Medicare enrollment. Each plotted coefficient represents the difference in the

differences of risk scores of people entering MA vs. FFS in the indicated period relative to the period

just before Medicare enrollment (period −1). The dashed vertical line indicates Medicare enrollment



                                                     30
(the start of period 0). The figure shows that during the 36 months prior to Medicare enrollment, the

risk scores for the MA and FFS groups were not differentially trending. Post-Medicare enrollment,

however, there is a clear divergence, with risk scores for the MA group increasing much more rapidly

than risk scores for the FFS group. By the sixth 6-month period (3 years after Medicare enrollment),

normalized risk scores for the MA group were higher by 0.1, or about 10% of the pre-period mean,

relative to the FFS group. The apparent growth in the MA coding effect from time zero to 36 months

is consistent with the ratcheting-up interpretation of results from column 4 of Table 2 (in the national

sample and main identification strategy). These showed that effects were larger (8.7%) by the second

year following a shift in θ. Figures 3B and 3C present similar event studies where the dependent

variable is the number of HCCs and the probability of having any HCC during the 6-month period,

respectively. These figures show similar patterns.

    Table 5 presents regression estimates in which all 6-month periods are grouped as either pre- or

post-Medicare enrollment spells, as in Equation (10). Column 1 presents results without individual

fixed effects, while column 2 includes individual fixed effects, which subsume the MA indicator.

The negative coefficient on MAi in the first row of column 1 indicates that during the pre-Medicare

periods, people who would eventually select into MA had lower risk scores than people who would

eventually select FFS, consistent with previous evidence that MA is advantageously selected (e.g.,

Curto et al., 2014). The coefficients of interest on MAi × Postt indicate that risk scores for the MA

group grew more rapidly in the post-Medicare periods relative to the FFS group: The risk score of

an individual enrolling in MA increased by 4.7 to 5.8% more than the risk score of an individual

enrolling in FFS between the pre- and post-Medicare periods. This magnitude is consistent with the

visual evidence in Figure 3, if one took the mean over the entire post period.

    The results are robust to alternative ways of controlling for MA/FFS selection. In columns 3

through 6 of Table 5, we estimate versions of the regression in column 1 in which we match individ-

uals on pre-period observable characteristics: gender, county of residence, pre-Medicare risk scores,

and pre-Medicare count of HCCs. For these regressions, we generate propensity scores on com-

binations of these variables, then weight the difference-in-differences regressions using these scores,

dropping observations for which there is no common support. This matching procedure significantly

reduces the coefficient that reflects selection: the coefficient on MAi reduces from −0.112 to −0.028.

But even as the selection estimate is reduced, estimates of the difference-in-differences effect of in-



                                                  31
terest (the effect of MA enrollment on risk scores in the post period) are stable, remaining similar in

size to the main specifications in columns 1 and 2. In Appendix Table A9, we estimate versions of

Equation (10) that include interactions between Postt and a full set of fixed effects for an individual’s

pre-Medicare plan. Effects are identified off of consumers in the same pre-65 employer or individual

market plan who make a different MA/FFS choice at 65. In all robustness exercises, the results are

consistent with columns 1 though 6 of Table 5.

      These results support and complement the findings of our main analysis, though it is important

to understand the limitations of the individual-level analysis. Specifically, the analysis here is limited

to just the subset of FFS enrollees who enroll in Medigap. It is also limited to individuals who live in

Massachusetts. And the nature of the identification exercise here means that these effects are identi-

fied for 65- (but not 85-) year-olds. We also note that point estimates derived from individual claims

data are likely to somewhat underestimate effects because claims data do not capture all diagnoses

submitted by MA plans to the regulator for risk score purposes. In particular, claims data do not

reflect diagnoses added via chart review programs.40 Our main, national analysis in Section 6 faces

none of these limitations. Nonetheless, these individual data have distinct advantages for consid-

ering the mechanisms behind the differential coding in MA. They also allow us to observe coding

differences in a setting where MA penetration is stable. We turn to each of this issues next.


7.3      Mechanisms

In addition to the estimates of the coding effects, the richer data in the APCD allows us to investigate

some of the mechanisms behind the differential coding increases we observe in MA. Of particular

interest is who is upcoded: relatively healthy or relatively sick enrollees? Enrollees who, if not for

MA, would not have made contact with the medical system in a given period, or enrollees with

regular healthcare utilization regardless of the MA/FFS enrollment choice? Understanding such

questions is useful in forming future regulatory frameworks that are less susceptible to manipulable

diagnosis coding.

      In columns 7 through 10 of Table 5, we investigate MA coding effects along the extensive and
  40 A subset of diagnoses typically come from physicians’ notes and are often extracted by third parties or insurer in-
house chart review programs. These are submitted to CMS but never recorded on the claims themselves. The omission
of these additional diagnoses (which one large insurer suggested to us make up about 20% of all submitted diagnoses)
would cause these estimates to be smaller than the estimates from Section 6, which are based on the actual risk scores in
the administrative data and so include submitted diagnoses not present on claims.



                                                           32
intensive margins. In columns 7 and 8, we replace the dependent variable with an indicator for hav-

ing at least one HCC in a 6-month period. Individuals in the MA group have a lower probability of

having an HCC during the pre-Medicare period, but their probability of having any HCC increases

more in the post-Medicare periods relative to the FFS group. Columns 9 and 10 investigate the inten-

sive margin. The dependent variable in these columns is the number of HCCs during the 6-month

period, restricted to person-period observations with at least one HCC. Here the results with and

without individual fixed effects have different interpretations. Without fixed effects, the results in-

dicate that the average number of HCCs among person-period observations with at least one HCC

increases more quickly after Medicare enrollment for the MA group vs. the FFS group. With fixed

effects, the results indicate that within a person the average number of HCCs during periods with at

least one HCC increases more after Medicare enrollment for the MA group vs. the FFS group. These

results suggest that the MA coding effect occurs on both the extensive and intensive margins.41

     We explore this issue further in Appendix Table A10, in which we variously restrict the sample

to different subsets based on pre-Medicare health status, as reflected by the diagnosed chronic con-

ditions in the pre-Medicare employer plan. These results show that there are important effects of

MA on diagnosis coding for both the healthy and the sick and that the coding effects for the sick are

larger.42

     The (limited) healthcare utilization information in the APCD also allows us to investigate the role

of healthcare use in the coding process. Table A11 presents estimates of versions of Equation 10 where

we replace the risk score with indicators for any utilization (columns 1 and 2), any inpatient utiliza-

tion (columns 3 and 4), and any non-inpatient utilization (columns 5 and 6) during a given 6-month

period.43 These results provide novel evidence that MA has a larger positive effect on the extensive
  41 Potential changes in composition make it difficult to completely separate the intensive margin effects from extensive
margin effects. Because the presence of extensive margin effects implies that the composition of the group of people with
at least one HCC differs pre- vs. post-Medicare, the difference-in-differences coefficient could reflect this compositional
shift. However, we would expect that the marginal individual, for whom MA causes the documentation of a first HCC,
would be healthier than the inframarginal individual who would have at least one HCC documented with or without MA.
This causes the pool of individuals with at least one HCC to be healthier (and have fewer HCCs overall) under MA than
if MA had no effect on the extensive margin. This would make the intensive margin coefficients lower bounds for the true
intensive margin effects.
   42 Appendix Table A8 showed larger effects among counties with lower starting MA penetration. Larger effect sizes for

the sick in Table A10 suggests that advantageous selection into MA is not the driving force behind the heterogeneity results
in Table A8.
   43 We focus on extensive margin utilization effects because these are the least likely to be impacted by issues with the

quality of the claims data in the APCD. In particular, we are concerned that duplicate reporting could bias measures of
utilization measured in spending or visits. In contrast, duplicate records do not impact risk scores, as the nth instance of a
particular diagnosis code has zero marginal impact on a risk score after that diagnosis has been established once.



                                                             33
margin of healthcare utilization than FFS. At the same time, MA seems to lower the probability of

having any inpatient utilization relative to FFS, though this result goes away when individual fixed

effects are included. These results suggest that increasing the probability of ever seeing a doctor

during a given year may be a mechanism by which MA plans achieve overall higher risk scores.

      Table A12 digs further into coding mechanisms by investigating how MA affects risk scores

among the set of MA and FFS enrollees who are using at least some healthcare. Specifications in Table

A12 estimate versions of Equation (10) over only the 6 month periods (within individuals) for which

there is positive healthcare utilization.44 We find that even limiting attention to enrollee-periods with

non-zero utilization in MA or FFS, the post-Medicare enrollment growth in risk scores is larger in

MA relative to FFS. This suggests that MA-induced differences in the probability that a patient has

any contact with a medical provider in a given period (see Table A11) are not solely responsible for

the differential coding observed in MA.


7.4    Practice Style Spillovers in Equilibrium

It is possible that the presence of MA in a market affects how FFS enrollees in the same market are

coded—perhaps because the same physicians treat patients from both regimes. In the context of the

model, spillovers that brought FFS coding closer to MA coding would decrease the excess cost of

MA, as only the MA/FFS coding difference matters for the public funds term of Equation (8). But

such convergence could nonetheless exacerbate the inefficient attention paid to coding, extending it

beyond MA plans.

      With respect to our estimates, if coding practice spillovers varied as a function of MA penetration,

then our market-level estimates in Section 6.1 would not accurately capture the difference between

MA scores and counterfactual FFS scores.45 The estimates would still estimate the causal effects of

MA on county-level risk scores, but the interpretation would change, as the coefficients would be

influenced both by MA/FFS coding differences and by any changes to FFS coding that resulted from

higher MA penetration. This potential complication arises because the national analysis is identified
  44 Thisimplies that not all person × period observations are included for each person.
  45 In this case,
                ∂r/∂θ would reflect both consumers moving from a lower coding intensity regime (FFS) to a higher coding
intensity regime (MA) and any contemporaneous increases in coding intensity in FFS caused by the spread of MA coding
practices. Such spillovers would thus lead to the results from our market-level analysis being overestimates of the differ-
ence between FFS and MA coding intensity. The MA/FFS coding difference is the relevant parameter for assessing the MA
overpayment. Effects of MA on FFS coding behavior would be relevant for assessing the inefficiency of over-investment in
coding services (see Section 3).



                                                            34
off of changes in the local MA presence.

      The person fixed-effects analysis, however, does not share this property. In the years leading

up to our sample period for the Massachusetts analysis, MA plan presence in Massachusetts was

remarkably stable: MA penetration in Massachusetts declined by an insignificant 0.2 percentage points

from 2008 to 2011. This implies that any coding practice spillovers from MA to FFS are likely to have

already occurred and that the coding differences we estimate using the person-fixed effects strategy

fully captures equilibrium MA vs. FFS coding intensity differences, net of such spillovers. The person

fixed-effects results thus represent a test of whether our estimates from Section 6.1 are overestimates

of the longer run MA/FFS coding difference due to spillovers of MA coding practices to FFS. Because

the estimated coding differences are very similar under the two identification strategies, this test

provides evidence—consistent with beliefs and action by regulators—that FFS coding practices are

not merely converging to MA coding practices over time.



8     Discussion

8.1    Additional Government Spending

In the terms of Eq (8), the total additional cost of the Medicare program due to the subsidy being
                                       
endogenous to risk scores is C NMA ρ .46 Here we have scaled up from per capita costs to total

program costs by replacing the MA share variable θ MA with the count of beneficiaries, NMA . For

every beneficiary choosing MA instead of FFS, total Medicare spending increases by Cρ, the base

payment times the coding intensity difference.

      This excess spending can be determined by combining three values: the number of MA enrollees

(NMA ), the average base subsidy amount paid to MA plans (C), and the difference between the MA

and FFS risk scores (ρ), which from column 3 of Table 2 is 0.064. We illustrate the size of the public

spending impact using program parameters from 2014. In 2014, the average benchmark was $10,140

and 15.7 million beneficiaries were enrolled in an MA plan.47 Combining these values suggests that,

absent any regulatory action to deflate MA plan risk scores, the additional public spending due to
  46 Our model ignores some sources of difference between FFS costs and MA payments that are unrelated to coding. For

example, due to the MA payment floors created by the Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000, C in some counties
may be significantly larger than the counterfactual cost of enrolling a beneficiary in FFS, even absent coding effects.
  47 Because of MA’s bid and rebate system, the model quantity C corresponds most closely to a figure slightly less than

the benchmark, equal to the bid plus rebate. See Song, Landrum and Chernew (2013) for an overview of how benchmarks
map to final payments via the bidding process.


                                                          35
subsidies being endogenous to coding would have been $10.2 billion or $649 per MA enrollee.48

      In fact, in 2010, toward the end of our study period, CMS began deflating MA risk scores by

3.41%, due to concerns about upcoding. In 2014, the deflation was increased to 4.91%. Factoring this

adjustment into our calculations shrinks our estimate of 2014 additional public spending to about

$2.4 billion, or $151 per MA enrollee. One could transform this accounting figure into a welfare loss

given an estimate of κ, the excess burden of raising program funds.

      We have generally assumed that ρ is constant across consumers or varies in a way that is un-

correlated with MA penetration. As discussed in Section 4, if instead individual-level heterogeneity

in ρ were correlated with θ MA , then our main results would capture coding differences only for the

individuals marginal to our variation. In practice, these marginal types are likely to be close to the

average MA enrollee. This is because the variation in θ MA we exploit in our empirical analysis cov-

ers most of the relevant range of MA penetration, as it arises from a period of massive expansion in

the MA market segment. Therefore, even if the individual-specific coding differences are systemati-

cally different for beneficiaries who choose MA versus FFS, our estimates likely reflect the parameter

necessary to calculate the excess public spending.


8.2    Inefficient Sorting

In our model, MA plans can increase the subsidy they receive by over-providing services relative to

the first best. This distorts consumer choices away from FFS and toward MA because MA plans pass

(at least part of) these increased subsidies through to MA consumers in the form of lower premiums.

Although a full analysis of the welfare costs of inefficient sorting between MA and FFS is beyond the

scope of this paper, our estimates of the difference between the MA and FFS risk scores allow us to

shed some light on the size of this distortion by quantifying how the size of the MA market is affected

by the subsidy to more intense coding. This is related to term (ii) in Equation (8).

      To estimate this quantity, we consider a counterfactual policy that uniformly deflates the risk-

adjusted payments from the regulator to an MA plan to exactly compensate for the mean MA/FFS
   48 This back of the envelope calculation is illustrative but necessarily imprecise. For example, we find some evidence that

effects are larger among counties with the smallest MA presence at the start of our sample period and also perhaps larger
among smaller counties (although these results are not robust or precisely estimated). If coding intensity in MA indeed
differed by population size, then an ideal calibration of the excess public spending due to upcoding would apply estimates
that fully incorporated heterogeneity in the effect sizes. Here we lack the statistical power to estimate such heterogeneity
and present instead cost figures based on our main estimate.




                                                             36
coding difference we find. Thus plans receive C instead of C (1 + ρ).49 This change in subsidy, ∆S =

ρ · C, can be combined with demand elasticity estimates from the literature to arrive at simulated

changes in MA enrollment if the coding overpayment were removed. Using program parameters

that correspond approximately to 2010, the transition year in which CMS began deflating risk scores,

we assume a monthly base capitation payment of C = $800. Drawing on the 6.4% estimate from

Table 2, column 3, the simulated change in monthly payment is $51 (= 0.064 · $800).

    Most previous studies of MA demand have estimated semi-elasticities with respect to the con-
                           
                       ∂θ/θ
sumer premium eP ≡            , where p equals the consumer premium and θ denotes the MA mar-
                        ∂p
ket segment enrollment, as above. Table 6 reports these demand elasticities from the literature. The

parameter needed for generating the relevant counterfactuals is the elasticity of demand for the MA
                                                                             
                                                                         ∂θ/θ
market segment with respect to subsidy payments to MA plans, eS ≡               . We convert plan price
                                                                          ∂S
semi-elasticities to plan payment semi-elasticities using empirical estimates of the pass-through rate,
∂p
   . The pass-through rate expresses how the marginal government payment to MA plans translates
∂S
into lower premiums or higher rebates for consumers. Theory predicts that under perfect competi-

tion and assuming no selection on enrollee net cost, this parameter would equal -1, as competition

forces premiums down dollar-for-dollar with the increased subsidy. Unlike in the stylized model of

Section 3, we allow here for imperfect competition, which dampens the enrollment effects of upcod-

ing if pass-through are less than 1 in absolute value. Several studies, including Song, Landrum and

Chernew (2013), Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2017), and Curto et al. (2014), find pass-through rates

in MA of about 50%.50 We therefore assume 50% pass-through.

     The back-of-the-envelope calculations in the third column of Table 6 show that modifying risk

adjustment payments in this way would have large negative impacts on MA enrollment for the range

of elasticities estimated in the literature. Using the smallest demand elasticity (Cabral, Geruso and

Mahoney, 2017) yields a 17% decline in the size of the MA market, while the most elastic estimate

(Dunn, 2010) implies a 33% decline in the size of MA under the counterfactual. These estimates of

reductions in MA enrollment apply to a complete elimination of the subsidy relative to a counter-

factual in which CMS did nothing to account for differential coding intensity in MA. As discussed
  49 In the conclusion, we discuss more nuanced refinements of current risk adjustment policy, with the potential to reduce

the distortionary impacts of within-MA coding differences across plans.
  50 A notable exception is Duggan, Starc and Vabson (2016), which finds a point estimate closer to zero. Under zero pass-

through, all of the incidence of the coding subsidy would fall on the plan. Contract features (δ, γ) would still be distorted
by the coding incentive, but conditional on these distorted contracts, the overpayment due to coding would not cause
consumers to sort inefficiently on the MA/FFS margin.


                                                             37
above, at the end of our sample period CMS began deflating risk scores by 3.41%. In the last column

of Table 6 we show the enrollment effects of increasing the CMS risk score deflation from 3.41% to

the 6.4% coding difference we estimate. The estimates suggest that the additional deflation would

result in a decline in MA enrollment of between 8% and 15%—a decline of 2 and 4 percentage points,

respectively, based on 2010 enrollment.51

     If, in addition to an all-MA deflation, coding were differentially deflated across plan types to

properly account for coding intensity differences within MA uncovered in Table 4, it is likely that the

sorting of consumers across plans within the MA segment would be dramatically affected. Provider-

owned plans currently capture the largest coding subsidies. Leveling payments would imply re-

ducing payments to these plans by an additional 9.2% beyond the all-MA payment reductions (=

15.6 − 6.4, combining estimates from Tables 2 and 4). Curto et al. (2014) estimate demand response at

the MA plan level, rather than MA market segment level, and find own-price elasticities around -1,

implying this kind of reshuffling within the MA market could be substantial.

     Overall, upcoding has the tendency to increase MA enrollment. Relative to the first best, this

decreases welfare. However, in the presence of multiple simultaneous market failures in MA, it is

possible that the tendency toward over-enrollment in MA due to coding counteracts some other op-

posing market failure. For example, MA insurers’ market power implies markups that raise prices

above marginal costs and constrain enrollment. Setting aside the distortions to MA plan benefits

discussed in the next section, the enrollment effects of upcoding could thus be welfare-improving

in the second best sense of counteracting market power. Of course, this offsetting relationship be-

tween “under-enrollment” in MA due to imperfect competition and “over-enrollment” in MA due

to the coding subsidy would be purely coincidental. There is no reason a priori to expect that the

coding subsidy specifically counteracts MA insurer market power or any of the other important mar-

ket failures documented in the context of Medicare Advantage, such as inertia (Sinaiko, Afendulis

and Frank, 2013), spillovers between MA and FFS practice styles (Baicker, Chernew and Robbins,

2013), or the choice salience of non-cash rebates (Stockley et al., 2014). Further, the coding subsidy

reinforces, rather than counteracts, the overpayment to MA plans generated by uncompensated fa-

vorable selection into MA (Brown et al., 2014).
  51 Because these implied effects are large, we note that the only parameter from the present study entering into the cal-

culations in Table 6 is the 6.4% mean coding difference, estimated robustly via two distinct research designs and consistent
with regulators’ policy actions and long held beliefs about coding.




                                                            38
8.3    Contract Distortions

The final component of the welfare decomposition in Equation (8) describes distortions to the MA

contract itself. Our data and identifying variation do not allow us to quantify how much the observed

MA contracts differ from efficient MA contracts. Nonetheless, anecdotal evidence is consistent with

the idea that contract features and insurer activity are distorted in several important ways. First, there

is a niche industry in MA of contractors that provide chart review services to MA carriers—searching

medical records to add diagnoses that were never translated to claims. Such activity may have little

direct benefit to consumers, as both the patient and their physician will often receive no feedback

that their claims-listed diagnoses have changed. Public statements from the regulator, CMS, point to

another example of distorted contracts in the form of in-home health assessments. These assessments

in MA have drawn CMS attention because they appear aimed primarily at boosting risk scores. Such

visits are often not associated with follow-up care or even communication with the primary care

physician.52 Recent criminal and civil actions brought by the US against MA organizations under

the False Claims Act also allege significant insurer—and in some cases physician—efforts to illegally

increase risk scores using techniques that would have no clear benefits for patients. In terms of

legally distorting physician behavior away from what our model would describe as first best, our

discussions with physicians and MA insurers indicate that risk scores are now an explicit part of

many insurer-provider contracts in MA in order to align coding incentives between the two parties.

      We speculate that the coding incentive, along with similar incentives embedded in new pay-for-

performance schemes, may lead to a meaningful share of marginal investments and innovations in

healthcare shifting towards the collection and processing of risk score (and other payment-focused)

data for which the value to the patient is unclear at best. This cost of diagnosis-based risk adjustment

must be considered when evaluating the success of these systems and the important role they play

in counteracting the distortions arising from selection. Investigation of the full extent of these costs

is an important area for future research.
  52 In its 2015 Advance Notice, CMS noted that home health risk assessments in MA...“are typically conducted by health-

care professionals who are contracted by the vendor and are not part of the plan’s contracted provider network, i.e., are
not the beneficiaries’ primary care providers.” And, “Therefore, we continue to be concerned that in-home enrollee risk
assessments primarily serve as a vehicle for collecting diagnoses for payment rather than serve as an effective vehicle to
improve follow-up care and treatment for beneficiaries.” See Appendix Section A.2 for further discussion.




                                                           39
9   Conclusion

The manipulability of the risk adjustment system via diagnosis coding is an issue of significant prac-

tical importance, given the large and growing role of risk adjustment in regulated insurance markets.

Our results demonstrate wide scope for upcoding in Medicare Advantage, one of the largest risk-

adjusted health insurance markets in the US, relative to the fee-for-service option. The estimates

imply significant overpayments to private insurers at a cost to the taxpayer, as well as distortions

to consumer choices. We also find evidence that coding intensity is increasing in a plan’s level of

insurer-provider integration. Our model makes clear that even in managed competition settings

such as the ACA Marketplaces—in which risk adjustment has no first-order impact on public bud-

gets because a regulator simply enforces transfers from plans with lower average risk scores to plans

with higher average risk scores—risk adjustment transfers that are endogenous to coding intensity

distort the provision of coding and non-coding services offered by insurers in equilibrium.

    Nonetheless, risk adjustment addresses an important problem of asymmetric information in in-

surance markets. Therefore, in the second best world in which adverse selection is an inherent feature

of competitive insurance markets, the optimal payment mechanism may include some kind of risk

adjustment despite the costs of and distortions caused by manipulable coding that we document. Our

study offers some insight into potential improvements in risk adjustment mechanism design: From

the perspective of this paper, the risk adjustment literature focusing on the predictive content of risk

scores is pursuing the wrong objective function. Glazer and McGuire (2000) show that to induce ef-

ficient health plan benefit design, risk adjustment must focus on generating insurer incentives rather

than predicting expected costs. Applied to our findings, this insight suggests that the (second best)

optimal payment policy may include coefficients on risk adjusters that account for the susceptibility

of each code to differential coding.

    In principle, with information on the upcoding susceptibility of various conditions, it would

be possible to estimate optimal payment coefficients by minimizing a loss function that includes

coding distortions. In practice, of course, the upcoding susceptibility of risk adjusters (especially

new risk adjusters) may be difficult to observe. One simple-to-implement improvement over the

current system would be coding intensity deflation factors that separately apply to the demographic

portions of the risk score originating from administrative data (such as age, sex, and disability status)

versus the plan-reported diagnosis portions. Our results suggest an optimal zero deflation of the

                                                   40
administrative portion (see Table 3) and a higher deflation to diagnoses, counter to current practice.

    Another potential reform applies to the audit process. Currently, CMS audits submissions of di-

agnoses from MA plans, but the audits are only tasked with determining whether diagnoses were

legally submitted. Given that much of the upcoding we document is likely to be legal rather than

fraudulent, audits that focus instead on the question of whether a given diagnosis would have been

submitted under FFS could be helpful in assessing the proper deflation factors to combat overpay-

ments. This could be done, for example, by assessing which diagnoses are established by MA plans

solely via chart review (an activity that would not occur in FFS) and not captured in any claim. Such

audits could help reduce the excess payments in MA, even if they would not address the marginal

incentives to overcommit resources to coding.

    Even with significant reform, it may not be possible to achieve perfect parity of coding intensity

across the Medicare Advantage and FFS market segments or within MA, among its competing plans.

In that case, any benefits of the MA program in terms of generating consumer surplus or creating

cost-saving externalities within local healthcare markets should be weighed against the additional

taxpayer costs and consumer choice distortions generated by a regulatory system in which the pa-

rameters determining insurer payment are squishy.


References
Baicker, Katherine, Michael E. Chernew, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2013. “The spillover effects of Medi-
  care managed care: Medicare Advantage and hospital utilization.” Journal of Health Economics,
  32(6): 1289 – 1300.
Baker, Laurence. 1997. “HMOs and Fee-For-Service Health Care Expenditures: Evidence from Medi-
  care.” Journal of Health Economics, 16: 453–482.
Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilyana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. 2014. “How does risk se-
  lection respond to risk adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage program.” American
  Economic Review, 104(10): 3335–3364.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
  Choice.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–48.
Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney. 2017. “Does Privatized Health Insurance
  Benefit Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” American Economic Review,
  forthcoming.
Carey, Colleen. 2014. “Government Payments and Insurer Benefit Design in Medicare Part D.”
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
 I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates.” American Economic Review, 104(9): 2593–
 2632.

                                                  41
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect Medical
  Treatment and Patient Health?” The American economic review, 104(4): 1320.

CMS. 2010. “Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2010 Medicare Advantage Capitation Rates and
 Medicare Advantage and Part D Payment Policies.” Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2014. “Can Health Insurance
 Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 20818.

Dafny, Leemore S. 2005. “How Do Hospitals Respond to Price Changes?” American Economic
 Review, 1525–1547.

Decarolis, Francesco. 2015. “Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy De-
 sign?” American Economic Review, 105(4): 1547–80.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, and Nicholas Ryan. 2013. “Truth-telling by Third-party Au-
 ditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India.” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1499–1545.

Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. 2016. “Who benefits when the government pays
 more? Pass-through in the Medicare Advantage program.” Journal of Public Economics, 141: 50–
 67.

Dunn, Abe. 2010. “The Value of Coverage in the Medicare Advantage Insurance Market.” Journal of
 Health Economics, 29(6): 839–855.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets
  Using Variation in Prices.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 877–921.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Raymond Kluender, and Paul Schrimpf. 2015. “Beyond statistics:
  the economic content of risk scores.” MIT.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen. 2013. “Selec-
  tion on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance.” American Economic Review, 103(1): 178–219.

Einav, Liran, and Jonathan Levin. 2014. “Managed Competition in Health Insurance.”

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of geographic variation
  in health care: Evidence from patient migration.” The quarterly journal of economics, 131(4): 1681–
  1726.

Fisher, Elliott S, Stephen M Shortell, Sara A Kreindler, Aricca D Van Citters, and Bridget K Larson.
  2012. “A framework for evaluating the formation, implementation, and performance of account-
  able care organizations.” Health Affairs, 31(11): 2368–2378.

Frakt, Austin B, and Rick Mayes. 2012. “Beyond capitation: how new payment experiments seek to
  find the “sweet spot” in amount of risk providers and payers bear.” Health Affairs, 31(9): 1951–
  1958.

Frakt, Austin B, Steven D Pizer, and Roger Feldman. 2013. “Plan–Provider Integration, Premiums,
  and Quality in the Medicare Advantage Market.” Health Services Research, 48(6pt1): 1996–2013.

Frandsen, Brigham, and James B Rebitzer. 2014. “Structuring Incentives within Accountable Care
  Organizations.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, ewu010.

                                                 42
Frank, Richard G, and Zeckhauser. 2000. “Custom-made versus ready-to-wear treatments: Behav-
  ioral propensities in physicians’ choices.” Journal of Health Economics, 26(6): 1101–1127.

Gaynor, Martin, James B Rebitzer, and Lowell J Taylor. 2004. “Physician incentives in health main-
 tenance organizations.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(4): 915–931.

Gaynor, M., K. Ho, and R. Town. 2015. “The Industrial Organization of Health Care Markets.”
 Journal of Economic Literature, 53(2).

Geruso, Michael. 2017. “Demand heterogeneity in insurance markets: Implications for equity and
 efficiency.” Quantitative Economics, 8(3): 929–975.

Geruso, Michael, and Timothy J. Layton. 2015. “Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy
 Risk Adjustment.” NBER Working Paper.

Geruso, Michael, and Timothy J. Layton. 2017. “Selection in Health Insurance Markets and Its Policy
 Remedies.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Forthcoming.

Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G McGuire. 2000. “Optimal risk adjustment in markets with adverse
 selection: an application to managed care.” The American Economic Review, 90(4): 1055–1071.

Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G McGuire. 2002. “Setting health plan premiums to ensure efficient
 quality in health care: minimum variance optimal risk adjustment.” Journal of Public Economics,
 84(2): 153–173.

Glied, Sherry, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2002. “How do doctors behave when some (but not all) of
 their patients are in managed care?” Journal of Health Economics, 21(2): 337–353.

Gold, Marsha. 2009. “Medicare’s Private Plans: A Report Card On Medicare Advantage.” Health
 Affairs, 28(1): w41–w54.

Government Accountability Office. 2013. “Substantial Excess Payments Underscore Need for
 CMS to Improve Accuracy of Risk Score Adjustmnets.” Accessed on Oct 8, 2013 at
 http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/651712.pdf.

Griffin, John M., and Dragon Yongjun Tang. 2011. “Did Credit Rating Agencies Make Unbiased
 Assumptions on CDOs?” American Economic Review, 101(3): 125–30.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. 1986. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory
 of Vertical and Lateral Integration.” Journal of Political Economy, 94(4): 691–719.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2017. “Delivering Public Health Insurance through Private Plan Choice in the
 United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4(4): 3–22.

Gruber, Jonathan, Phillip Levine, and Douglas Staiger. 1999. “Abortion legalization and child living
 circumstances: who is the “marginal child”?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): 263–291.

Ho, Kate, Joe Hogan, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2014. “The Impact of Consumer Inattention on Insurer
 Pricing in the Medicare Part D Program.”

Kolstad, Jonathan T. 2013. “Information and Quality When Motivation Is Intrinsic: Evidence from
 Surgeon Report Cards.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2875–2910.

Kronick, Richard, and W. Pete Welch. 2014. “Measuring Coding Intensity in the Medicare Advan-
  tage Program.” Medicare and Medicaid Research Review, 4(2): E1–E19.

                                                43
Newhouse, Joseph P, Mary Price, Jie Huang, J Michael McWilliams, and John Hsu. 2012. “Steps
 to reduce favorable risk selection in Medicare advantage largely succeeded, boding well for health
 insurance exchanges.” Health Affairs, 31(12): 2618–2628.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An
 Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4): 629–
 649.

Sacarny, Adam. 2014. “Technological Diffusion Across Hospitals: The Case of a Revenue-Generating
  Practice.” MIT.

Schulte,    Fred.     2014.    “Judgment      calls  on     billing   make  upcoding    prose-
  cutions   rare.”    The    Center    for   Public Integrity,     May  19,  2014.   Available:
  http://www.publicintegrity.org/2012/09/15/10835/judgment-calls-billing-make-upcoding-
  prosecutions-rare [Last accessed: 15 April 2015].

Schulte,    Fred.    2015.   “More     Whistleblowers     Say    Health Plans    Are   Goug-
  ing     Medicare.”     National    Public     Radio,       May    19,    2014.    Available:
  http://www.npr.org/blogs/health/2015/04/23/401522021/more-whistleblowers-say-health-
  plans-are-gouging-medicare [Last accessed: 15 April 2015].

Sinaiko, Anna D, Christopher C Afendulis, and Richard G Frank. 2013. “Enrollment in Medicare
  Advantage Plans in Miami-Dade County Evidence of Status Quo Bias?” INQUIRY: The Journal of
  Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 50(3): 202–215.

Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John E Wennberg, and Elliott S
  Fisher. 2010. “Regional variations in diagnostic practices.” New England Journal of Medicine,
  363(1): 45–53.

Song, Zirui, Mary Beth Landrum, and Michael E Chernew. 2013. “Competitive bidding in Medicare
  Advantage: Effect of benchmark changes on plan bids.” Journal of health economics, 32(6): 1301–
  1312.

Stockley, Karen, Thomas McGuire, Christopher Afendulis, and Michael E. Chernew. 2014. “Pre-
  mium Transparency in the Medicare Advantage Market: Implications for Premiums, Benefits, and
  Efficiency.” NBER Working Paper.

van de Ven, Wynand P. M. M., and Randall P. Ellis. 2000. “Risk Adjustment in Competitive Health
  Plan Markets.” In Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 1A, , ed. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P.
  Newhouse, 755–845. Elsevier.

Wallace, Jacob, and Zirui Song. 2016. “Traditional Medicare versus private insurance: how spend-
 ing, volume, and price change at age sixty-five.”




                                                44
                  Figure 1: Identifying Coding Differences in Selection Markets

                                                                 (A) Selection Only
                                            1.5
                                            1.5
                                                                                  𝑟̅𝑟̅!!"
                                                          Selection                  !!"
                                                          Selection
                                    Score
                               RiskScore
                                                                                   𝑟̅𝑟̅
                       AverageRisk

                                            1.0
                                            1.0
                      Average




                                                                                                 Selection
                                                                                  𝑟̅𝑟̅!"         Selection
                                                                                     !"



                                            0.5
                                            0.5

                                                  0.0                                                        1.0
                                                  0.0       MA
                                                            MA Market
                                                               Market share
                                                                      share // Penetration
                                                                               Penetration (θ)
                                                                                           (θ)
                                                                                                             1.0




                                                        (B) Selection and Differential Coding


                                            1.5
                                            1.5
                                                                                  𝑟̅𝑟̅!!"
                                                                                     !!"
                                                          Selection
                                                          Selection
                                                                                   𝑟̅𝑟̅
                                   Score
                              RiskScore




                                                                                                                    Coding
                                                                                                                   Coding
                      AverageRisk




                                            1.0
                                            1.0
                                                                                  𝑟̅𝑟̅!"
                                                                                     !"
                     Average




                                                                                     !!"
                                                                                                 Selection
                                                                                                 Selection
                                                                                 𝑟̅𝑟̅!"
                                                                                     !!"
                                                                                    !"


                                            0.5
                                            0.5

                                                  0.0                                                        1.0
                                                  0.0       MA
                                                            MA Market
                                                               Market share
                                                                      share // Penetration
                                                                               Penetration (θ)
                                                                                           (θ)
                                                                                                             1.0



Note: The figure illustrates how to separate coding intensity differences from selection when true underlying health
risk is unobservable. The horizontal axis measures the market share of MA, θ. The vertical axis measures the average
risk score. Average risk in FFS is r FFS , average risk in MA is r MA , and the average risk of all enrollees in the market
is r. The dashed line in the bottom panel represents the counterfactual average risk that plan k enrollees would have
been assigned under plan j’s coding practices, r FFSMA . All consumers choose either FFS or MA. MA is assumed to be
advantageously selected in both panels. In the bottom panel MA is also assumed to have higher coding intensity.
If and only if there are coding differences between MA and FFS, then the slope of the market-level risk curve with
                          ∂r
respect to marketshare ( ∂θ  ) will be different from zero.




                                                                         45
  Figure 2: Identification: Within-County Growth in Medicare Advantage Penetration

                                    (A) National MA Penetration Changes Following MMA Implementation




                        25

                                                       Part D Introduction
                               20
               MA penetration, %




                                                          MMA
               15       10
                                    99

                                          00

                                                01

                                                       02

                                                             03

                                                                   04

                                                                         05

                                                                               06

                                                                                     07

                                                                                             08

                                                                                                     09

                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                 20
                               19

                                         20

                                               20

                                                     20

                                                            20

                                                                  20

                                                                        20

                                                                              20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                          20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                          20
                                                          (B) Within-County MA Growth




                        -.15             -.1    -.05      0        .05      .1       .15       .2         .25     .3
                                                       Penetration 2011 - Penetration 2006


Note: The top panel displays national trends in MA penetration, where the unit of observation is the Medicare bene-
ficiary. Source: Kaiser Family Foundation, 2013. The bottom panel displays a histogram of within-county changes in
penetration from 2006 to 2011 in the main estimation sample. The unit of observation is the county.




                                                                        46
                                                                  Figure 3: Alternative Identification: Diff-in-Diff Event Study at Age 65

                                                                                                                                                                            (A) Risk Scores




                                                                                          Risk Score Difference: Consumers Entering MA vs. FFS
                                                                                           -.05         0          .05       .1         .15




                                                                                                                                                 -36 mths     -24 mths     -12 mths     0 mths                                                        12 mths      24 mths      36 mths



                                                                  (B) Counts of Coded Conditions                                                                                                                                                         (C) Coded with Any Chronic Condition
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pr(Any HCC) Difference: Consumers Entering MA vs. FFS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .08
# of HCCs Difference: Consumers Entering MA vs. FFS
                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .06
                                        .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .04
                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .02
                     .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
           0




                                                                                                                                                                                               -.02
 -.05




                                                       -36 mths   -24 mths   -12 mths   0 mths                                                      12 mths      24 mths      36 mths                                                              -36 mths     -24 mths     -12 mths     0 mths   12 mths   24 mths   36 mths



    Note: The figure plots coefficient estimates from flexible difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent
    variable is risk score (Panel A), count of HCCs (Panel B), or an indicator for any HCC (Panel C). Plotted coefficients
    are estimated from a version of Equation 10 in which MAi is interacted with each of the period fixed effects, αt ,
    instead of a single Post indicator in order to assess pre trends and the unfolding of effects over time in the post-
    Medicare period. The plotted coefficients represent the regression adjusted differences between individuals who
    will eventually enter MA versus eventually enter FFS, relative to the period just before Medicare enrollment. The
    horizontal axis is scaled in 6-month periods during the individual’s panel of observations. 95% confidence intervals
    are plotted with dashed lines. Data are from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Database. See text for additional
    details.




                                                                                                                                                                                      47
                                              Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                  Analysis	  Sample:	  Balanced	  Panel	  of	  Counties,	  2006	  to	  2011
                                                       2006                                    2011
                                                 Mean          Std.	  Dev.       Mean                 Std.	  Dev.              Obs

MA	  penetration	  (all	  plan	  types)      7.1%                9.1%              16.2%              12.0%               3128
 Risk	  (HMO/PPO)	  plans                      3.5%                7.3%              10.5%              10.5%               3128
 PFFS	  plans                                   2.7%                3.2%               2.7%               3.7%               3128
 Employer	  MA	  plans                         0.7%                2.2%               2.8%               4.3%               3128
 Other	  MA	  plans                            0.2%                1.4%               0.0%               0.0%               3128

MA-­‐Part	  D	  penetration                    5.3%                8.0%              13.1%              10.8%               3128
MA	  non-­‐Part	  D	  penetration             1.8%                3.0%               3.0%               4.0%               3128

Market	  risk	  score                          1.000               0.079             1.000              0.085               3128
Risk	  score	  in	  TM                        1.007               0.082             1.003              0.084               3128
Risk	  score	  in	  MA                        0.898               0.171             0.980              0.147               3124

Ages	  within	  Medicare
  <65                                           19.8%                6.3%              17.2%               6.2%               3128
  65-­‐69                                       23.5%                3.4%              23.7%               3.1%               3128
  70-­‐74                                       19.2%                1.9%              20.2%               2.5%               3128
  75-­‐79                                       15.9%                2.1%              15.4%               1.8%               3128
  ≥80                                           21.6%                4.4%              23.5%               5.0%               3128



 Note: The table reports county-level summary statistics for the first and last year of the main analysis sample. The
 sample consists of 3,128 counties for which we have a balanced panel of data on Medicare Advantage penetration
 and risk scores. MA penetration in the first row is equal to the beneficiary-months spent in Medicare Advantage
 divided by the total number of Medicare months in the county × year. The market risk score is averaged over all
 Medicare beneficiaries in the county and normed to 1.00 nationally in each year.




                                                                48
   Table 2: Main Results: Impacts of MA Expansion on Market-Level Reported Risk


                                                   Dependent Variable: County-Level Average Risk Score
                                                     (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)

      MA Penetration t (placebo)                    0.007            0.001            0.001             0.006
                                                   (0.015)          (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.017)

      MA Penetration t-1                          0.069**          0.067**           0.064**          0.041**
                                                  (0.011)          (0.012)           (0.011)          (0.015)

      MA Penetration t-2                                                                               0.046*
                                                                                                       (0.022)


      Main Effects
        County FE                                     X                X                 X                X
        Year FE                                       X                X                 X                X
      Additional Controls
        State X Year Trend                                             X                 X                X
        County X Year Demographics                                                       X                X

      Mean of Dep. Var.                             1.00             1.00              1.00             1.00
      Observations                                 15,640           15,640            15,640           12,512



Note: The table reports coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the
average risk score in the market (county). Effects of contemporaneous (t) and lagged (t − 1, t − 2) Medicare Advan-
tage (MA) penetration are displayed. Because MA risk scores are calculated using diagnosis data from the prior plan
year, changes in MA enrollment can plausibly affect reported risk scores via differential coding only with a lag. Thus,
contemporaneous penetration acts as a placebo test. Observations are county × years. The inclusion of an additional
lag in column 4 reduces the available panel years and the sample size. All specifications include county and year
fixed effects. Column 2 additionally controls for state indicators interacted with a linear time trend. Columns 3 and 4
additionally control for the demographic makeup of the county × year by including 18 indicator variables capturing
the fraction of the population in 5-year age bins from 0 to 85 and >85. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered
at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                           49
       Table 3: Falsification Tests: Effects on Measures Not Manipulable by Coding

                                                     Dependent Variable, Calculated as County Average:

                                       Demographic Portion of                                Cancer Incidence Over
                                             Risk Score              Mortality Over 65                 65
                                          (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)

     MA Penetration t                      0.001      0.001          0.001       0.001         0.001      0.001
                                          (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.002)

     MA Penetration t-1                    0.000     -0.001          0.000      -0.001         0.000     -0.001
                                          (0.002)    (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.002)


     Main Effects
       County FE                            X           X              X          X              X          X
       Year FE                              X           X              X          X              X          X
     Additional Controls
       State X Year Trend                   X           X              X          X              X          X
       County X Year Demographics                       X                         X                         X

     Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.485      0.485          0.048       0.048          0.023      0.023
     Observations                         15,640     15,640         15,408      15,408         3,050      3,050



Note: The table reports estimates from several falsification exercises in which the dependent variables are not in
principle manipulable by coding activity. The coefficients are from difference-in-differences regressions of the same
forms as those displayed in Table 2, but in which the dependent variables are changed, as indicated in the column
headers. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the average demographic risk score in the county-year, calcu-
lated by the authors using data from the Medicare Beneficiary Summary File based on age, gender, and Medicaid
status, but not diagnoses. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the mortality rate which is derived using data
from the National Center for Health Statistics. In columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the cancer incidence
rate from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program of the National Cancer Institute, which
tracks cancer rates independently from rates observed in claims data. The smaller sample size in columns 3 and 4 is
due to the NCHS suppression of small cells. The smaller sample size in columns 5 and 6 reflects the incomplete ge-
ographical coverage of SEER cancer incidence data. Cancer incidence and mortality are both calculated conditional
on age ≥ 65. Observations are county × years. Controls are as described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses
are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                            50
                 Table 4: Heterogeneity by Plan Type and by Plan Integration


                                                                                                  By Plan
                                                         Heterogeneity by Plan Type
                                                                                                 Ownership

                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)

       HMO & PPO Share, t-1                    0.089**      0.088**
                                               (0.026)      (0.026)

       HMO Share, t-1                                                   0.103**       0.101**
                                                                        (0.028)       (0.028)

       PPO Share, t-1                                                   0.068*        0.068*
                                                                        (0.028)       (0.028)

       PFFS Share, t-1                         0.057*       0.058*      0.057*        0.058*
                                               (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.025)       (0.025)

       Employer MA Share, t-1                  0.041**      0.041**     0.041**       0.041**
                                               (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.012)       (0.012)

       Non-Provider-Owned Plans Share, t-1                                                        0.061**
                                                                                                  (0.011)

       Provider-Owned Plans Share, t-1                                                            0.156**
                                                                                                  (0.031)

       Main Effects
         County FE                                X            X           X            X            X
         Year FE                                  X            X           X            X            X
       Additional Controls
         State X Year Trend                       X            X           X            X            X
         County X Year Demographics               X            X           X            X            X
         Special Need Plans (SNP) Share                        X                        X

       Observations                            15,640       15,640      15,640        15,640       15,640


Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the
average risk score in the market (county). Effects of lagged (t − 1) MA penetration are displayed, disaggregated in
columns 1 through 4 by shares of the Medicare market in each category of MA plans (HMO/PPO/PFFS/Employer
MA). Share variables are fractions of the full (MA plus FFS) Medicare population. Regressions in these columns
additionally control for the corresponding contemporaneous (t) effects and the share and lagged share of all other
contract types. In column 5, MA penetration is disaggregated by whether plans were provider-owned, following the
definitions constructed by Frakt, Pizer and Feldman (2013) (see Section A.8 for full details). Observations are county
× years. Controls are as described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. *
p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                          51
Table 5: Alternative Identification: Coding Differences at Age 65 Threshold, MA vs. FFS

 Dependent Variable:                        Risk Score                            At least 1 HCC     Count of HCCs
 Specification:               D-in-D                Matching D-in-D              Extensive Margin   Intensive Margin
 Sample Restriction:        Full Sample                   Full Sample               Full Sample      At least 1 HCC
                           (1)       (2)     (3)         (4)       (5)   (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)       (10)

 Selected MA             -0.113**          -0.116** -0.054** -0.038** -0.028**   -0.043**           -0.143**
                          (0.007)           (0.006) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)       (0.003)            (0.014)

 Post-65 X Selected MA   0.058** 0.047**   0.058** 0.054** 0.060** 0.051**       0.033** 0.033**    0.090** 0.071**
                         (0.009) (0.007)   (0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)       (0.004) (0.003)    (0.018) (0.018)

 Person FE                             X                                                     X                  X
 Matching Variables:
   Gender/County                              X          X         X     X
   Count of HCCs                                         X               X
   Risk Score                                                      X     X

 Mean of Dep. Var.        1.00    1.00      1.00    1.00    1.00    1.00          0.52    0.52       1.07    1.07
 Observations            319,094 319,094   316,861 314,293 288,407 287,676       319,094 319,094    118,327 118,327



Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions described by Eq. 10 in which the depen-
dent variables are the risk score (columns 1 through 6), an indicator for having at least one chronic condition (HCC)
during the period (columns 8 and 9), and the count of chronic conditions (HCCs) conditional on periods where indi-
viduals have at least one HCC (columns 9 and 10). All regressions compare coding outcomes pre- and post-Medicare
enrollment among individuals who select MA vs. individuals who select FFS. Data are from the Massachusetts All-
Payer Claims Dataset. Pre-Medicare claims are from commercial/employer plans. Post-65 claims are from Medicare
Advantage plans for MA enrollees and Medigap plans for FFS enrollees. The sample is restricted to individuals who
join FFS or MA within one year of their 65th birthday and who have at least 6 months of continuous coverage before
and after their 65th birthday. The unit of observation is the person-by-six month period, where six-month periods
are defined relative to the month in which the individual joined Medicare. Columns 2, 8, and 10 include individual
fixed effects. Columns 3-6 report coefficients from regressions where the observations are weighted using propensity
scores estimated using the indicated matching variables. The coefficient on “Selected MA” should be interpreted
as the pre-Medicare enrollment difference in the outcome for individuals who will eventually enroll in an MA plan
vs. individuals who will eventually enroll in FFS. The coefficient on “Post-65 X Selected MA” should be interpreted
as the differential change in the outcome post- vs. pre-Medicare for individuals who join an MA plan vs. individ-
uals who join FFS. Data are described more thoroughly in Sections 7 and A.11. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered at the person level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                             52
Table 6: Counterfactual: Implied MA Enrollment Effects of Removing Coding Subsidy


                                                                             Implied enrollment effect of removing
                                                                                  overpayment due to coding

                                                                                Relative to            Relative to
                                                                           counterfactual of no  counterfactual of 3.4%
                                     Estimated semi- Implied semi-        CMS coding adjustment coding deflation by CMS
                                      price elasticity payment elasticity   (6.4% reduction in      (3% reduction in
              Study                     of demand         of demand             payments)              payments)

Cabral, Geruso, and Mahoney (2014)       -0.0068          0.0034                -17%                      -8%
Atherly, Dowd, and Feldman (2003)        -0.0070          0.0035                -18%                      -8%
Town and Liu (2003)                      -0.0090          0.0045                -23%                     -11%
Dunn (2010)                              -0.0129          0.0065                -33%                     -15%


Note: The table displays back-of-the-envelope calculations for MA market segment enrollment under a counterfac-
tual in which the subsidy to differential coding is removed. A monthly base payment of $800 is assumed. Price
semi-elasticities are taken from the prior literature. Implied semi-payment elasticities of demand have been derived
from semi-price elasticities assuming a pass-through rate of 50%. See text for full details.




                                                           53
Appendix


                                                   APPENDIX

A.1    Background on MA Risk-Adjusted Payments
Medicare Advantage (MA) insurance plans are given monthly capitated payments for each enrolled
Medicare beneficiary. The levels of these county-specific payments are tied to historical fee-for-
service (FFS) Medicare costs in the county. County captitation rates were originally intended to
capture the cost of enrolling the “national average beneficiary” in the FFS Medicare program in the
county, though Congress has made many ad hoc adjustments over time.
     Before 2004, there was relatively minimal risk adjustment of capitation payments in MA, relying
primarily on demographics.53 In 2004, CMS began transitioning to risk adjustment based on diag-
noses obtained during inpatient hospital stays and outpatient encounters. By 2007, diagnosis-based
risk adjustment was fully phased-in. During our study period (2006-2011), risk-adjusted capitation
payments were approximately equal to Sijc = φjc · xijc Λ, where i indexes beneficiaries, j indexes
plans, and c indexes counties (markets).
     The base payment, φjc , could vary within counties because since 2006 MA plans have been re-
quired to submit bids to CMS. These bids are compared to the uniform county benchmark C c . If
the bid is below the county benchmark set by the regulator, the plan receives 75% of the difference
between the bid and the benchmark, which the plan is required to fold back into its premium and
benefits as a “rebate” to beneficiaries.54 Importantly for our purposes, this 75% is still paid out by
CMS into the MA program. This implies that any estimation of coding subsidies should be based on
the capitation payment to plans inclusive of any rebate, suggesting that the county benchmark, C c , is
a good approximation for φjc .

A.2    Diagnosis Coding in Practice
Section 2.2 outlines the practices that insurers can use to influence the diagnosis coding of physicians.
Here, we expand on that discussion. In Figure A1, we outline the various mechanisms insurers em-
ploy to affect diagnosis coding, and in turn risk scoring. Insights in the figure come from investigative
reporting by the Center for Public Integrity, statements by CMS, and our own discussions with MA
insurers and physician groups. We exclude any mechanisms that involve illegal action on the part of
insurers. While fraud is a known problem in MA coding, coding differences can easily arise without
any explicitly illegal actions on the part of the insurer.
     First, before any patient-provider interaction even occurs, insurers can structure contracts with
physician groups such that the payment to the group is a function of the risk-adjusted payment that
the insurer itself receives from the regulator. This directly passes through coding incentives to the
physician groups. Insurers may also choose to selectively contract with providers who code more
aggressively. Additionally, the insurer can influence coding during the medical exam by providing
tools to the physician that pre-populate his notes with information on prior-year diagnoses for the
patient. Since risk adjustment in many settings, including MA, is based solely on the diagnoses from
a single plan year, this increases the probability that diagnoses, once added, are retained indefinitely.
Insurers also routinely provide training to the physician’s billing staff on how to assign codes to ensure
the coding is consistent with the insurer’s financial incentives. Finally, even after claims and codes
  53 From 2001-2003 inpatient diagnoses were used in risk adjustment, but in order to weaken insurer incentives to send

more enrollees to the hospital, CMS only gave these diagnoses a 10% weight in the risk adjustment payment, leaving the
other 90% of the payment based on demographics only.
  54 This description is slightly simplified from the true policy. Often MA plans span multiple counties. When they do, the

insurer submits a single bid that is based on an enrollment-weighted average of the county benchmarks across all counties
in the plan’s service area.


                                                            54
Appendix


are submitted to the insurer for an encounter, the insurer may automatically or manually review
claims, notes, and charts and either add new codes based on physician notes that were not originally
translated to the claims or request a change to the coding in claims by the physician’s billing staff. In-
surers use various software tools to scan patient medical records for diagnoses that were not recorded
in originally submitted claims, but nonetheless met the statutory diagnosis eligibility requirements
and can therefore be added as valid codes.
     In addition to these interventions with physicians and their staffs, insurers directly incentivize
their enrollees to take actions that result in more intensive coding. Insurers may incentivize or re-
quire enrollees to complete annual evaluation and management visits or “risk assessments,” which
are inexpensive to the insurer, but during which codes can be added that would otherwise have
gone undiscovered. Further, if an insurer observes that an enrollee whose expected risk score is
high based on medical history has not visited a physician in the current plan year, the insurer can
directly intervene by proactively contacting the enrollee or sending a physician or nurse to the en-
rollee’s home. The visit is necessary in order to code the relevant, reimbursable diagnoses for the
current plan year and relatively low cost. There is substantial anecdotal evidence and numerous
lawsuits related to such behavior in Medicare Advantage. See, for example, Schulte (2015). And
regulators have expressed serious concern that such visits primarily serve to inflate risk scores. In a
2014 statement, CMS noted that home health visits and risk assessments “are typically conducted by
healthcare professionals who are contracted by the vendor and are not part of the plan’s contracted
provider network, i.e., are not the beneficiaries’ primary care providers.” CMS also noted that there
is “little evidence that beneficiaries’ primary care providers actually use the information collected in
these assessments or that the care subsequently provided to beneficiaries is substantially changed or
improved as a result of the assessments.”
     None of these insurer activities take place in FFS because providers under the traditional system
are paid directly by the government, and the basis of these payments is procedures, not diagnoses.
Under FFS, hospitals are compensated for inpatient visits via the diagnosis-related groups (DRG)
payment system, in which inpatient stays are reimbursed partially based on inpatient diagnoses and
partially based on procedures. It is nonetheless plausible that overall coding intensity in FFS and MA
differs significantly. For one, the set of diagnoses compensated under the inpatient DRG payment
system differs from that of the MA HCC payment system. In addition, the majority of FFS claims
are established in the outpatient setting, in which physician reimbursement depends on procedures,
not diagnoses. In FFS, diagnoses are instead used for the purpose of providing justification for the
services for which the providers are requesting reimbursement.

A.3   Competitive Equilibrium with No Endogenous Risk Scores
In Section 3.3 we claim that under our model, the MA plans {δ, γ; p} offered in a competitive equilib-
rium mirror the parameters set by the social planner. Here we show that. Assume that the risk score
is exogenous to the healthcare and coding services offered by the plan, so that the MA/FFS coding
intensity difference ρ(δ, γ) is zero. Competition will lead to all insurers offering a contract that max-
imizes consumer surplus, subject to the zero-profit condition, or else face zero enrollment. Because
consumer preferences are identical up to a taste-for-MA component that is uncorrelated with δ, γ,
and costs net of risk adjustment, there is a single MA plan identically offered by all insurers. The
zero profit condition here is p + S = δ + γ. The insurer’s problem, where we have substituted for
price, is then
                                   maxδ,γ [v(δ) + w(γ) − (δ + γ − S)]                                 (11)




                                                   55
Appendix


This produces the following first order conditions:

                                              v0 (δ∗ ) = 1                                       (12a)
                                               0   ∗
                                             w (γ ) = 1                                          (12b)

The levels of δ and γ chosen in equilibrium thus correspond precisely with the optimal levels from
the social planner’s problem. Further, the zero profit condition imposes that p is equal to the social
planner price that optimally allocates consumers to MA and FFS: p = δ∗ + γ∗ − C. Thus, under the
assumptions of our model, when S is exogenous to healthcare and coding, insurers offer the socially
optimal contract.
    Under different assumptions (i.e. preference heterogeneity correlated with cost heterogeneity not
captured by the risk adjustment payments), insurers would not necessarily offer the socially optimal
contract. We chose these assumptions deliberately to focus on the welfare implications of the coding
distortions we study in this paper and abstract from other distortions that may also be relevant in
health insurance markets but would introduce complexity that would make the coding distortions
more difficult to understand.

A.4   Monopolist’s Problem with Endogenous Risk Scores
Here we show that endogenous coding distorts the monopolist’s choice of coding services, δ, and
other healthcare services, γ, in the same way as in the competitive market. Using notation from
Section 3.3, the monopolist’s problem is:
                                                                          
                                                                          
                         max p,δ,γ θ ( p, δ, γ) p − γ − δ + C 1 + ρ(δ, γ)      ,            (13)

where the term on the right expresses per unit profit as price minus costs plus the subsidy that is
a function of coding intensity, and θ denotes the fraction of the Medicare market choosing MA. (To
better align notation with Section 3, Eq. (13) maximizes profits normalized by the size of the Medicare
eligible population in the market.) This produces the following first order conditions:
                                                                         
                        ∂θ                                              ∂ρ
                             p − γ − δ + C 1 + ρ(δ, γ) + θ − 1 + C            =0                  (14a)
                        ∂δ                                               ∂δ
                                                                         
                        ∂θ                                              ∂ρ
                             p − γ − δ + C 1 + ρ(δ, γ) + θ − 1 + C            =0                  (14b)
                       ∂γ                                                ∂γ
                                                                       
                                       ∂θ                             
                                             p − γ − δ + C 1 + ρ(δ, γ) + θ = 0                    (14c)
                                       ∂p

                                net of premiumsis v(δ) + w(γ) + σi − p, where σ is distributed F (·).
From Section 3, consumer utility
Noting that θ ( p, δ, γ) = 1 − F p − v(δ) − w(γ) and defining U ≡ p − v(δ) − w(γ), we rewrite
                                                                          
∂θ      ∂F                         ∂θ       ∂F    0        ∂θ      ∂F    0
   as −    . We similarly rewrite     as       · v (δ) and    as      · w (γ) . This allows us to
∂p      ∂U                         ∂δ       ∂U             ∂γ      ∂U




                                                   56
Appendix


simplify the conditions to:

                                                                    ∂ρ
                                                                         v0 (δ) = 1 − C                             (15a)
                                                                    ∂δ
                                                                    ∂ρ
                                                     w0 (γ) = 1 − C                                                 (15b)
                                                                    ∂γ
                                                                −θ
                                                                    
                                                         
                                p = δ + γ − C 1 + ρ(δ, γ) +                                                         (15c)
                                                               ∂θ/∂p

     The conditions determining the levels of δ and γ are identical to those in the competitive equi-
librium. Prices differ from the competitive equilibrium by a standard    absolute  markup term. The
                                                                       −θ
                                                                           
monopolist sets prices equal to (net) marginal costs plus a markup             that is inversely related
                                                                      ∂θ/∂p
to the semi-elasticity of demand with respect to price. With infinite elasticity residual demand, the
pricing condition simplifies to the competitive equilibrium price.
     If contrary to our model’s assumptions, the utility function had non-zero cross derivatives with
respect to coding services and premiums, so that the marginal consumer utility generated by an
insurer’s coding activities covaried with the level of premium paid by the consumer, then the equiv-
alence between the competitive market coding intensity and the monopolist coding intensity would
no longer hold. In this case, the level of coding services would be a function of the premium prices
(which vary with the level of competition).

A.5   Derivation of Expression 8
Welfare is the social surplus generated for enrollees in each of the MA and FFS market segments
minus the distortionary cost of raising public funds to subsidize (both segments of) the market. Fol-
lowing the variable definitions from Section 3.4, the competitive equilibrium social surplus per capita
for the case of endogenous risk scores that affect plan subsidies is
                                                Z ∞                                                           
         W̃ = θ̃ MA Φ̃ MA + θ̃ FFS Φ FFS +
                                                                                                      
                                                                   σdF (σ) − κ · C θ̃ MA 1 + ρ(δ̃, γ̃) + θ̃ FFS .    (16)
                                                  F −1 (θ̃ FFS )

The competitive equilibrium social surplus per capita for the case of risk scores that do affect plan
subsidies, and in which first best levels of coding and healthcare services are provided is
                                                                           Z ∞
                      W Exo = θ ∗MA Φ∗MA + θ FFS
                                             ∗
                                                 Φ FFS +                                    σdF (σ) − κ · C.         (17)
                                                                                      ∗ )
                                                                              F −1 (θ FFS


Note that in the case of Expression 17, the excess burden term reduces to κ · C because MA by con-
struction costs the same as FFS, and so costs don’t vary with MA penetration, θ MA . The difference
between W̃ and W Exo can be written:
                                                                    
                     W̃ − W Exo = −κ · C θ̃ MA 1 + ρ(δ̃, γ̃) + θ̃ FFS + κ · C
                                                            
                                                                                                (18)
                                + θ̃ MA Φ̃ MA + θ̃ FFS Φ FFS − θ ∗MA Φ∗MA − θ FFS
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                  Φ FFS                              (19)
                                    Z ∞                                 Z ∞
                                +                     σdF (σ ) −                       σdF (σ).                      (20)
                                     F −1 (θ̃ FFS )                              ∗ )
                                                                         F −1 (θ FFS




                                                                   57
Appendix


which reduces to:

        W̃ − W Exo =
                                                            
                                   −κ · C θ̃ MA · ρ(δ̃, γ̃)                                                                    (21)
                                   |         {z             }
                        (i) excess burden of additional government spending
                                                                  Z F−1 (θ̃ MA )
                    −(θ ∗MA   − θ̃ MA )(Φ∗MA    − Φ FFS ) +                          σdF (σ )   −θ̃ (Φ∗ − Φ̃ MA ) .            (22)
                                                                     F −1 (θ ∗MA )              | MA MA
                                                                                                      {z       }
                    |                             {z                                       }     (iii) inefficient contracts
                                          (ii) inefficient sorting


A.6   Identifying Coding Differences Via the Market Average Risk Score Curve
In Section 4 we claim that the slope of the market average risk score with respect to MA penetration
identifies a FFS/MA coding difference. Here we provide proofs and extensions. We begin with
the case of an additively separable coding effect and then proceed to an alternative data generating
process that involves multiplicative effects. For each case, we discuss the implications if individual
heterogeneity in differential coding is correlated with θ.
      Define the risk score an individual would have received in FFS as riFFS = r̂i . Define the same
person’s risk score had they enrolled in MA as the sum of this FFS risk score, a mean MA/FFS
difference ρ and an arbitrary person-level shifter: riMA = r̂i + ρ + ei . The ei term is mean zero (ρ
removes the mean), but can vary arbitrarily to capture individual-level heterogeneity in the tendency
to produce a different risk score in MA relative to FFS. Let 1[ MAi ] denote an indicator function for
i choosing MA. An individual’s risk score as a function of MA enrollment is then ri (1[ MAi ]) =
r̂i + 1[ MAi ](ρ + ei ). The county-level mean risk score as a function of MA enrollment is analogously
                                                            Z θ MA               
                                        r (θ MA ) = r̂ +                  ρ + e(t) dt,                                         (23)
                                                              0


where r̂ expresses the unconditional expectation of r̂i and the integral captures the average MA/FFS
coding difference among MA enrollees when the MA share equals θ MA . Here e(θ ) describes the
epsilon of the consumer type that is on the FFS/MA margin at some θ. (Any variation in ei that is
orthogonal to θ will not impact the derivative of interest.) Small changes in θ identify
                                                    Z θ MA 
                            ∂r (θ MA )
                                                                               
                                          ∂
                                 MA
                                       = MA                       ρ + e(t) dt = ρ + e(θ MA ),                                  (24)
                             ∂θ         ∂θ            0

where the latter equality follows from the Leibniz rule. Thus, the slope of the market average risk
score identifies the coding difference for types just indifferent between MA and FFS. If within this
group there is heterogeneity in ei , the slope identifies ρ plus the the mean of epsilon among these
marginal types. We illustrate the idea in Figure A5. The figure shows how the slope of the market
average risk curve (r) varies when ρ is a function of θ. Note that if ρ is not a function of θ then the
slope of the market average risk curve is constant across all levels of θ and equal to ρ. If susceptibility
to differential coding intensity varies across consumers in a way that is correlated with MA market
share, then the market-level average risk curve will be nonlinear, as this curve integrates over the
varying e. In the case that e varies in θ, then r (θ ) is non-linear, and small changes in θ identify the
MA/FFS coding difference (ρ + e(θ MA )) among consumers on the MA/FFS margin. The estimate of
the coding effect is exact for types at the margin, but may not be representative for types away from
the identifying variation in θ.
      Note that because ei is allowed to be arbitrary, we have made no assumption on the distribution
of r̂i or on the joint distribution of risks and preferences that generate the within-market segment


                                                               58
Appendix


average risk curves that describe selection r MA (θ ) and r FFS (θ ) . As we describe in Section 4, this
                                                                            

result simplifies to ∂r/∂θ MA = ρ if individual heterogeneity in the tendency to be differentially coded
is orthogonal to θ.
     These proofs hold for small variations in θ. In practice, we estimate ∂r/∂θ MA using larger, discrete
changes in θ. As discussed above, in this case the slope of the market average risk curve is equal to
ρ plus the mean of epsilon among the types whose FFS/MA choice is marginal to the empirical
variation in θ used to estimate the slope. This can be seen in Figure A5. In the figure, the market
                                                                                                     2
average risk curve (the red line) is assumed to be concave (we find some evidence that ∂2 r/∂θ MA < 0
in practice). The dashed line indicates the coding intensity difference for the marginal person at the
indicated level of θ: ρ + e(θ ). The figure indicates that the slope of the market average risk curve is
equal to this coding intensity difference at any given level of θ.
     It now seems prudent to ask what is the parameter of interest here, the marginal or the average
coding intensity difference. This depends on the question being asked. For example, one might be
interested in knowing how much risk scores would increase if MA penetration went from 0% to
100%. In this case, the average coding intensity difference across the entire population (ρ) would be
the parameter of interest. On the other hand, one might be interested in knowing how much risk
scores would decrease if MA risk scores were equal to FFS risk scores. Here, the average coding
intensity difference across the set of individuals enrolled in MA would be the parameter of interest.
Note that in the case where heterogeneity in coding intensity is orthogonal to θ, these two parameters
are equivalent. However, in the more general case, they may differ. To see this, let us return to Figure
A5. In the figure, the dotted line indicates the average coding intensity difference for the set of
individuals enrolled in MA for each level of θ. The line is defined on the left y-axis (0% MA market
share) by the coding intensity difference for the first individual to enroll in MA. It is defined on the
right y-axis (100% MA market share) by the average coding intensity across the entire population,
which in this case is equal to 0.07. Now, assume that in reality θ = 0.35 so that 35% of beneficiaries
are enrolled in MA. At this level of θ, the market average risk score is 1.04, the marginal coding
intensity difference is 0.09, and the average coding difference among the individuals enrolled in MA
is 0.11. Unlike the orthogonal heterogeneity case, these values clearly differ. Now, recall that our
estimate of the slope of the market average risk curve depends on the range of θ used to empirically
estimate the slope. If we observe variation in θ spanning from θ = 0 to θ = 0.35, then we would
                          −1
estimate a slope of 1.04
                      0.35−0 = 0.11, the average coding difference among the individuals enrolled in
MA. This is not a coincidence: The estimated slope of the market average risk curve will always
approximate the average coding difference among the set of individuals whose MA/FFS choice is
marginal to the variation in MA. This is true for any arbitrary heterogeneity in the coding intensity
difference.
     Finally, we explore the case where plan coding effects multiply individual risk score components,
rather than adding to these. Here, the coding factor can similarly be derived from the slope ∂r/∂θ MA .
Consider a data generating process in which riFFS = r̂i as above, but riMA = r̂i (d + ei ), where d > 1
would correspond to higher MA coding intensity. Defining d ≡ 1+ ρ, an individual’s risk score as a
function of MA enrollment is ri (1[ MAi ]) = r̂i 1 + 1[ MAi ](ρ + ei ) . The county-level mean risk score
as a function MA enrollment is
                                                 Z θ MA                      
                                r (θ MA ) = r̂ +          r̂ (t) · (ρ + e(t)) dt,                      (25)
                                               0


where r̂ expresses the unconditional expectation of r̂i . Here e(θ ) describes the epsilon of the consumer
type that is on the FFS/MA margin at some θ. (Any variation in ei that is orthogonal to θ will not




                                                    59
Appendix


impact the derivative of interest.) Small changes in θ identify
                                   Z θ MA 
                ∂r (θ MA )
                                                               
                              ∂
                                              r̂ (t) · (ρ + e(t)) dt = r̂ (θ MA ) ρ + e(θ MA ) .
                                                                                              
                     MA
                           = MA                                                                     (26)
                 ∂θ         ∂θ      0

In this case, the slope of the market average risk score identifies the coding difference for types just
indifferent between MA and FFS, multiplied by the mean FFS risk score of these marginal types, r̂ (θ ).
Again this result simplifies if individual heterogeneity in the tendency to be differentially coded is
orthogonal to θ. In that case, ∂r/∂θ MA = r̂ (θ MA )ρ. In practice, the FFS risk scores of the marginal
types appear to not vary in θ and are very close to 1.0. In a cross-county regression of mean FFS
risk scores on MA share of the form r FFS = α + βθ MA + µ, we estimate α = 0.975 and β = .058.
Thus even over a wide range of θ, there is very little variation in cross-county means of FFS risk
scores (corresponding to E[r̂i |θ MA ] in the model). To put this in context, these parameters imply
that E[r̂i |θ MA = 0.00] = 0.98 while E[r̂i |θ MA = 0.50] = 1.00. These are small differences. That
these averages don’t vary systematically with θ suggests that the marginals likewise do not strongly
covary with θ. Because in practice, county-level means of r̂i appear to be very close to one, ∂r/∂θ MA
is approximately ρ without additional adjustment.

A.7   Estimates of Selection
Section 6 describes the results of the main analysis in which we regress county-level averages of risk
scores on lagged MA penetration in the county to estimate coding differences. For completeness, here
we estimate selection on risk scores, using an analogous set of regressions. Under the assumption
that MA penetration changes are exogenous to changes in underlying population health conditional
on our controls, selection on risk scores can be estimated by regressing either the average risk score
within FFS or the average risk score within MA on contemporaneous and lagged penetration. Note
that this reveals only compensated selection, not uncompensated selection as estimated in Brown
et al. (2014) and Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney (2017).
     Table A13 presents the selection results. Coefficients on contemporaneous MA penetration iden-
tify pure selection effects. If selection were monotonic (such as in Figure 1), then positive contem-
poraneous coefficients in both markets would indicate that as penetration increased, the marginal
beneficiary choosing MA was high risk relative to the MA average and low risk relative to the FFS
average (according to prior-year diagnoses), increasing the average risk score in both pools. In Table
A13, estimates for both FFS and MA risk are imprecise, yielding confidence intervals consistent with
a broad range of selection effects, including the findings in Newhouse et al. (2012) of advantageous
selection into MA of 4 to 9% of the risk score in 2008.
     An important component of selection effects may be captured by the lagged penetration coeffi-
cient: Research on MA enrollment by Sinaiko, Afendulis and Frank (2013) shows that many of new
MA enrollees are age 65, implying that at least some portion of the shift in MA penetration is likely
occurring among the newly Medicare-eligible. In Table A13, this would cause a significant fraction
of selection effects to be captured by the lagged coefficient, as new MA enrollees aren’t assigned
diagnosis-based risk scores until their second year. However, interpreting selection effects in Table
A13 is difficult because coefficients on lagged MA penetration are affected by: (i) selection on risk
score trajectory and (ii) selection on the unobserved contemporaneous risk score for new enrollees
who are not assigned a diagnosis-based score until their second year.
     It is important to note that unlike these within-market-segment results, the regressions compris-
ing our main analysis, which examine the effect of lagged penetration on overall county risk, are
unaffected by selection and yield a straightforward identification of pure coding effects.



                                                      60
Appendix


A.8    Supplemental Analysis on Plan Ownership
In Section 6 we described results that identified heterogeneity in coding practices across plans with
different levels of insurer-provider integration. For our results in column (5) of Table 4, we calculated
MA penetration separately for provider-owned plans, using data constructed by Frakt, Pizer and
Feldman (2013). Here, we describe those data and results in more detail.
     Frakt, Pizer and Feldman (2013) gathered data on provider ownership of plans via plan websites
and governance documents for plan year 2009. They limited attention to coordinated care MA-Part
D plans (e.g. HMOs and PPOs), excluding employer plans, PFFS plans, and MA plans without
drug coverage. We apply their integration flag to our data covering years 2006-2011, using publicly
available CMS plan crosswalk files to link the 2009 plan IDs across years. The restriction of Frakt,
Pizer and Feldman (2013) to exclude non-drug plans from classification and our implicit assumption
that physician ownership was constant from 2006 to 2011 could introduce measurement error, which
would bias against our finding of a difference in coding between plans classified as provider-owned
and not.

A.9    The Role of Electronic Health Record (EHR) Adoption
Regressions in Table A6 analyze the extent of coding intensity differences across markets classified
by differences in the local adoption of electronic health records (EHRs). Here we describe the data
used to classify local markets by EHR adoption.
     CMS, in cooperation with the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Tech-
nology, has collected data on meaningful use of EHR systems within physician office settings at the
county level. Since 2011, physician offices serving Medicare patients have been incentivized with
financial bonuses to report on meaningful EHR use to CMS. We use reports of EHR use during the
first year of the incentive program (2011) as a proxy for the existing local EHR infrastructure during
our sample period (2006-2011). Within each county, we normalize the count of physicians report-
ing office EHR adoption by the county Medicare population. Then we define an indicator for high
EHR adoption by splitting this metric at the median. Interaction terms in Table A6 between lagged
penetration and this indicator for high EHR adoption yield coefficients very close to zero.

A.10    Heterogeneity by For-Profit Status
We classified HMO and PPO plans into three mutually exclusive categories by first partitioning plans
into a group including national and large regional carriers and a second group capturing smaller,
local organizations. The group of national and large regional plans included, for example, plans
offered by Aetna, United Health Group, Blue Cross Blue Shield, and Kaiser. These made up about
two-thirds of the enrollee-years in our sample. Smaller organizations included, for example, the
Rochester Area Health Maintenance Organization and Puget Sound Health Partners, Inc. We further
divided the national and large regional MA carriers by their for-profit/not-for-profit status.
    To investigate possible heterogeneity in coding intensity across plans of different for-profit sta-
tuses, we generated separate MA market share variables measuring the for-profit and not-for -profit
plans and included these as separate regressors in a regression that also included the overall MA
share. Table A7 presents the results. Because “main effects” for overall MA penetration are included
in each regression, the coefficients on the for-profit and not-for-profit share variables can be inter-
preted as interaction terms that measure the difference in coding intensity for the indicated type of
MA plan, relative to the excluded plan category. Column 1 compares for-profits to an excluded group
comprised of not-for-profits and local plans. Column 2 compares not-for-profits to an excluded group
comprised of for-profits and local plans. Column 3 estimates separate coefficients for for-profits and


                                                   61
Appendix


not-for-profits relative to local plans.
    The table shows no evidence of differential coding intensity across profit status, or across local
versus regional and national plans. Note that while the standard errors on the interaction terms are
large enough to potentially mask some heterogeneity, the point estimates for the effect of overall MA
penetration are very stable across the additions of profit status controls in columns 1 through 3 (0.063,
0.064, and 0.062). These can be compared to the main coefficient estimate of 0.064 from Table 2.

A.11   Data Notes: Massachusetts All-Payer Claim
Here we provide some additional notes on the data described in Section 7.1 of the paper:

   • The Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Dataset (APCD) includes records for 2009 through 2013.
     We exclude 2009 due to irregularities in the data.

   • We drop any individual who is enrolled in both MA and Medigap post-Medicare enrollment,
     either contemporaneously or at different points in time so that our MA and Medigap groups are
     mutually exclusive. For each individual, we construct a panel of health insurance enrollment
     at the level of the 6-month period relative to the month in which the individual enrolled in
     Medicare.

   • In sample construction, for the pre-Medicare period we include all 6-month periods during
     which the individual was continuously enrolled in some form of health insurance except for 6-
     month periods prior to a gap in coverage. For the post-Medicare period, we include all 6-month
     periods during which the individual was continuously enrolled in either MA or Medigap ex-
     cept for 6-month periods after a gap in coverage.

   • We assume that the set of Medigap FFS enrollees we observe is a good proxy for the full FFS
     population in Massachusetts with respect to changes in coding at age 65. This requirement
     is weaker than requiring that levels of risk scores are similar between FFS enrollees with and
     without Medigap. FFS enrollees with Medigap and FFS enrollees without Medigap are unlikely
     to experience different changes in coding upon enrollment in Medicare. This is because Medigap
     plans, unlike MA plans, solely reimburse cost-sharing for services and do not engage in care
     management or steer patients to a particular set of providers. Nonetheless, a mechanism by
     which Medigap could influence coding in principle is by increasing an enrollee’s utilization
     of health care (via a demand response to net price). This could lead to more provider-patient
     encounters during which codes could be obtained. Though we expect such effects are ignorably
     small, such a phenomenon would imply our estimates of FFS-MA coding differences below are
     biased toward zero: This type of demand response to Medigap would imply that the increase
     in FFS risk scores at age 65 in our sample overstates the average change in risk scores in FFS
     overall. This implies that our estimates of the differential change in coding in MA relative to
     FFS would be a lower bound of the true differential change.




                                                   62
Appendix


                         Figure A1: How Risk Scores are Influenced by Insurers
                  	  
                  	  
                  	      Insurer Actions
                  	  
                  	  
                  	        Contract with
                  	                                                       Physician Office
                          physician on a risk
                  	                                                          Actions
                  	            basis
                  	  
                  	  
                  	      Encourage/require
                  	                                                          Physician visit
                           evaluation visit
                  	  
                  	  
                  	        Prepopulate
                  	  
                                                                                 Physician
                           physician notes
                  	                                   	                       takes notes
                           with past codes
                  	  
                  	  
                  	       Train physician’s                                   Billing staff
                  	                                   	  
                            staff on coding                                   codes notes
                  	  
                  	  
                  	  
                  	  
                                                                            Claims and codes
                  	  
                  	                                                         sent to insurer
                  	        Dispatch home
                  	          health visit                     	  
                  	  
                  	  
                  	      Request change to
                  	                                                  No          Insurer
                  	  
                               coding
                                                                                satisfied
                  	                                                           with codes?
                  	           Directly
                  	  
                               change
                  	  
                  	           coding                                           Yes
                  	  
                                                                                   Final
                                                                                   codes
                                                                                determine
                                                                                risk score


 Note: The flowchart illustrates how diagnosis codes originate and how insurers can influence the process that gen-
 erates them. Insurer actions are towards the left of the figure in blue boxes. Provider actions, including the actions of
 the provider’s billing and coding staff, are towards the right in black boxes. Actions that can immediately result in
 generation of a code are represented by rhombuses.




                                                              63
                                          1.0                                                                                          	                                         𝑟̅
              	                                                                                                                  1.0




                                                                                                              Average R




                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                      	  




                     Average
              	  
                                                                                                      	                                                                        𝑟̅! 	  
              	  
                                                             𝑟̅ !                                     	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                        0.5                                                                           	  
              	                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix
              	             0.0                                        1.0
              	  
                                   Figure A2: Identifying Coding Differences in Selection Markets:
                                      J Market share / Penetration (θJ)                    0.0     Alternative
                                                                                                      	              Forms of Selection
                                                                                                    k Market share / Penetration (θk)
                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	   (A) Advantageously Selected Plan Codes More Intensely                                                 (B) Advantageously Selected Plan Codes Less Intensely
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	                                                                      𝑟̅! 	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	        1.5
                                                                                                      	                          1.5
              	                                             𝑟̅! 	                                   	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	                                                                      𝑟̅!!
              	  
                                                             𝑟̅                                       	  
                     Average Risk Score



              	  




                                                                                    Coding




                                                                                                             Average Risk Score
                                                                                                      	  




                                                                                                                                               Coding
                           	                                                                                                                                                  𝑟̅
                                                                                                                                     	  
                   	      	  
                        1.0                                  𝑟̅! 	                                               	                 	  
              	                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                             𝑟̅!
                                                                !                                     	  
              	                                                                                                                                                              𝑟̅! 	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	        0.5
                                                                                                      	                          0.5
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	             0.0                                        1.0
                                      k Market share / Penetration (θk)                               	                                 0.0                                                   1.0
              	                                                                                                                                        k Market share / Penetration (θk)
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
64




              	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	        (C) No Selection and Differential Coding Intensity                                                               (D) Selection is Nonlinear and Non-monotonic
                                                                                                      	  
              	  
                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                                      	  
                                                                                                      	  
              	                                                                                      	  
              	                          1.5                                                         	                          1.5
              	                                                                                      	                                                                            𝑟̅! 	  
              	                                                                                      	  
              	                                             𝑟̅! 	                                   	  
                     Average Risk Score




                                                                                                                                                                                    𝑟̅


                                                                                                             Average Risk Score
              	                                                                                      	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Coding
                                             	                                                                                      	  
                                                                                  Coding




                  	                         	                  𝑟̅                                       	                         	  
                                          1.0                                                                                     1.0
             	                                                                                      	                                              𝑟̅! 	  
             	                                                𝑟̅! 	                                	  
             	                                                                                      	  
             	                                                                                      	                                              𝑟̅!
                                                                                                                                                        !
             	                                                                                      	  
             	                                                                                      	  
             	          0.5                                                                         	        0.5
             	                                                                                      	  
             	              0.0                                                  1.0                	            0.0                                                1.0
                                        k Market share / Penetration (θk)                                                     k Market share / Penetration (θk)
             	                                                                                      	  
             	                                                                                      	  
             	                                                                                      	  
             	  
     Note: This         figure demonstrates how to separate coding differences from selection        	   when true underlying risk is unobservable. The horizontal axis
             	                                                                                      	  
                                                               k . The vertical axis measures the average
     measures	        the   market share  of segment     k, θ𝑟̅! 	                                 	          risk score: Average risk in j is r j , average risk in k is r k , and
     the average
             	          risk of all enrollees in the market is r. The dashed line in the figure represents the counterfactual average risk that segment k enrollees
             	  
     would have          1.5                                                          j
                           been assigned under segment j coding practices, r k . All consumers choose either plan j or plan k. If and only if there are coding
             	                                                !
             	  
     differences        between j and k, then the slope𝑟̅!of the market-level risk curve with respect to marketshare ( ∂θ          ∂r
                                                                                                                                     k ) will be different from zero.
             	  
                     Score




             	  
                                                    ing




                                                              𝑟̅
Appendix


           Figure A3: Geography of Growth in Medicare Advantage, 2006 to 2011




                Quantiles
                 !
                    (.13, .37]
                    (.08, .13]
                    (.04, .08]
                   [-.25, .04]




 Note: Map shows changes in MA penetration by county between the beginning and the end of our sample period,
 2006 to 2011. Counties are binned and color-coded according to their quartile of changes in penetration. Darker
 regions indicate larger MA growth.




                                                       65
Appendix
           	  
           	  
           	  
Figure A4:         Identification: Coding Effects Plausibly Observed Only with a Lag in Medicare
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	   Market average risk (𝑟̅ ),                                 Coding differences
                                                 No immediate              can only affect
           	   assuming    new  MA
                                                 response in               reported risk scores
           	   enrollees   are newly-           observed scores           with a 1- or 2-year lag       Coding effect
           	   eligible  beneficiaries
           	  
           	   Market average risk (𝑟̅ ),       No immediate
           	   assuming new MA                  response in
           	   enrollees are switchers          observed scores
                                                                              Coding effect
           	   from FFS
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	  
           	                        !"
           	   MA penetration (θ )
           	  
           	  
           	  
           Year
           	       = t -1              Year = t                     Year = t + 1                  Year = t + 2
           MA advantageously            Marginal enrollee i with     Risk scores updated to        Risk scores updated to
           	  
           selected                     𝑟̅!!" > 𝑟! > 𝑟̅!" , switches include diagnoses             include diagnoses entered
           	                           from FFS to MA or            entered between time t        between time t+1 and t+2.
           	                           chooses MA after             and t+1 for enrollees         This is the first year that
           	                           becoming Medicare-           enrolled all of t-1           reported scores for the
           	                           eligible                     (switchers)                   newly eligible who joined
                                                                                                   mid-year during t could be
           	  
                                                                                                   affected
           	  
           	  
  Note: The diagram highlights the timing of changes in market-level average risk scores (r) in response to a change in
           	  
  MA penetration (θ MA ). For the first year in either the MA or FFS market segment, switchers carry forward risk scores
  based on 	  their diagnoses from the previous year in the other segment. For the newly eligible beneficiaries (those
           	   demographic risk scores are assigned until there is a full calendar year of enrollment and diagnosis
  turning 65),
           	  
  information.      Therefore, effects on risk scores should not be apparent until year t + 1 when the net penetration
  change is	   due to switchers and should not be apparent until year t + 2 when the net penetration change is due to
  new Medicare enrollees.




                                                             66
Appendix


                                                    Figure A5: Identification when ρ + e Varies with θ

                                             1.08                                                                                0.16


                                             1.07                                                                                0.14

                                             1.06
                                                                                                                                 0.12




                                                                                                                                        Coding Intensity Difference
                 Market Average Risk Score



                                             1.05
                                                                                                                                 0.10

                                             1.04
                                                                                                                                 0.08
                                             1.03

                                                                                                                                 0.06
                                             1.02                     ∂r/∂θ = ρ + ε(θ)

                                                                                                                                 0.04
                                             1.01


                                               1                                                                                 0.02


                                             0.99                                                                                0.00
                                                    0   0.1   0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6    0.7    0.8        0.9   1
                                                                            MA Market Share, θ

                                                              Avg risk score in market

                                                              Marginal coding difference, ρ + ε(θ)

                                                              Avg coding difference cond'l on MA, E[ρ + ε(θ) | MA=1]


 Note: Figure shows how the slope of the market average risk curve (r) varies when ρ is a function of θ. If susceptibility
 to differential coding intensity varies across consumers in a way that is correlated with MA market share, then the
 market-level average risk curve will be nonlinear, and small changes in θ identify the coding intensity difference
 among consumers on the FFS/MA margin. Here we assume ρ + e(θ ) = 0.14 − 0.14θ and plot r (θ ) for illustration.




                                                                                         67
Appendix


                        Table A1: Results with Non-Normalized Risk Scores

                                                  Dependent Variable: County-Level Average Risk Score

                                       Normalized Dependent Variable
                                                                               Non-Normalized Dependent Variable
                                           (Main Specification)
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)

  MA Penetration t (placebo)           0.007        0.001         0.001           0.016        0.004        0.004
                                      (0.015)      (0.019)       (0.019)         (0.016)      (0.020)      (0.020)

  MA Penetration t-1                  0.069**      0.067**      0.064**         0.070**       0.068**      0.066**
                                      (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.011)         (0.011)       (0.012)      (0.012)

  Main Effects
    County FE                            X            X            X                X            X            X
    Year FE                              X            X            X                X            X            X
  Additional Controls
    State X Year Trend                                X            X                             X            X
    County X Year Demographics                                     X                                          X

  Mean of Dep. Var.                    1.00          1.00         1.00            1.03         1.03         1.03
  Observations                        15,640        15,640       15,640          15,640       15,640       15,640


 Note: The table reports coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the
 average risk score in the market (county). Effects of contemporaneous (t) and lagged (t − 1) Medicare Advantage
 (MA) penetration are displayed. Columns 1 through 3 repeat specifications in Table 2 for comparison. Columns 4
 through 6 use a non-normalized version of the risk score as the dependent variable, rather than normalizing so that
 the national average is exactly 1.0 in each year. Additional controls are as described in Table 2. Observations are
 county × years. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                           68
                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix
                                      Table A2: Robustness to Additional Time Varying County Controls

                                                                          Dependent Variable: County-Level Average Risk Score
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)

         MA Penetration t (placebo)              0.001      -0.004       0.001      -0.004       0.009       0.001       0.002       0.001      -0.008
                                                (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.034)     (0.019)     (0.021)     (0.019)     (0.039)

         MA Penetration t-1                     0.064**     0.064**     0.062**     0.061**     0.077**     0.064**     0.067**     0.063**    0.082**
                                                (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.022)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.022)


         Main Controls
           County FE                               X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X
           Year FE                                 X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X
           State X Year Trend                      X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X
           County X Year Demographics              X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X
         Extended Controls (county-by-year)
           Medicare Enrollees                                  X                                                                                   X
69




           ln(Medicare Enrollees)                                          X                                                                       X
           Share Dual Eligible                                                         X                                                           X
           Share Enrolled in Employer MA                                                           X                                               X
           Share <65 (Newly Disabled, Proxy)                                                                   X                                   X
           Fraction FFS ESRD                                                                                               X                       X
           Share Enrolled in SNP Plans                                                                                                 X           X

         Observations                           15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640      15,640




     Note: The table reports coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the average risk score in the market
     (county). Effects of contemporaneous (t) and lagged (t − 1) Medicare Advantage (MA) penetration are displayed. Columns add time varying county-level
     controls as indicated. Column 6 controls for the share of Medicare enrollees who are under age 65 in the county-year to proxy for changes in county-level
     prevalence of disability-eligible Medicare beneficiaries. Column 7 controls for the fraction of the FFS population with end-stage renal disease. Main
     controls are as described in Table 2. Observations are county × years. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, **
     p < 0.01.
Appendix


                          Table A3: Results with Weighting and Trimming

           Panel A: Weighting by Ln(County Medicare Population)

                                                       (1)                (2)                (3)

           MA Penetration t-1                       0.068**            0.063**            0.060**
                                                    (0.009)            (0.010)            (0.010)

           Observations                              15,640             15,640             15,640

           Panel B: Dropping Smallest Counties, by Medicare Population Size

                                                  Trimming < 1       Trimming < 5      Trimming < 10
                                                   percentile         percentile         percentile
                                                      (4)                (5)                (6)

           MA Penetration t-1                       0.065**            0.060**            0.059**
                                                    (0.010)            (0.009)            (0.009)

           Observations                              15,480             14,855             14,075

           Panel C: Dropping Largest and Smallest Counties, by Medicare Population Size

                                                 Trimming < 1 &     Trimming < 5 &    Trimming < 10 &
                                                 >99 percentile     >95 percentile     >90 percentile
                                                      (7)                (8)                (9)

           MA Penetration t-1                       0.067**            0.065**            0.064**
                                                    (0.010)            (0.010)            (0.010)

           Observations                              15,320             14,070             12,510

           Main Effects
             County FE                                  X                  X                  X
             Year FE                                    X                  X                  X
           Additional Controls
             State X Year Trend                                            X                  X
             County X Year Demographics                                                       X


 Note: The table reports coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the
 average risk score in the market (county). Effects of lagged Medicare Advantage (MA) penetration are displayed.
 Contemporaneous effects are included in regressions but supressed for readability. Panel A weights the regression by
 the natural log of the size of the county Medicare population. Panel B drops the smallest 1%, 5%, or 10% of counties,
 by Medicare population size. Panel B drops the smallest and largest 1%, 5%, or 10% of counties, by Medicare popu-
 lation size. Controls are as described in Table 2. Observations are county × years. Standard errors in parentheses are
 clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                 Appendix
                       Table A4: Extended Placebo Tests: Effects of Contemporaneous Penetration and Leads

                                                                Dependent Variable: County-Level Average Risk Score
                      available panel years: 2007-2011     2007-2010 2007-2009 2008-2011 2008-2010 2008-2009                   2009-2011     2009-2010
                                                (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)           (8)

       MA Penetration t+2 (placebo)                                        0.044                                    0.030
                                                                          (0.023)                                  (0.036)

       MA Penetration t+1 (placebo)                           0.017        0.032                       -0.005       -0.019                      -0.004
                                                             (0.025)      (0.056)                     (0.015)      (0.042)                     (0.034)

       MA Penetration t (placebo)               0.001         -0.021       -0.064        0.006         0.003        -0.025        0.011         0.014
                                               (0.019)       (0.028)      (0.071)       (0.017)       (0.025)      (0.091)       (0.016)       (0.043)

       MA Penetration t-1                      0.064**      0.076**       0.084**       0.041**        0.038        0.025         0.037         0.052
                                               (0.011)      (0.018)       (0.022)       (0.015)       (0.022)      (0.038)       (0.032)       (0.090)

       MA Penetration t-2                                                               0.046*        0.054*        0.048         0.052         0.100
71




                                                                                        (0.022)       (0.024)      (0.041)       (0.031)       (0.061)

       MA Penetration t-3                                                                                                         0.023         -0.033
                                                                                                                                 (0.024)       (0.039)

       Main Effects
         County FE                                X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X
         Year FE                                  X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X
       Additional Controls
         State X Year Trend                       X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X
         County X Year Demographics               X             X            X             X             X            X             X            X

       Observations                            15,640        12,512        9,384        12,512        9,384         6,256         9,384        6,256


     Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the average risk score in the market
     (county). Effects of future (t + 2, t + 1), contemporaneous (t), and lagged (t − 1, t − 2, t − 3) Medicare Advantage (MA) penetration are displayed.
     Because MA risk scores are calculated using diagnosis data from the prior plan year, changes in MA enrollment can plausibly affect reported risk scores
     via differential coding only with a lag. See Figure A4 for details of this timing. Contemporaneous penetration and leads of penetration serve as placebos
     that allow for tests for pre-trends within the county. The data include penetration from 2006 through 2011 and market risk from 2007 through 2011. The
     inclusion of leads and lags determines the available panel years, listed in the header for each column. Observations are county × years. Controls are as
     described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
                                                                                                                                                                Appendix
                                     Table A5: Falsification Test: Effects on Medicare Age Distribution

                                                         Dependent Variable:                         Dependent Variable:
                                                                                          Indicator for Age Bin, Conditional on ≥65
                                                              Fraction ≥65
                                                                                     65-69      70-74       75-79       80-84       85+
                                                                   (1)                (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

              MA Penetration t                                    0.003              0.002        0.008        -0.004       -0.001       -0.006
                                                                 (0.004)            (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.003)

              MA Penetration t-1                                  -0.004             -0.006     0.019**        -0.006       -0.003       -0.004
                                                                 (0.004)            (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.004)


              Main Effects
                County FE                                           X                  X            X            X            X            X
                Year FE                                             X                  X            X            X            X            X
72




              Additional Controls
                State X Year Trend                                  X                  X            X            X            X            X
                County X Year Demographics

              Observations                                       15,640             15,640       15,640       15,640       15,640       15,640


     Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variables are indicators for age ranges. The depen-
     dent variable in column 1 is the fraction of the Medicare population with age ≥ 65. The dependent variables in columns 2 through 6 are the fractions of
     the Medicare population in the indicated age bins, conditional on age ≥ 65. Data on the Medicare age distribution come from the Medicare Beneficiary
     Summary File. Observations are county × years. Controls are as described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. *
     p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix


                Table A6: No Coding Interaction with Electronic Health Records

                                                      Dependent Variable: County-Level Average
                                                                     Risk Score

                                                           (1)             (2)            (3)

                   MA Penetration t-1                    0.069**        0.069**        0.066**
                                                         (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.016)

                   High EHR X MA Penetration t-1         -0.001         -0.004          -0.005
                                                         (0.018)        (0.017)         (0.017)


                   Main Effects
                     County FE                              X               X              X
                     Year FE                                X               X              X
                   Additional Controls
                     State X Year Trend                                     X              X
                     County X Year Demographics                                            X

                   Observations                          15,640          15,640         15,640




 Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is
 the average risk score in the market (county). Effects of lagged (t − 1) Medicare Advantage (MA) penetration are
 displayed. Contemporaneous effects are included in regressions but supressed for readability. Regressions include
 interactions between the MA penetration variables and an indicator for high electronic health record (EHR) adoption
 by physician offices in the county. Data on EHR adoption were assembled by CMS and the Office of the National
 Coordinator for Health Information Technology (see Section A.9 for full details). Regressions additionally control for
 the corresponding contemporaneous (t) effects. Observations are county × years. Controls are as described in Table
 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                          73
Appendix


                                      Table A7: Results by Profit Status


                                                                 Dependent Variable: County-Level
                                                                       Average Risk Score

                                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)

                      MA Share, t-1                              0.064**      0.065**      0.064**
                                                                 (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.012)

                      National For Profit MA Share, t-1           0.000                     0.004
                                                                 (0.010)                   (0.010)

                      National Non Profit MA Share, t-1                       -0.003       -0.006
                                                                              (0.013)      (0.014)

                      Main Effects
                        County FE                                   X            X            X
                        Year FE                                     X            X            X
                      Additional Controls
                        State X Year Trend                          X            X            X
                        County X Year Demographics                  X            X            X

                      Observations                                15,640      15,640       15,640


 Note: The table reports coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is
 the average risk score in the market (county). Effects of lagged (t − 1) Medicare Advantage (MA) penetration are
 displayed. Contemporaneous effects are included in regressions but supressed for readability. The additional regres-
 sors in the table are the lagged MA enrollment share, as a fraction of Medicare eligibles, in large regional/national
 for-profit plans in the county × year (column 1), in large regional/national not-for-profit plans in the county × year
 (column 2), or in each separately (column 3). Because “main effects” for overall MA penetration are included in each
 regression, the coefficients on the for-profit and not-for-profit share variables can be interpreted as interaction terms
 that measure the difference in coding intensity for the indicated type of MA plan, relative to the excluded plan cat-
 egory, small and local plans. See Section A.10 for additional data notes. Observations are county × years. Controls
 are as described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                            74
                                                                                                                                                             Appendix
                                          Table A8: Heterogeneity in Effects by County Characteristics



                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)

         MA Penetration t-1                       0.119**    0.062**    0.026    0.089**   0.120**     0.012     0.060    0.077**   0.128**    0.061
                                                  (0.028)    (0.020)   (0.017)   (0.023)   (0.035)    (0.018)   (0.032)   (0.024)   (0.031)   (0.034)

         High 2007 MA Pen. X MA Penetration t-1   -0.091**                                 -0.082**             -0.058*             -0.076*   -0.055
                                                   (0.031)                                  (0.031)             (0.029)             (0.032)   (0.030)

         High ∆MA Pen. X MA Penetration t-1                  -0.017                        -0.027      0.016     0.004    -0.005               0.009
                                                             (0.026)                       (0.027)    (0.025)   (0.025)   (0.028)             (0.026)

         High ∆HHI X MA Penetration t-1                                0.058*                          0.041     0.037                         0.036
                                                                       (0.023)                        (0.023)   (0.023)                       (0.023)

         High Medicare Pop X MA Penetration t-1                                  -0.054*                                  -0.046    -0.039    -0.010
                                                                                 (0.022)                                  (0.024)   (0.023)   (0.022)

         Main Effects
75




           County FE                                 X         X         X         X          X         X         X         X         X         X
           Year FE                                   X         X         X         X          X         X         X         X         X         X
         Additional Controls
           State X Year Trend                        X         X         X         X          X         X         X         X         X         X
           County X Year Demographics                X         X         X         X          X         X         X         X         X         X
         Mean of Dep. Var.
         Observations                             15,640     15,640    14,370    15,640    15,640     14,370    14,370    15,640    15,640    14,370



     Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variable is the average risk score in the market
     (county). Across the columns, specifications show how the effect varies with each of the interacted county-level variables: the 2007 level of MA pen-
     etration, the 2007 to 2011 change in MA penetration, the 2007 to 2011 change in HHI, and the 2007 size of the Medicare population. Indicators for
     above-median values of these variables are interacted with lagged MA penetration. Observations are county × years. Controls are as described in Table
     2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
Appendix


           Table A9: Massachusetts Person-Level Analysis: Pre-Medicare Plan FEs

                                                        Dependent Variable: Risk Score
                                                  (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)

                    Selected MA                -0.113**                   -0.116**
                                                (0.007)                    (0.007)

                    Post-65 X Selected MA      0.058**     0.047**         0.070**    0.058**
                                               (0.009)     (0.007)         (0.011)    (0.009)

                    Person FE                                   X                        X
                    Post-65 X Pre-65 Plan ID                                  X          X

                    Mean of Dep. Var.           1.00        1.00            1.00       1.00
                    Observations               319,094     319,094         319,094    319,094




 Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions described by Eq. 10 in which the de-
 pendent variable is the risk score. All regressions compare coding outcomes pre- and post-Medicare enrollment
 among individuals who select MA vs. individuals who select FFS. Data are from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims
 Dataset. Pre-Medicare claims are from commercial/employer plans. Columns 2 and 4 include individual fixed ef-
 fects. Columns 3 and 4 include fixed effects for the interaction of the person’s pre-Medicare plan and an indicator
 for the post-Medicare enrollment period. Post-65 claims are from Medicare Advantage plans for MA enrollees and
 Medigap plans for FFS enrollees. The sample is restricted to individuals who join FFS or MA within one year of their
 65th birthday and who have at least 6 months of continuous coverage before and after their 65th birthday. The unit of
 observation is the person-by-six month period, where six-month periods are defined relative to the month in which
 the individual joined Medicare. The coefficient on “Selected MA” should be interpretted as the pre-Medicare enroll-
 ment difference in the outcome for individuals who will eventually enroll in an MA plan vs. individuals who will
 eventually enroll in FFS. The coefficient on “Post-65 X Selected MA” should be interpretted as the differential change
 in the outcome post- vs. pre-Medicare for individuals who join an MA plan vs. individuals who join FFS. Data are
 described more thoroughly in Sections 7 and A.11. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the person level. *
 p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                           76
Appendix


 Table A10: Massachusetts Person-Level Analysis: Heterogeneity by Pre-Medicare Health

                                                                   Sample Restriction:
                                                                                         Below Top Quartile      Above Top
                                                   No HCCs Pre-     Some HCCs Pre-
                                 Full Sample                                                 Score Pre-       Quartile Score Pre-
                                                    Medicare          Medicare
                                                                                              Medicare            Medicare
                                (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)      (8)        (9)       (10)

   Selected MA                -0.113**           -0.015**          -0.200**              -0.019**             -0.235**
                               (0.007)            (0.005)           (0.017)               (0.005)              (0.023)

   Post-Medicare X Selected MA 0.058** 0.047**   0.020** 0.034**   0.108** 0.056**       0.022** 0.028**      0.138** 0.078**
                               (0.009) (0.007)   (0.006) (0.006)   (0.021) (0.017)       (0.006) (0.006)      (0.029) (0.024)

   Person FE                              X                  X                  X                     X                    X

   Mean of Dep. Var.           1.00    1.00       0.72    0.72      1.22    1.22          0.76    0.76          1.84      1.84
   Observations               319,094 319,094    203,923 203,923   115,171 115,171       239,916 239,916       79,178    79,178



  Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions described by Eq. 10 in which the de-
  pendent variable is the risk score. All regressions compare coding outcomes pre- and post-Medicare enrollment
  among individuals who select MA vs. individuals who select FFS. Data are from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims
  Dataset. Pre-Medicare claims are from commercial/employer plans. Even columns include individual fixed effects.
  Columns 3-6 split the population based on whether they have any HCCs during the period just before entering
  Medicare. Columns 7-10 split the population based on whether their risk score during the period just before entering
  Medicare was in the top quartile. Post-65 claims are from Medicare Advantage plans for MA enrollees and Medigap
  plans for FFS enrollees. The sample is restricted to individuals who join FFS or MA within one year of their 65th
  birthday and who have at least 6 months of continuous coverage before and after their 65th birthday. The unit of
  observation is the person-by-six month period, where six-month periods are defined relative to the month in which
  the individual joined Medicare. The coefficient on “Selected MA” should be interpretted as the pre-Medicare enroll-
  ment difference in the outcome for individuals who will eventually enroll in an MA plan vs. individuals who will
  eventually enroll in FFS. The coefficient on “Post-65 X Selected MA” should be interpretted as the differential change
  in the outcome post- vs. pre-Medicare for individuals who join an MA plan vs. individuals who join FFS. Data are
  described more thoroughly in Sections 7 and A.11. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the person level. *
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                             77
Appendix


   Table A11: Massachusetts Person-Level Analysis: Enrollment in MA and Utilization

                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                                                                    Any Inpatient         Any Other
                                          Any Utilization            Utilization           Utilization
                                           (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)

                Selected MA             -0.028**                 -0.021**              -0.028**
                                         (0.002)                  (0.001)               (0.002)

                Post-65 X Selected MA   0.064** 0.072**           -0.003*    0.002     0.065** 0.072**
                                        (0.003) (0.003)           (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003) (0.003)

                Person FE                             X                       X                      X

                Mean of Dep. Var.        0.89    0.89              0.04    0.04         0.89    0.89
                Observations            319,094 319,094           319,094 319,094      319,094 319,094


 Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions described by Eq. 10 in which the de-
 pendent variable is an indicator for having any healthcare utilization during the period (columns 1 and 2), an in-
 dicator for having any inpatient utilization during the period (columns 3 and 4), and an indicator for having any
 non-inpatient utilization during the period (columns 5 and 6). Even columns include individual fixed effects. All
 regressions compare coding outcomes pre- and post-Medicare enrollment among individuals who select MA vs. in-
 dividuals who select FFS. Data are from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims Dataset. Pre-Medicare claims are from
 commercial/employer plans. Post-65 claims are from Medicare Advantage plans for MA enrollees and Medigap
 plans for FFS enrollees. The sample is restricted to individuals who join FFS or MA within one year of their 65th
 birthday and who have at least 6 months of continuous coverage before and after their 65th birthday. The unit of
 observation is the person-by-six month period, where six-month periods are defined relative to the month in which
 the individual joined Medicare. The coefficient on “Selected MA” should be interpretted as the pre-Medicare enroll-
 ment difference in the outcome for individuals who will eventually enroll in an MA plan vs. individuals who will
 eventually enroll in FFS. The coefficient on “Post-65 X Selected MA” should be interpretted as the differential change
 in the outcome post- vs. pre-Medicare for individuals who join an MA plan vs. individuals who join FFS. Data are
 described more thoroughly in Sections 7 and A.11. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the person level. *
 p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                            78
Appendix


Table A12: Massachusetts Person-Level Analysis: Conditional on Pre-Medicare Utilization

                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                  Risk score                 Risk score (cond'l on use)
                                            (1)                (2)               (3)            (4)

                Selected MA              -0.113**                              -0.115**
                                          (0.007)                               (0.008)

                Post-65 X Selected MA     0.058**         0.047**              0.033**       0.036**
                                          (0.009)         (0.007)               (0.01)       (0.008)

                Person FE                                      X                                 X

                Mean of Dep. Var.          1.00            1.00                 1.05          1.05
                Observations              319,094         319,094              282,379       282,379


 Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions described by Eq. 10 in which the de-
 pendent variable is the risk score. All regressions compare coding outcomes pre- and post-Medicare enrollment
 among individuals who select MA vs. individuals who select FFS. Data are from the Massachusetts All-Payer Claims
 Dataset. Pre-Medicare claims are from commercial/employer plans. Columns 2 and 4 include individual fixed ef-
 fects. Columns 1 and 2 replicate the main results from Table 5. Columns 3 and 4 restrict to person-periods with some
 healthcare utilization. Even columns include individual fixed effects. Post-65 claims are from Medicare Advantage
 plans for MA enrollees and Medigap plans for FFS enrollees. The sample is restricted to individuals who join FFS
 or MA within one year of their 65th birthday and who have at least 6 months of continuous coverage before and
 after their 65th birthday. The unit of observation is the person-by-six month period, where six-month periods are
 defined relative to the month in which the individual joined Medicare. The coefficient on “Selected MA” should be
 interpretted as the pre-Medicare enrollment difference in the outcome for individuals who will eventually enroll in
 an MA plan vs. individuals who will eventually enroll in FFS. The coefficient on “Post-65 X Selected MA” should be
 interpretted as the differential change in the outcome post- vs. pre-Medicare for individuals who join an MA plan vs.
 individuals who join FFS. Data are described more thoroughly in Sections 7 and A.11. Standard errors in parentheses
 are clustered at the person level. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.




                                                               79
                                                                                                                                                                   Appendix
                              Table A13: Selection Results: Effects on within-FFS and within-MA Risk Scores


                                                                                                 Dependent	  Variable:
                                                                     Mean	  FFS	  Risk	  Score                        Mean	  MA	  Risk	  Score
                                                                 (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)                (6)

                  MA	  Penetration	  t                        0.037            0.040           0.040             0.025          -­‐0.024       -­‐0.013
                                                               (0.026)          (0.034)         (0.033)           (0.062)         (0.085)        (0.083)

                  MA	  Penetration	  t-­‐1                  0.045**           0.030*          0.026*            0.087*         0.116**         0.130**
                                                              (0.013)           (0.012)         (0.012)           (0.040)        (0.040)         (0.041)


                  Main	  Effects
                    County	  FE                                  X                 X              X                  X               X              X
                    Year	  FE                                    X                 X              X                  X               X              X
                  Additional	  Controls
80




                    State	  X	  Year	  Trend                                     X              X                                  X              X
                    County	  X	  Year	  Demographics                                            X                                                 X

                  Dep	  var	  mean                            1.006            1.006           1.006              0.959          0.959           0.959
                  Observations                                 15,640           15,640          15,640             15,616         15,616          15,616



     Note: The table shows coefficients from difference-in-differences regressions in which the dependent variables are the average FFS risk score in the county
     (columns 1 through 3) and the average MA risk score in the county (columns 4 through 6). Both contemporaneous and lagged coefficients represent tests
     of selection. Observations are county × years. Controls are as described in Table 2. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the county level. *
     p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01.
