                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DOES EXPORTING IMPROVE MATCHING? EVIDENCE FROM FRENCH EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE
                                  DATA

                                            Matilde Bombardini
                                             Gianluca Orefice
                                              Maria D. Tito

                                           Working Paper 21225
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w21225


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         May 2015




   This work benefited from a State aid managed by the National Agency for Research, through the program
   "Investissements devenir" with the following reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17 (Remote Access to data
   CASD). Bombardini acknowledges support from CIFAR and SSHRC. We would like to thank Kristian
   Behrens, Mikael Carlsson, Andrew Chang, Leland Crane, Nils Gottfries, Keith Head, Hiroyuki Kasahara,
   Christopher Kurz, Julien Martin, Teodora Milicevic, Justin Pierce, JohnRomalis, Gisela Rua, Oskar
   Nordstrom Skans, Tomasz Swiecki, Francesco Trebbi, Farid Toubal and seminar participants at the
   University of British Columbia, Universita' Bocconi, IES Summer Trade Workshop at Princeton University,
   EIIT at the University of Oregon, Peter B. Gustavson School of Business, UQAM, HEC Montreal,
   Uppsala University, Federal Reserve Board, University of Sydney, the West Coast Trade Workshop
   at Stanford University, Universite' d'Orleans and Rice University. The views expressed herein are
   those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2015 by Matilde Bombardini, Gianluca Orefice, and Maria D. Tito. All rights reserved. Short sections
   of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
   credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Exporting Improve Matching? Evidence from French Employer-Employee Data
Matilde Bombardini, Gianluca Orefice, and Maria D. Tito
NBER Working Paper No. 21225
May 2015
JEL No. F16,J2

                                              ABSTRACT

Does opening a market to international trade affect the pattern of matching between firms and workers?
And does the modified sorting pattern affect welfare? This paper answers these questions both theoretically
and empirically in three parts. We set up a model of matching between heterogeneous workers and
firms where variation in the worker type at the firm level exists in equilibrium only because of the
presence of search costs. When firms gain access to the foreign market their revenue potential increases.
When stakes are high, matching with the right worker becomes particularly important because deviations
from the ideal match quickly reduce the value of the relationship. Hence exporting firms select sets
of workers that are less dispersed relative to the average. We then document a novel fact about the
hiring decisions of exporting firms versus non-exporting firms in a French matched employer-employee
dataset. We find that exporting firms feature a lower type dispersion in the pool of workers they hire.
The matching between exporting firms and workers is even tighter in sectors characterized by better
exporting opportunities as measured by foreign demand or tariff shocks. In a calibrated general equilibrium
version of the model we show that trade opening increases welfare by more when search costs are
high, pointing to an additional source of gains from trade.


Matilde Bombardini                                   Maria D. Tito
Department of Economics                              University of British Columbia
University of British Columbia                       997-1873 East Mall
997-1873 East Mall                                   Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1                                mariadomenica.tito@gmail.com
CANADA
and CIFAR and RCEA
and also NBER
matildeb@interchange.ubc.ca

Gianluca Orefice
CEPII
113 rue de Grenelle
75007 Paris, France
gianluca.orefice@cepii.fr




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21225
1    Introduction

The pattern of sorting of workers across firms has fundamental implications for the efficiency of the

economy as well as for the inequality of wages in the labor force. The first implication has been a

concern of the literature on assignment starting from Shapley & Shubik (1971) and Becker (1973).

From those contributions we know that when firms and workers are complementary in production,

then the allocation of the right worker to the right job maximizes output. The second implication

has received attention more recently for example by Card et al. (2013), who show that sorting of

good workers to good firms can explain as much as 35% of the recent increase in wage inequality in

West Germany. The logic by which highly skilled workers are paid more not only because of their

innate higher productivity, but also because they work with highly productive firms and co-workers,

is common to the contribution by Kremer & Maskin (1996) as well.

    In this paper we start from the premise that the optimal allocation of workers cannot be reached

because of the presence of search costs, and therefore firms accept some degree of mismatch in

equilibrium because the cost of search exceeds the benefit from a more suited partner. We then

explore whether the matching of firms and workers is affected by access of the former to the

export market. But how can market integration affect how firms and workers are matched? When

firms gain access to the foreign market their revenue potential increases. When stakes are high,

matching with the right worker becomes particularly important because deviations from the ideal

match quickly reduce the value of the relationship.

    Using matched employer-employee data from France, we show that exporters select pools of

workers characterized by a higher average type and, more importantly, a lower type dispersion

than non-exporting firms. While the first effect is predicted by other models (Helpman et al., 2010

and Sampson, 2012) we believe we offer a novel way of testing this prediction, which disentangles

pure exporter wage premia (deriving from profit-sharing with workers as in Amiti & Cameron,


                                                 2
2012) from the selection of better workers by exporting firms. The second effect, i.e. the influence

of exporting on worker type dispersion, is unexplored in the literature and is quantitatively as

strong as the effect of exporting on worker average type. We explore further the effect of exporting

by building measures of the exporting opportunities in different sectors using tariffs and aggregate

imports from the rest of the world of the various countries that France exports to. Whether we build

these measures at the firm or at the sector level (using previous period export shares), we find that

when exporters face lower tariffs or larger demand for imports in a foreign market, the dispersion

of types in their pool of workers declines further. We believe this result is harder to reconcile with

a view that the exporting and tightening of the matching are both driven by a common excluded

factor.

   To study the impact of exporting on matching we employ the model proposed by Eeckhout

& Kircher (2011), where we show that exporting is identical to an increase in the firm’s type.

Heterogeneous workers and firms face a dynamic problem where in the first period they meet at

random and decide whether to accept the match or not. If they do not accept the match they

pay a search cost and proceed to the second period where perfect assortative matching prevails.

The second period, rather than an infinite horizon, approximates the long-run outside option for

both worker and firm. The presence of search costs creates an acceptance set, rather than a unique

assignment outcome that prevails in the frictionless model. As shown by Eeckhout & Kircher

(2011), the boundaries of such acceptance set are increasing in firm type, confirming the pattern

of positive assortative matching in a model with frictions. We focus on a different dimension and

we take the width of the acceptance set as a measure of the variability in worker type tolerated by

the firm.

   On the one hand, because of complementarity, a worker with type below the firm’s ideal creates

a reduction in output that is larger when the firm is very productive. On the other hand a worker



                                                  3
type that is above the average type requires an increasing compensation due to her outside option.

Such compensation rises much faster at firms that are more productive because they employ on

average more productive types. The result is that firms that are more productive, or that have

access to the export market, tolerate less relative dispersion from their ideal worker type.

   In order to assess the welfare implications of this novel empirical finding, we present two sets

of results. First, we derive a measure of the average revenue deviation for each firm type relative

to the optimum assignment. We show that, according to this measure, a more productive firm

(or an exporting firm) features a lower deviation from the optimal level of revenues created under

perfect assortative matching. This is only a partial equilibrium result and cannot inform us as to

whether there are overall gains from trade opening related to this matching channel. In particular

there are two counteracting forces when an economy is opened to trade. On the one hand, import-

competing firms receive a negative shock to their revenues and therefore their matching range tends

to widen. On the other hand, exporting firms receive a positive shock and choose smaller deviations

from the optimal. We therefore proceed to simulate an infinite horizon version of the model with

two symmetric countries and calibrate it to French moments of the data in order to recover the

parameters for costs of search, transport costs and elasticity of demand. We numerically show

that the gains from trade are larger as we increase the cost of search. We interpret this result

as providing support to the idea that when an economy is characterized by high frictions, trade

opening can be more beneficial than when the economy is essentially very close to the optimal

worker and firm allocation. This explicit result on welfare is novel in the literature and we believe

could be further explored in a richer model.

   This paper contributes to the growing literature on international trade with heterogeneous

workers and firms, which is surveyed in a recent chapter by Davidson & Sly (2012). More specifically

it belongs to a strand of research that investigates the effect of openness on the process of matching



                                                  4
between firms and workers, which is at the core contribution by Sampson (2012), who studies its

consequences for wage inequality.1

       The most closely related work is a recent paper by Davidson et al. (2012), which shows,

using Swedish data, that export-oriented sectors display a higher correlation between firm and

worker types, estimated as firms’ and workers’ fixed effects in a wage regression as in Abowd et al.

(1999)(henceforth AKM).

       Our approach shifts the focus on the firm-level decision rather than looking at the aggregate

strength of matching and therefore relies on a different type of variation to detect different matching

behaviour by firms that are differentially exposed to international trade. In particular, it exploits

within-sector variation between exporting and non-exporting firms, therefore isolating and control-

ling for other sector-level characteristics of the labor market that may affect the sorting of workers

across firms.

       Moreover, because Eeckhout & Kircher (2011) prove that firms fixed effect deriving from a wage

regression a la AKM might be negatively or not correlated with the true firm type, we are careful to

avoid using those fixed effects as a proxy for the firm’s type. We use instead variables constructed

from firm-level data, such as sales, value added and total employment.

       From a theoretical standpoint our approach differs from Davidson et al. (2008) in that we

have a different focus. We are interested in deriving predictions at the firm level, rather than at

the aggregate level and therefore we allow for a rich heterogeneity on both the worker and the

firm side. Davidson et al. (2008) simplify those dimensions in order to obtain clean aggregate

results. In particular they have high and low types of workers and high and low technology which

is chosen endogenously by ex-ante homogeneous firms. Globalization can take the economy from

an equilibrium in which high-tech firms employ high type workers and low-tech firms employ both
   1
    Our paper is also related to the large literature on the impact of trade on inequality, which includes, among many
others, Feenstra & Hanson (1999), Costinot & Vogel (2010), Bustos (2012), Amiti & Cameron (2012), Verhoogen
(2008), Krishna et al. (2014) and Frı́as et al. (2012).


                                                          5
high and low type workers to an equilibrium where there is perfect assortative matching. The

firm-level predictions in their set-up between exporters and non-exporters are stylized in that there

is no predicted variation in the type of workers hired by different types of firms under trade.

   The relationship of this paper to the theoretical framework in Helpman et al. (2010) and Help-

man et al. (2013) deserves a more detailed analysis, since both models describe the matching of

heterogeneous firms to heterogeneous workers in the presence of search frictions. The main con-

ceptual difference between the two theoretical approaches is the nature of workers heterogeneity.

In Helpman et al. (2010) workers are not ex-ante different, but they have a productivity draw that

is firm specific. Therefore there is no sense in which an ex-ante a high-type worker is more likely

to match with a high-type firm, since a firm simply select the workers that have better produc-

tivity draws relative to that firm only. In general our estimation procedure, which presumes the

existence of a fixed worker type is incompatible with their view of ex-ante identical workers. Let

us for a moment set aside this difference and investigate the predictions of their model in terms

of the dispersion of worker types within firms. Under the assumption of a Pareto distribution,

exporters (and more productive firms in general) choose a higher cut-off for hiring workers. This

results in a distribution of workers within firm that has higher standard deviation, higher mean

and a constant coefficient of variation (the ratio of standard deviation to mean). Therefore we

need an alternative theoretical framework to investigate the impact of exporting on matching of

permanently heterogeneous workers and firms that also face the possibility of exporting.

   The remainder of the paper is divided in four sections. Section 2 introduces the theoretical

framework and derives the main result on the dispersion of worker types at the firm level. Section

3 presents the estimation of worker types and presents empirical results linking export status and

dispersion of worker type in the firm. Section 4 presents the model calibration and the numerical

results on welfare. Section 5 concludes.



                                                 6
2        Theoretical framework

The role of the theoretical framework is to understand why exporting firms may match with a

different pool of workers from non-exporters. In particular, we are interested in two characteristics

of the pool of workers hired by exporters: the average worker type and, most importantly, the

variation in worker type at the firm level.

        The setup is borrowed from Eeckhout & Kircher (2011), a dynamic model where heterogeneous

firms and heterogeneous workers match in the presence of search frictions. There is a unit mass of

workers and a unit mass of firms. A worker’s type θ is distributed according to a smooth density

g (θ) on the interval [0, 1], while a firm’s type ψ is distributed according to smooth density h0 (ψ)

on the interval [0, 1].

        Output is produced by a firm that employs one worker, according to the production function

f (θ, ψ) = (θψ)σ where σ > 0.        2   We embed the matching problem in a monopolistic competition

model à la Krugman (1979). Each firm produces a differentiated variety of a product. Demand for

an individual variety is isoelastic with elasticity η > 1. Therefore firms selling their output in the

domestic market obtain total revenues:


                                                              σ(η−1)    1
                                           Rd (θ, ψ) = (θψ)      η     Eη



        where E represents domestic total real expenditures. Firm revenues are increasing in the type

of the firm and the worker and feature complementarity between the two types, i.e. fθψ > 0.

Complementarity is key for whether there is positive assortative matching in equilibrium between

firms and workers.
    2
     An extension to a firm with n is trivial if there are no complementarities among workers. In this case the firm
solves the same problem n times. If we allow complementarities between workers we can show that our basic result
is confirmed. See section 2.1.4.




                                                         7
       Under these assumptions, in the absence of frictions, we would observe perfect positive assor-

tative matching. Under that scenario every type of firm would be matched with a unique type of

worker. In particular, a more productive firm would be matched with a more productive worker,

but there would be no variation within the set of workers matched with firms of a given type ψ, as

in Sampson (2012).

       We are interested in analyzing the variation between workers employed by the same type of

firm. We therefore introduce frictions in the spirit of Atakan (2006), although we follow the timing

simplification proposed by Eeckhout & Kircher (2011).3 There are two periods. In the first period

workers and firms meet at random, they perfectly observe one another’s type and decide whether

to produce. If they do not produce they pay a cost c to search again in the second period. In

the second period matching happens in a frictionless and competitive setting, therefore perfect

assortative matching is the equilibrium outcome as in Becker (1973). Before describing how the

equilibrium matching is determined we describe how we interpret the exporting decision in this

simple set-up.

       We introduce exporting in the simplest possible way, yet one that has similar features to the

rest of the literature. There are different options when introducing a firm-level exporting decision.

The original contribution by Melitz (2003) simply introduces a fixed cost of exporting common

to all firms. This modelling choice implies that we should never observe two firms of the same

productivity, but different export status. The stark prediction that all exporters should be more

productive than non-exporters is clearly not supported by the data, as argued for example by-

Bernard et al. (2003) and Helpman et al. (2013). In both US and Brazilian data the distribution

of productivity of exporters has a higher mean, but also displays a substantial overlap with the

productivity distribution of non-exporters, a feature that is clearly shared by our French sample as
   3
    Extending the model to an infinite horizon framework does not alter the qualitative predictions of the equilibrium.
The analytical characterization, however, requires that workers and firms have the same distribution. In the appendix
we also include a numerical simulation without assuming equal distributions of worker and firm types.


                                                          8
shown in Figure A4.

   Because, similarly to Helpman et al. (2013), in our exercise we focus on the effect of exporting

separately from that of firm productivity, we adopt a similar strategy of allowing different firms

to have different costs of exporting. This may reflect various idiosyncratic factors such as better

knowledge of the export market that makes setting up an export operation less costly. Because

our interest in this paper is exclusively in comparing exporters and non-exporters and not in the

endogenous sorting into exporting or the estimation of the fixed cost of exporting, we make one

further simplifying assumption. We assume that some firms draw a prohibitively high fixed cost

of exporting, while the rest of the firms draw a negligible fixed cost. All firms that export face

an iceberg transport cost τ > 1. This is the simplest way of introducing heterogeneous exporting

behaviour among firms of identical type.

   When a firm exports, its revenues increase even if the firm is not allowed to adjust its workforce.

The firm sells its output in a market where the first unit sold of its differentiated variety is valued

much more by foreign consumers than the last unit sold in the home market was valued by domestic

consumers. The firm allocates output produced between the two markets so that marginal revenues

are equalized in the two markets. This implies that, similarly to Helpman et al. (2010), total

revenues of a firm ψ that exports can be written as follows:


                                                  σ(η−1)                   1
                               Rx (θ, ψ) = (θψ)      η     E + E ∗ τ 1−η    η
                                                                                ,



where E ∗ is foreign real expenditure.

   It is straightforward to verify that, for given θ and ψ, revenues of an exporting firm are larger

than those of a non-exporting firm. It is useful to rewrite revenues of an exporting firm and a




                                                    9
non-exporting firm with given productivity ψ as follows:


                                                                     σ(η−1)
                                       Rd (θ, ψ) = (Ad θψ)              η     ,                              (1)
                                                                     σ(η−1)
                                       Rx (θ, ψ) = (Ax θψ)              η                                    (2)


                        1                                      1
       where Ad = E σ(η−1) and Ax = E + E ∗ τ 1−η                    and A∗ > A. We therefore establish the
                                                        
                                                            σ(η−1)




following property.

       Remark 1 Exporting is isomorphic to an increase in productivity for a firm of initial produc-

tivity ψ.

       Based on Remark 1 we are going to analyse the effect on matching of export status by charac-

terizing the matching behaviour of more productive versus less productive firms.

       Until now we have not discussed the distribution of worker types and, more importantly, of firm

types. In principle we could start with a specific distribution of firm types h0 (ψ), introduce export

opportunities and derive a distribution of types based on adjusted firm type Ai ψ where i = d, x.

For the sake of tractability we instead make an assumption directly regarding the distribution of

adjusted firm types, ϕ = Ai ψ, and assume that such distribution h (ϕ) is uniform. We assume that

the distribution of worker types g (θ) is also uniform as in Eeckhout & Kircher (2011).4 In section

4.2 we introduce actual type distributions from the data in a numerical exercise.


2.1      Matching problem

We now solve the matching problem and derive predictions regarding the matching behaviour of

exporters versus non-exporting firms. We start by characterizing second period wages, profits and

assignment and then analyse period one firms’ and workers’ decisions. Once again, the problem is
   4
    Although the problem remains tractable as long as worker and firm types are distributed according to the same
distribution, the measures of dispersion that we will adopt will not be meaningful for generic distributions.




                                                       10
analysed in terms of adjusted firm type ϕ and worker type θ. We rewrite the revenue function as
                              σ(η−1)
R (θ, ϕ) = (θϕ)α where α =       η   .


2.1.1   Second period: frictionless market


In the second period, assignment is positive assortative. The matching function, µ (θ) = ϕ, which

assigns firm ϕ to worker θ is therefore µ (θ) = θ. In a competitive equilibrium the wage function

w (θ) must be such that the marginal revenues for a firm from hiring a better worker is equal to

the marginal increase in the wage paid. The equilibrium wage is therefore given by:


                                            Zθ
                                    ∗            dR (t, µ (t))     1
                                  w (θ) =                      dt = θ2α                              (3)
                                                      dt           2
                                            0



   By symmetry equilibrium profits in the second period take the same form:


                                                     1
                                            π ∗ (ϕ) = ϕ2α                                            (4)
                                                     2


2.1.2   Acceptance sets


We now determine the matching behaviour of firms and workers in the first period. When a worker

θ and a firm ϕ meet, they produce R (θ, ϕ). The outside option for the worker is w∗ (θ) − c, while

the outside option for the firm is π ∗ (ϕ) − c. Regardless of how surplus is split, the worker and the

firm will accept to match if the surplus from the relationship is positive, i.e. if the following surplus

condition holds:
                                           1     1
                                    (θϕ)α − ϕ2α − θ2α + 2c ≥ 0                                       (5)
                                           2     2

The surplus condition (5) defines the acceptance set, i.e. the set of pairs (θ, ϕ) where a match

is mutually acceptable. The set of workers that match with firm ϕ are denoted by A (ϕ). The



                                                    11
                                Θ
                          1.0




                          0.8




                          0.6




                          0.4



                                                                                   uHjL
                          0.2
                                                                                   lHjL


                                                                                                j
                            0.0         0.2        0.4         0.6         0.8            1.0


                                    Figure 1: Acceptance set α = 1, c = 0.01


boundaries of set A (ϕ) are shown by Eeckhout & Kircher (2011) to be monotonically increasing in

ϕ, which proves that positive assortative matching holds in the presence of constant search costs.5

Let us define u (ϕ) and l (ϕ), respectively, the highest and the lowest worker type that matches

with firm type ϕ. Figure 1 illustrates the acceptance set for α = 1 and c = 0.01.


2.1.3    Exporting and the Width of the Acceptance Set


We now investigate whether exporting (or more productive) firms tolerate higher or lower variation

in the set of workers they match with. We adopt the matching range of firm type ϕ, d (ϕ), as

a measure of the dispersion of workers types tolerated by the firm. The matching range d (ϕ) is

defined as the difference between u (ϕ) and l (ϕ). At this point it is important to discuss whether

the absolute measure d (ϕ) is an appropriate measure by which we can compare dispersion of worker

types within firms that exhibit differences also in the average type of worker hired. Let us take for

example the parametrization in figure 1 and consider two firms. Firm ϕH hires on average very

high worker types and firm ϕL hires on average very low worker types. Figure 1 implies that we
   5
     Positive assortative matching requires stronger restrictions on the production function if search costs are due to
output loss as in Shimer & Smith (2000).


                                                          12
should observe the same d (ϕ) for both firms, but we would probably not conclude that the two

firms tolerate the same degree of worker variation. This is because, in relative terms, firm ϕH

tolerates less variation relative to the average worker hired than firm ϕL . Hence we argue that

the correct way to analyse the matching range is to adopt scale-free dispersion measures and we

propose two alternatives:


  (i) a normalized matching range d1 (ϕ) where we divide the matching range by the average
                                                                                                     u(ϕ)
       worker type hired by firm ϕ, i.e. a (ϕ). Define d1 (ϕ) = u1 (ϕ) − l1 (ϕ) where u1 (ϕ) =       a(ϕ)

                       l(ϕ)
       and l1 (ϕ) =    a(ϕ)


 (ii) a logarithmic matching range d2 (ln ϕ) i.e. a measure defined on a logarithmic scale so that

       dispersion is defined in relative revenue deviations. Define d2 (ln ϕ) = u2 (ϕ) − l2 (ϕ) where

       u2 (ϕ) = ln u (ϕ) and l2 (ϕ) = ln l (ϕ).


   The following proposition establishes the main result regarding variability of worker types at

more productive firms and exporters.


Proposition 1 Dispersion of worker types working at firm ϕ, as measured by

   (i) normalized matching range d1 (ϕ) and

   (ii) logarithmic matching range d2 (ln ϕ)

   is decreasing in firm type (and is therefore lower for exporting firms relative to non-exporting

firms of identical initial productivity).

                                                         √   1
                                                                         √ 1
                                                   (ϕα +2 c) α
                                                                  
                                                                        2 c α
Proof. (i) It is immediate to show that u1 (ϕ) =        ϕ        = 1+   ϕα      is a decreasing function

of ϕ. Similarly one can show that l1 (ϕ) is an increasing function of ϕ. Therefore the difference

between u1 (ϕ) and l1 (ϕ) is decreasing.
                                                                                        du2 (ϕ)
   (ii) In order to prove that d2 (ln ϕ) is decreasing, we are going to show that        d ln ϕ   < 1 and
       dl2 (ϕ)                                     √ 1
that   d ln ϕ    > 1. Starting from u (ϕ) = (ϕα + 2 c) α it is immediate to show that u2 (ϕ) =

                                                  13
1                 √                      du2 (ϕ)           eα ln ϕ √
α   ln eα ln ϕ + 2 c and that              d ln ϕ   =    eα ln ϕ +2 c
                                                                         which is always smaller than one. Similar steps
             dl2 (ϕ)
imply that   d ln ϕ    > 1.

     In Appendix section A.1.1 we show that this proposition holds more in general as long as the

production function is increasing, symmetric, homogeneous and supermodular. Figure 2 presents

the two normalized measures with the same parametrization as figure 1.


                       Θ
                                                                           ln Θ
                  a HjL                                                  1.0

                   4                                                     0.8

                   2                                                     0.6

                                                                     j   0.4
                              0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8    1.0                                         u2 HjL
                                                                         0.2
                 -2                                 u1 HjL                                                 l2 HjL
                                                                                                                      ln j
                 -4                                 l1 HjL                 0.0        0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8    1.0




                              Figure 2: Normalized matching range α = 1, c = 0.01


     The result in proposition 1 is easy to explain once we express the surplus condition (5) in terms

                                                                           θ          θ
of normalized worker types. Let us define θb =                           a(ϕ)     =   ϕ,    the type of a worker, relative to the

average type employed by a firm ϕ. Condition (5) can be rewritten as a function of θb as follows:


                                                               
                                                      1       1 2α
                                                 θbα − θb2α −     ϕ + 2c ≥ 0                                                  (6)
                                                      2       2
                                               |          {z       }
                                                       S (θ,ϕ
                                                          b )


                                                 
We analyse the behaviour of the function S θ,  b ϕ and the search costs in figure 3. The function
      
S θ,b ϕ is maximized at θb = 1 and drops as one moves away from this perfect PAM allocation. The
                                                
important feature for our purpose is that S θ,
                                             b ϕ drops more steeply on either side of θb = 1 when

ϕ is higher. This means that the same proportional deviation from the optimal worker produces a

larger loss in surplus at larger firms. Higher type firms therefore have a narrower range over which


                                                                     14
     
   b ϕ > −2c as figure 3 clearly shows.
S θ,




                       0.01

                        0.00
                                                                                  1.0
                       -0.01
                       -0.02
                        -0.03
                           0.0                                          0.5
                                                                              j
                                 `    0.5
                               SHΘ,jL
                                                1.0
                               -2c          `
                                            Θ
                                                      1.5
                                                                  0.0
                                                            2.0


     Figure 3: Surplus condition as a function of normalized worker types for α = 1, c = 0.01



2.1.4   One firm with multiple workers


The model we have analysed so far entails only one worker. In that context we have said that we

can interpret a firm as a collection of hiring decisions that are independent from one another.

   One may wonder whether adding more workers to the problem modifies the results. In principle

there is a somewhat distinct reason why firms may not want to hire very heterogeneous sets of

workers and that is because workers types are complementary to one another, and not just to the

firm. Nevertheless, because of complementarity with the firm type this effect is stronger for more

productive firms. As a result this effect will strengthen the logic that we have illustrated in the one-

worker set-up. Consider for example the case of two workers (each drawn from a distinct uniform

productivity distribution): θ1 and θ2 where the production function is R (ϕ, θ1 , θ2 ) = (ϕθ1 θ2 )α

Assuming, as in this production function, that in case of disagreement the firm cannot produce

with only one worker, the surplus condition is very similar to (6) and we can write it in normalized




                                                      15
terms analogously to (6):


                                                                 
                                               α    1 b3α 1 b3α 1 3α
                                     θb1 θb2        − θ1 − θ2 −      ϕ + 3c ≥ 0,                       (7)
                                                     3     3     3


                  θi
    where θbi =   ϕ.   It is immediate to verify that the same logic applies in this case. Surplus declines

faster for more productive firms as they consider worker types that are further away from their

ideal. Hence a higher ϕ firm will accept a narrower set of workers than a lower ϕ firm.

    In the next section we introduce data and methodology aimed at verifying the empirical content

of the results in proposition 1.



3    Empirical analysis

Our empirical analysis proceeds in two steps. First, following the theory, we construct worker types

using the average wage of the worker over her job spells. As a robustness check, we also estimate

the worker types employing a methodology pioneered by Abowd et al. (1999) (AKM) and recently

enriched by Card et al. (2013). We are careful to separately construct measures of the firm type

that are not derived as firm fixed effects, due to considerations on the AKM methodology by EK. In

a second step we propose various measures that approximate the matching range of individual firms

and show that those measures are systematically different between exporters and non exporters,

both in the cross section and when export markets are subject to shocks that affect the profitability

of exporting.

    Before describing our empirical strategy in details, we offer a brief overview of the features of

the wage-setting institutions in France and of the data employed in this paper.




                                                             16
3.1      Institutional Background

It is important to discuss whether the features of the French institutional setting match the as-

sumptions made in the theoretical framework. Our model assumes that wages are the outcome of

a bargaining game between firms and workers. This condition is key to the empirical analysis in

order for wage outcomes to reflect workers’ and firms’ characteristics. We argue that the French

institutional background provides a good approximation of this feature.

       Since 1950, wage-setting institutions in France are organized according to a hierarchical prin-

ciple. Wages are bargained at three different levels: (i) at the national level, a binding minimum

wage (called Salaire Minimum Interprofessionnel de Croissance, or SMIC hereafter) is set by the

government;6 (ii) at the industry level, employers’ organisations and unions negotiate pay scales;

wages are, then, negotiated occupation by occupation; (iii) at the firm level, employers and unions

usually negotiate wage increases.

       Typically, in the 1970’s and 1980’s collective agreements were negotiated within different sectors

between unions and employer associations, then extended by the Ministry of Labour to the entire

industry, becoming binding also for workers and firms not part of the original negotiation. At

the end of the 1980s, more than 95% of the workforce was covered by those collective agreements.

However, different laws have strengthened the decentralization of the wage bargaining process in

France over the last thirty years. Three channels have been used to promote firm-level agreements:

(i) the obligation for firms to negotiate on wages each year, (ii) more possibilities offered to firms

to deviate from industry-level agreements (escape clauses), and (iii) fiscal incentives.7 In 1982,

the Auroux Law introduced the duty for firms with at least 50 employees and an elected union

representative to negotiate wages with unions every year, although not the obligation to reach an
   6
     Until 2010, the SMIC was raised each year in July according to a legal formula based on partial indexation to
past inflation and to past wage growth.
   7
     In 2008, reduction of social security contributions paid by the employers became conditional upon wage negotia-
tions occurring within the firm.



                                                        17
agreement. Subsequent legislations concerning the working time reduction (Robien’ s laws in 1996,

the first Aubry’s law in 1998, the second Aubry’s law in 2000) allowed the application of escape

clauses to working hours’ arrangements, reinforcing the trend towards decentralization.

       Since the 1980s, firm-level negotiations acquired progressively more importance. By 2005, 41%

of the workers employed in private firms with more than 10 employees were covered by a wage

agreement signed that very same year (Naboulet & Carlier, 2007).8 .


3.2      Data

The data for our project come from three main sources, the Déclaration Annuelle des Données

Sociales (DADS), the Enquete Annuelle d’Entreprises (EAE) and the French Customs Data.9

       DADS is an administrative database of matched employer-employee information collected by

the INSEE (Institut Nationale de la Statistique et des Etudes Economique). The data are based

on the mandatory reports, filed by employers, of the gross earnings of each employee in compliance

with French payroll taxes. All wage-paying individuals and legal entities established in France

are required to file payroll declarations; only individuals employing civil servants are excluded

from filing such declarations. The INSEE prepares extracts of the original database for research

purposes. We rely on the panel version of DADS, which covers all individuals employed in French

enterprises born in the month of October of even-numbered years until 2001 and every year after

that.10 This choice is motivated by the need to follow workers across years and job positions in

order to recover their type (see 3.3).

       Our extract stretches from 1995 to 2007. The initial data set contains around 24 million

observations (corresponding to the triplet worker-firm-year) which are identified by worker and
   8
     In 1992, 40% of the workforce was covered by some firm-level agreement. Source: Abowd et al. (2005); authors’
calculation based on data from wage structure survey in 1992.
   9
     These data are subject to statistical secrecy and have been accessed at CEPII
  10
     In 2002, the sampling methodology has been extended to include all individuals born in the month of October
of every year. Currently, the DADS panel represents 1/12th of the total French workforce.



                                                       18
firm ID (respectively, nninouv and siren).

       For each observation we have information on the individual’s gender, year and place of birth,

occupation (both 2-digit CS and 4-digit PCS-ESE classification), job spell,11 full-time/part-time

status, annualized real earnings, total number of hours worked as well as the industry of the employ-

ing firm (NAF700, 4-digit industry classification). We restrict our sample to full-time employees

in manufacturing (NAF 10-33), reducing the total number of observations to 2, 662, 411. Most

full-time workers are employed at a single firm during the year. Only 6% has more than one em-

ployer in a given year; for those, we selected the enterprise at which the individual worked the

largest number of days during the year. Finally, to control for possible outliers, we remove those

observations whose log annualized real earnings are more than 5 standard deviation away from the

predicted wage, based on a linear model including gender, an ile-de-France dummy and in-firm

experience. We obtain a final sample of 2, 579, 414.

       Following EK, we have to find an alternative proxy for the type of the firm to the standard

estimated firm fixed effects. So we enrich the available set of firm-level variables by merging DADS

with EAE, a survey-based dataset containing balance-sheet information on French firms in manu-

facturing over the period 1995-2007. The unit of observation in EAE is a firm-year combination;

the firm identifier is the same as the firm ID in DADS (siren). EAE samples only medium-large

enterprises with at least 20 employees. From EAE we collect information on sales (domestic and

exports), total employment, value added and also on the main sector of the firm (NAF700 4-digit

classification).12 The merge with EAE further reduces the sample availability. We restrict our sam-

ple to individuals working for firms whose characteristics are available from EAE. Furthermore, we

remove those firms whose number of sampled employees from DADS is larger than the effective
  11
     DADS records both the job start date and the number of days the individual worked in a given firm during the
calendar year.
  12
     We compare the firm’s industry classification between EAE and DADS and keep only those observations whose
industry information coincides between the two sources.




                                                       19
employment reported in EAE. This provides us a final sample of 1, 673, 992 observations on which

we implement our empirical strategy.

   Export-related information on French firms come from the French Customs. The customs data

includes export records at the firm-product-destination level for the universe of exporters located

in France.

   Finally, aggregated trade flows and applied tariff levels come from standard sources, respectively

COMTRADE and WITS. Aggregated trade flows are used to compute aggregated market shocks

as (weighted) import demand by all potential French trade partners, while applied tariff levels are

used as a second proxy for foreign market openness - average tariff reduction (across all French

trade partners) representing a measure of higher market access for French firms.


3.3   Constructing worker types

We propose two strategies to construct worker types.


Worker type proxy: Average Lifetime Wage


Our preferred methodology follows the model and uses the average wage of the worker over her

job spells - hereafter, average lifetime wage- to proxy for the worker type. In fact, the average

lifetime wage is monotonically related to the worker type θ: a more productive worker makes larger

contributions to revenues and expects to match with a better firm in the frictionless equilibrium,

obtaining, on average, a higher wage. From the model, the average lifetime wage of a worker of

type θ takes the following expression


                                    R (θα +2√c)1/α h θ2α       θα yα       y 2α
                                                                                  i
                                           √     4
                                               1/α         +     dy
                                                                 2     −     4
                                    (θα −2 c)
                           w̄ (θ) =          √ 1/α          √ 1/α                                (8)
                                     (θα + 2 c)    − (θα − 2 c)




                                                     20
In appendix section A.2 we formally show that the average lifetime wage is increasing in the worker

type θ. However, the expression for the average lifetime wage (8) also captures the measure of the

matching set and the average productivity of the firms within the matching set of a worker of ability

θ. To remove the effect of the average firm productivity, we construct worker types employing a

second strategy, the AKM methodology.


Worker type proxy: Worker Fixed Effects


This methodology aims at decomposing individual workers’ wages into a firm component and a

worker component.13 The basic specification relates a measure of log compensation for worker i

employed in firm j at time t to workers and firms’ effects:



                                      ln wit = x0it β + θi + ψJ(i,t) + εit                                 (9)



where θi is worker i’s component and ψJ(i,t) is the firm component. The function J (i, t) = j

identifies the firm employing worker i at time t. The vector xit includes time-varying worker char-

acteristics, therefore the component θi captures persistent differences in compensation explained

by ability and other time-invariant worker characteristics. We assume that the error term εit is

i.i.d. across time and workers with mean zero. This assumption requires that employment mo-

bility is exogenous, depending only on observable characteristics, person and firm effects. More

precisely, the fixed effects estimator conditions on the whole sequence of establishments at which

each worker is observed; this implies that the exogenous mobility assumption is not violated in

presence of systematic mobility patterns driven by the person effect θi and/or the sequence of firm
                                              
effects ψJ(i,t) , ψJ(i,t+1) , . . . , ψJ(i,T ) . The assumption is, instead, violated if mobility depends, for
  13
    The AKM methodology has seen a very large number of applications, e.g. Abowd et al. (2003), Abowd et al.
(2005), Abowd et al. (2006) Abowd et al. (2007), Abowd et al. (2008), Abowd et al. (2009), Abowd et al. (2009),
Carneiro et al. (2012) Torres et al. (2012).



                                                      21
example, on match-specific components of wages.                 14


       We follow AKM for the explicit specification of (9). Our dependent variable is the log of

annualized real wages.15 We include as time-varying controls a quartic in employer-specific expe-

rience,16 time-dummies, a dummy for workers residing in Ile-de-France and time-varying gender

effects (exactly, the interactions of sex with all the other variables).

       The panel version of DADS does not contain information on education. AKM obtain in-

formation on the highest degree attained from the permanent demographic sample (Echantillon

Démographique Permanent, EDP). However, this information would be available, in our case, only

for about 20% of the workers in our sample. Thus, we decided not to include a control for schooling

in our decomposition.17

       As described in Abowd et al. (2002), fixed effects for workers and firms can be separately

identified only for sets of firms and workers that are ‘connected’ by moving workers. In fact, the

person effect is common to all of the individual’s job spells; its identification requires observing

the individual at different employers. Similarly, a firm effect is common to all employees of the

firm; identifying the firm effect requires observations on multiple employees of the firm. Identifying

both effects requires mobility of workers across firms.18 The movement of workers between firms

characterizes a connected group. A connected group is defined by all workers who ever worked for

any firm in the group and all firms whose workforce is included in the group. A second group is
  14
      The results estimated under the assumption that the error term εit includes a match effect ηiJ(i,t) and an
idiosyncratic term as in Card et al. (2013) and Woodcock (2008) are qualitatively similar to those in Tables 3 and 4.
   15
      Working hours are often not reported. The restriction to full-time workers absorbs possible differences in hours
worked across individuals.
   16
      DADS contains information on the job starting date at a certain firm - we compute the employer-specific expe-
rience as a difference between the current year and the first year of employment at the firm.
   17
      In addition, most of the effect of schooling would be absorbed by the person effect. AKM mention that schooling
does not time-vary over their sample.
   18
      Let us consider a simple example of how to implement the AKM methodology. Consider a connected group with
2 firms and N workers and suppose that at least one worker, individual 1, is employed in both firms over the sample
period. The observed wage differential for individual 1 is entirely attributed to the difference between firms fixed
effects. Normalizing the mean firm effect to zero, it is possible to identify one of the fixed effects. A similar argument
applies to the identification of the person effect.




                                                           22
unconnected to the first if no firm in the first group has ever employed any worker from the second

group and no firm in the second has ever employed workers from the first. Within each group, we

normalize the mean of the fixed effects to zero, therefore it is not possible to identify 1 individual

and 1 firm effects per group.

    Due to the normalization, comparing fixed effects between groups has no real meaning. There-

fore, when comparing workers and firms, we only employ estimated fixed effects from the largest

connected group, which represents 88% of the workers in our final sample.

    The estimation of the fixed effects is performed using the Gauss-Seidel algorithm, proposed by

Guimaraes & Portugal (2010). Such algorithm consists in solving the partitioned set of normal

equations, associated to (9), given an initial guess on the coefficients. Workers’ and firms’ fixed

effects are recovered as coefficients on the dummy variables identifying the worker and the firm at

which the worker is employed. According to Smyth (1996), the Gauss-Seidel algorithm achieves

a stable, but slow convergence, depending on the correlation between the parameter estimators.

This implementation has the advantage of not requiring an explicit calculation of inverse matrices

to determine the vector of coefficients nor forces us to drop small firms, due to the large number of

firm effects to estimate.19

    We recover estimates for the fixed effects for 406404 individuals and 31649 firms. In the ap-

pendix, we include the distribution of the worker fixed effects (Figure A5) and firm fixed effects

(figure A6) for the largest connected group.

    With estimates of worker types at hand, we now proceed to construct measures of the average

worker type and dispersion of worker type at the firm level. Specifically, we construct the variables
  19
     The number of firms’ fixed effect is too large for e.g. the felsdv estimator. In such case, Andrews et al. (2006)
suggest pooling small plants into a single superplant. However, we prefer not to implement a similar strategy, as, in
our case, firms - not plants - are the units of observation.




                                                         23
AvWorkerType jt , SdWorkerType jt and IQRWorkerType jt as:


                                                  1 X
                       AvWorkerType jt =                   w̄i
                                                 njt
                                                     i∈Ijt
                                                  1
                                                     sX
                                                                                     2
                       SdWorkerType jt =                       w̄i − AvWorkerType jt
                                                 njt
                                                       i∈Ijt
                                                  j,75th
                      IQRWorkerType jt = w̄                − w̄j,25th



where Ijt is the set of workers employed by firm j at time t, w̄j,75th and w̄j,25th are the types of the

workers at the 75th and 25th percentile of firm j’s employee type distribution.

       We build these measures only for firms with more than 5 sampled workers. The choice of the

threshold is a compromise between retaining a sample of satisfactory size and constructing sample

measures that approximate the true underlying measures. On the one hand, a larger threshold

forces us to cut a larger percentage of the sample. On the other hand, a larger number of sampled

workers reduces the noise in the estimation of a firm’s matching set. We consider each employment

relation to be a realization of a match along the set of acceptable matches within a firm’s matching

set. In the limit, increasing the number of match realizations, the constructed statistics of worker

types converges to the true measure. Choosing a higher threshold does not affect the results. If

including firms with less than 5 sampled workers, instead, the coefficients on our variables of interest

are of the correct sign but in some specifications are not significant.      20




3.4      Firm types

For the purpose of comparing matching choices of exporting and non-exporting firms, we need to

control for the type of the firm. EK show that the relationship between true firm type and firm

fixed effects estimated from a AKM-style wage regression is theoretically ambiguous, i.e. it can be
  20
    In the appendix, we report the results from GLS regressions including also firms with less than 5 workers,
weighting by the number of workers. See Tables A7-A10.



                                                     24
positive, negative or zero.21 EK also argue that the ideal firm component is a measure of firm type

that is specific to every job within the firm, but measurable variables such as output and profits

are obviously only observed at the aggregate firm level, not for each relationship within the firm.

We therefore adopt three proxies for firm type to investigate the behaviour of firms fixed effects ψ:

value added per worker of firm j, V Apwj , the logarithm of total employment in firm j, log Empj

and share in the domestic market DomSharej , defined as the ratio of firm j’s domestic sales to

total domestic sales in the firm’s sector (each firm is classified as belonging to only one sector in

each year).22 While the first two proxies are standard measures of the productivity or demand

intensity for a firm product, the third is motivated by Eaton et al. (2011). In particular, while

the first two proxies contain a measure of success over all markets, including the foreign ones, the

third variable better captures the success of the firm with respect to the domestic market, before

the choice of exporting. We average each proxy over the years the firm appears in the sample to

smooth out the effect of changes in the workforce.23

    We first confirm the hypothesis put forward by EK regarding the ability of the AKM firm fixed

effects to capture the firm type. Table 1 shows the pairwise correlation between the AKM firm

fixed effect, the three proxies for firm type and the average worker type at firm j as measured

by the average AKM worker fixed effect, AvWorkerType j over the sample period at firm j. The

first striking fact is the negative and large correlation (−0.80) between average worker type and

the AKM firm fixed effects ψ, confirming previous findings by Abowd et al. (2004). If instead

we employ the three proxies for firm type, we observe for each of them a positive and significant
  21
     In a recent contribution Hagedorn et al. (2012) show how to complement wage data with labour market transitions
to identify the pattern of sorting.
  22
     We consider sectors at the 4-digit level for the constructions of market shares.
  23
     Our model confirms the positive correlation between productivity, value added per worker and domestic market
share. According to our theory, more productive firms tend to match with better workers, realizing on average larger
revenues. Therefore, firms of higher productivity should display larger value added per worker and a larger share in
the domestic market. The model is silent about employment differences due to variations in productivity, since we
focus on one firm-one worker matching. If we introduce homogeneous labour in the production function, the model
will also address the implication that more productive firms hire a larger workforce.



                                                        25
correlation with the average worker type, proxied either with the average lifetime wage or the

average of the worker fixed effects. The three firm type proxies are in turn all positively correlated

with one another, but display small and sometimes opposite correlations with the AKM fixed effect

ψ. In particular DomSharej and V Apwj have a positive correlation of 0.01 and of 0.001 with ψ,

respectively, while and log Empj displays a negative correlation of −0.01.

   Table 2 shows that this correlation pattern is not unique to a few sectors. In column 4 we report

the correlation between AvWorkerType j and ψj by two-digit sector, while column 6 displays the

analogous correlation between DomSharej and AvWorkerType j . While the first set of correlations

is always negative and significant, the second set of correlations is positive and significant, except

in one case where the correlation is positive, but not significant. The evidence presented in tables 1

and 2 is consistent with the hypothesis put forward by EK, that the AKM firm fixed effect may not

be correlated with the true firm type, although it is still possible that, as in Abowd et al. (2004),

there is truly negative assortative matching between workers and firms or that the negative result

is purely due to statistical bias arising from the short nature of the panel.


3.5   Empirical Specification 1: Export Status and Acceptance Set

We now proceed to illustrate the specifications employed to describe the different matching be-

haviour of exporting and non-exporting firms. The first implication of our model is that exporting

firms hire workers of higher average type. This is a similar prediction to the models of Sampson

(2012) and, under the interpretation of permanent worker heterogeneity, Helpman et al. (2010).

We believe this is a novel method of corroborating such prediction since it shows directly that an

exporter pays higher wages because it employs better workers, not because it shares higher revenues

with the same type of workers. The former is the mechanism involved in explaining the exporter

wage premium in Helpman et al. (2010), but we believe it has not been tested before.



                                                 26
       In a pooled cross-section of firms over the sample period, the basic specification we employ is

the following:



                    AvWorkerType jt = β0 + β1 Export jt + β2 Firm Type jt + Dst + ujt                              (10)



where Export jt = 1 if firm j exports at time t and Firm Type jt is one or all of the three proxies for

firm productivity, V Apwj , log Empj and DomSharej .

       Differences in average worker type between exporters and non-exporters also reflect differences

in the occupational structure. If, for example, exporters employ workers in occupations with higher

average wage, they might also have higher average type, since the person effect contains all time-

invariant characteristics, like occupation, that rarely change over time for a given worker.24 We

add the number of occupation, N.occjt and the share of white collar workers,25 whiteshare, to

specification (10). Similarly, the number of exported products, log P roducts, which we include

in the specification with all controls, is intended to capture structural differences in occupational

complexity that might cause a spurious correlation of the exporting status with the average worker

type.

       In addition, all specifications except the first include a quadratic in the number of sampled

workers to control for the precision of our left-hand side estimates.26 Finally, all specifications

include sector-year dummies, Dst .

       The novel contribution of this paper is the prediction that exporters match with workers that

are characterized by lower relative dispersion of ability. The specification that we employ is the
  24
     Around 80% of the workers in the sample do not switch occupation during the time period analysed.
  25
     The blue vs white collar classification is based on occupational codes. We report the classification we adopt in
Table A2.
  26
     In unreported results we simulated the model and verified that differences in the number of observations available
for exporters and non-exporters do produce differential biases that can justify the quantitative estimates we obtain. In
order words exporting firms do not have a large enough number of observations to mechanically reduce the standard
deviation of worker types by the amount we observe.




                                                          27
following:

                     SdWorkerType jt = β00 + β10 Export jt + β20 Firm Type jt + Dst + u0jt .                        (11)


      The theoretical section shows that the only robust prediction regarding the link between worker

type dispersion and export status (and productivity) requires expressing such dispersion either in

percentage terms or relative to the average worker type. In this regard, it is essential to remember

that the fixed effects are estimated from a log-linearized equation, where types are therefore already

expressed in percentage differences from one another. Nevertheless we will add the average worker

type in the specification with all controls.27

      Similarly to specification (10), we include the number of occupations, N.occjt , the share of

white collar workers, white share and the number of exported products, log P roducts, to control for

differences in the occupational structure across firms with different export status. All specifications

include sector-year dummies, Dst .

      Both specifications (10) and (11) are estimated by OLS and standard errors are clustered at

the level of the firm.

      We develop an alternative strategy to test the prediction that exporters select a set of workers

characterized by a lower dispersion. We compare the rank correlation between the average worker

type by firm and the firm type among exporters to the rank correlation between the average worker

type and firm types among non-exporters. In fact, the rank correlation captures the strength of

sorting patterns. A lower dispersion among exporters implies better sorting and should be associated

with a larger correlation. We construct the rank correlation separately for exporters and for non-

exporters for each sector-year and we test the existence of systematic differences in the correlation

according to export status, employing the following specification:
 27
      All results are very similar if we adopt the coefficient of variation of worker type as our dependent variable.




                                                            28
                                                            = β000 + β100 Export st + Ds + Dt + u00st .
                                                   
           Corr AvWorkerType jt , DomSharejt           st
                                                                                                          (12)


   where Export st = 1 if the correlation is constructed for the set of exporting firms in sector s

at time t. In addition to sector and time dummies, we also include the average (log) employment

and the average domestic market share of firms in the same sector-year-export status cell, because

those characteristics might differentially affect the matching patterns and be correlated with export

status.


Results


The estimation results relative to specifications (10) and (11) are presented in Tables 3 and 4.

Column 1 of Table 3 reports a positive and statistically significant relationship between export

status and the average type of the worker employed by the firm. The positive relationship is of

similar strength when we introduce in turn the three controls for firm type (domestic share, value

added per worker and employment).

   As predicted by theory, the coefficient on all three proxies for firm type is positive and significant,

like the one on export status. In the specification reported in column 4 we include the three controls

for firm type in the same regression, and the coefficient on export (the one of our interest) remains

positive and significant, like the ones on value added per worker and employment.

   Table 4 reports the results of the estimation of specification (11) and has a similar structure to

Table 3. Starting from column 1 where no controls are added, we document the expected negative

and significant relationship between export status and variability of worker type. The effect persists

with a similar magnitude when we control for the above mentioned firm type controls (domestic

share, employment and value added per worker). The inclusion of all the control variables in column

(6) does not alter the negative and significant coefficient on the export dummy. As predicted by


                                                   29
theory, the coefficient on two proxies for firm type is negative (columns 2 and 3), but the table also

documents a positive and significant correlation between value added per worker and the dispersion

of worker type (column 4 - 6) a pattern that is not in line with the predictions of the model.

       It is important to quantify the effect at the core of this paper. Based on our preferred specifica-

tion, column 6 of Table 4, where we include all controls, the expected difference on the dispersion

of worker type between exporter and non-exporter firms is about 0.037 points (holding the other

variables constant). Considering that the dependent variable has a standard deviation of 0.41, an

exporter features worker variability that is lower by 9% standard deviations. The effect on the

mean worker type can be calculated using the results from Table 3 and is of the same order of

magnitude, but slightly smaller: an exporting firm displays an average worker type that is 3.9%

standard deviations higher.28

       In Tables A5 and A6, we report the result separately for the sample of newly hired workers and

for the stayers. Intuitively, the export dummy is negative and significant only when we consider

the newly hired sample, as reported in Table A5. This is a reasonable result given that firing costs

and other labour market protection measures plausibly make the firing margin less flexible than

the hiring one.

       Tables 5 and 6 report estimates for the same specifications as in tables 3 and 4, but employ

a different proxy for the worker type, i.e. worker fixed effect from the AKM regression. Table 5

reports again a positive relationship between export status and average worker type; the coefficient

on export status remains positive but loses its significance when adding controls for firm type and

the occupation structure. Table 6 confirms a negative relationship between the dispersion of worker

type and export status. Controlling for the type of the firm (by using employment, domestic market

share and value added per worker), the coefficient on export is negative and once again we find
  28
    This magnitude has been computed by using the export coefficient of Table 3 column 6. The standard deviation
of the average worker type is 0.81.



                                                      30
that firms with higher employment and higher domestic share have tighter worker type dispersion

- coherently with the model. But, again, firms with high value added per worker have a wider

variation.


Endogeneity of Export Status


We have not discussed so far the potential endogeneity of export status and the bias resulting

from unobserved firm characteristics that may affect the export status and the standard deviation

of worker types simultaneously. To address this concern, we develop an instrumental variable

strategy. We instrument export status using a firm-level measure of tariff,

                                                                                         
                                                                          1
                                Firm Tariffjt = ln 1 + P                 Exportsjr,t−1
                                                                                                        (13)
                                                                sr τsrt   Exportsj,t−1



where τsrt is the tariff faced by firms in sector s exporting to country r at time t − 1; we aggregate

across countries using as weights the share of exports to country r of firm j at time t over the
                                             Exportsjr,t−1
total exports of firm j at time t − 1,       Exportsj,t−1 .   Table 7 reports the second stage results29 . The

coefficient on export status remains negative and significant in all specification. In particular, in

our preferred specification, the coefficient is smaller than the coefficient from the OLS regression

in Table 4; this is consistent with the idea that more productive firms possess a better technology

to search for their workers.


Additional robustness


Table 8 presents the results for specification (11) with an alternative measure of dispersion, a

weighted average of the standard deviation of ability for different groups of workers. In particular,

we divide occupations into ‘managers’, ‘executives’ (white collar occupations) and ‘blue’ collar (as
 29
      The First Stage is reported in Table A13



                                                         31
reported in Table A2) and we construct average employment shares of those occupational groups

within firm over time. We then weigh the standard deviation of lifetime wages for each group by its

average employment share to construct our new dependent variable. The coefficient on the export

dummy remains negative and significant in all specifications; in most columns, the magnitude of

the coefficient is not significantly different from what is reported in Table 4. This suggests that our

result is not due to compositional differences between exporters and non-exporters.

   Looking at the coefficients on firm’s type controls (columns 2, 3 and 4 in Table 8) we discover

that employment and domestic market share have the expected sign, i.e. they are negatively related

with the standard deviation of workers types. The coefficient on value added per worker is positive

and significant only in column 6, suggesting that the ‘puzzling’ effect discussed above for tables 4

and 6 might be related to changes in employment composition over time.

   Table 9 presents a further robustness of the result to the definition of worker type employed

as dependent variable. In particular, we employ the interquartile range of worker type at firm j,

as described earlier. It is easy to verify that all previously described patterns appear again in this

table. Exporting firms choose a narrower range of worker types.

   Finally, Tables A11 and A12 confirm that differences in dispersions translate into higher rank

correlation between average worker types and firm types for exporters compared to non-exporters,

controlling for average size differences. Firm and worker types are more tightly correlated among

exporters than non-exporters.


3.6   Empirical specification 2: market access and tariff shocks

Our first empirical strategy has relied on cross-sectional differences between exporting and non-

exporting firms. Plausibly, the export dummy may be capturing the effect of other firms charac-

teristics that are not included in our firm type proxies and that affect the matching behaviour of



                                                  32
firms.

      Our second strategy to detect the impact of exporting on matching between firms and workers

aims at addressing this concern. We exploit differences in the opportunities offered by foreign

markets, approximated by demand shocks and tariffs across sectors and countries over time. These

different shocks, which we indicate as ‘market access’ should affect exporting firms differentially

from non-exporting firms. A positive demand shock in a foreign market or a lower tariff faced by

French exporters should induce the exporting firm to select an even less dispersed labor force. The

specification that we estimate is the following:



                 AvWorkerType jt = γ0 + γ1 Mkt Access st × Export jt + γ2 Mkt Access st

                                            +γ3 Export jt + Dst + vjt ,                            (14)

                  SdWorkerType jt = γ00 + γ10 Mkt Access st × Export jt + γ20 Mkt Access st

                                                                    0
                                            +γ30 Export jt + Dst + vjt                             (15)



where


                                              X                        F rench exportssr,t−1
                        MktAccess st =             MktAccess srt ×                           ,     (16)
                                               r
                                                                       F rench exportss,t−1
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                               Tariffs srt       or
                                              
                                              
                       MktAccess srt =           Imports srt or        ,
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                              
                                               Imports srt
                                              
                                              
                                                   Tariffs srt



Imports srt is the total value of imports by country r from the rest of the world30 , Tariffs srt is the

tariff faced by a French firm exporting to country r in sector s at time t, and F rench exportssr,t−1

is the value of exports from France to country r in sector s at time t − 1 (with total exports in the
 30
      The inclusion of French exports to country r does not affect the results.


                                                             33
sector in that year indicated as F rench exportss,t−1 ). The variable MktAccess st measures cost of

access or demand size in foreign markets for firms in a given sector s, weighted by the importance of

French firms in that sector in the previous year. The model predicts that a good export opportunity

should result in an increase in the average worker type and further tightening of the acceptance set

for an exporting firm, so we expect γ1 < 0 and γ10 > 0 for the case of MktAccess srt =Tariffs srt and
                                                                    Imports srt
the opposite when market access is measured as Imports srt or        Tariffs srt .



3.6.1   Results


Table 10 and 11 report estimates of the coefficients in specifications (14) and (15) when market

access for a firm in sector s is measured by total demand for imports faced by an exporter in sector

s as in equation (16). We do not present results for the case when total import demand is deflated

by the tariff faced by French exporters because they are very similar. Table 10 reports results on

the average worker type; our coefficient of interest is positive and significant on all specifications.

However, if evaluated at the mean of the market access measured by Importssrt an exporter does

not feature a higher average worker ability; only exporters in sectors with a degree of openness

larger than the average will enjoy an effect on the average worker type.

   In Table 11 we find for all specifications that the estimated coefficient γ10 is negative and signif-

icant, so that exporters seem to choose a less dispersed workforce in particular when having better

access to foreign markets. The inclusion of firm type controls does not affect the magnitude and

significance of this result. The coefficient on export status is negative and significant in all specifica-

tions. If evaluated at the mean of the market access measured by Importssrt , an exporter features

worker variability that is lower by 3.4% standard deviations than a non-exporter firm (which is in

line with the quantification reported in section 3.5.1).

   Tables 12 and 13 report estimates of the coefficients in specifications (14) and (15) when market



                                                    34
access for a firm in sector s is measured by the average tariff faced by an exporter in sector s. Only

columns 4-6 of Table 12 report a negative coefficient γ1 - which is line with the prediction - but

not statistically significant.

    Table 13 reports very similar results to Table 11: better export market conditions as measured

by a lower tariff faced on the export market result in a tighter matching set for exporting firms. So,

contrary to Table 12, the effect of export opportunities on standard deviation of worker type seems

more robust to the definition of market access. In particular, firms exporting in country-sector with

’mean’ market access (mean value equal to 5.58% in our sample) have a lower worker variability

than non-exporters (13.7% standard deviation units), with such gap increasing with the market

access of the firm.



4    Welfare implications

We have so far not discussed the consequences in terms of welfare of the mechanism explored in

this paper. Our model predicts that exporting firms tolerate less relative dispersion in worker

type, but it does not analyse what happens to exporting and non-exporting firms relative to their

autarky matching decisions. In theory the model features two counteracting effects. While newly

exporting firms have stronger incentives to tighten their matching range, non-exporting firms see

their revenues decline because of import competition and therefore will see an increase in their

normalized matching range. We therefore present our results in two steps. First, we report partial

equilibrium results that examine revenue loss as a function of firm productivity and confirm that

revenue loss is lower for exporting and more productive firms. Second, we turn to a general

equilibrium model where we introduce a second symmetric country and compute overall welfare

changes, taking into account variety effects and price changes.




                                                 35
4.1   Revenue loss in partial equilibrium

We start by analysing revenue loss as a function of firm productivity. We choose to present a

measure of revenue loss relative to the optimal allocation as in EK. For each firm ϕ and worker θ

we can define a revenue loss relative to the optimum which we also define L (ϕ, θ) =   1
                                                                                       2   (θα − ϕα )2 .

The assumption in creating such a measure is that in the optimal allocation a worker of type θ

would generate a revenue of θ2α and is allocated half of that revenue. Holding the type of the firm

constant at ϕ we sum the revenue loss, relative to the optimal level, for each possible worker type

in the acceptance set. We then divide for the optimal revenue summed across the same range. We

obtain the share of revenues lost relative to the optimum for a firm of type ϕ (and the workers in

that firm’s acceptance range), which we define RL (ϕ):

                                            R u(ϕ) 1  α     α 2
                                             l(ϕ) 2 (θ − ϕ ) dθ
                                 RL (ϕ) =   R u(ϕ) 1 2α 1 2α                                       (17)
                                             l(ϕ) 2 θ   + 2 ϕ dθ


The following proposition shows that such deviations from the optimal revenues are smaller for

more productive firms.


Proposition 2 The share of output lost relative to the optimal revenues, RL (ϕ), is decreasing in

the type of the firm ϕ:


  1. For any α, as c → 0


  2. For any c if α = 1 or α = 2 or α = 12 .


Proof. See Appendix A.3.

   Moreover, we have verified that this result holds for a very wide range or parameters. We

have not been able to find instances where proposition 2 does not hold, although a general proof

is arduous due to many non-integer exponents in the expressions involved. This proposition is a

                                                36
comparison across firm types observed in a given equilibrium, so that for example we can use this

proposition to compare revenue losses of an import-competing firm versus an exporting firm of

the same original underlying productivity. The exporting firm will feature across all the possible

matches in her matching set a lower share of revenues lost because of mismatch. This is a partial

equilibrium result that we cannot employ to evaluate the overall welfare impact of trade opening

because the two equilibria will feature different type distributions and therefore different shapes of

the matching sets. In particular if we want to compare autarky and trade equilibria we can no longer

assume that the distribution of types is uniform. If we start with a uniform distribution for firms

and workers, only the distribution of worker types will remain unchanged, while the distribution

of firms will be affected by the endogenous shock to revenues given by export opportunities and

import competition. Once we move away from a uniform distribution and the two distributions

of workers and firms are no longer symmetric, the analytical characterization becomes intractable.

We therefore resort to a simulation and calibration exercise where we can relax other unrealistic

assumptions and that we describe in the next section.


4.2      Calibration of a general equilibrium model with symmetric countries

We calibrate the infinite-horizon open-economy version of the model31 to match moments of the

French Economy. The two main differences from the simple two period model are that: i) successful

firms and workers pairs are subject to a exogenous rate of separation δ, and that ii) in each period

the probability of meeting a potential match is ρ. The parameters to be calibrated are as follows:

the elasticity of demand, η; the curvature of the production function, σ; the variable trade cost τ ;

the distribution of the fixed export costs; the rate at which matches are dissolved, δ; the rate at

which matches are created, ρ; the search cost c; the worker ability distribution, gθ (θ), and the firm
 31
      See Tito (2014) for details.




                                                 37
productivity distribution, gψ (ψ). We need to calibrate those parameters for both a domestic and

a foreign economy; in what follows, we will assume that the home country and the foreign country

share the same characteristics.

       In a model with monopolistic competition and CES preferences, the elasticity of demand η maps

into the trade elasticity, ε = η −1. Following the extensive literature on trade elasticity estimates,32

we set η = 4, the median value over the range of those estimates.

       We calibrate the curvature of the production function to the elasticity of a CES-aggregate of

worker types with respect to firm revenues. In our estimation, σ = 0.653.

       We use the implied relationship between foreign and domestic shipments at an exporting firm to

identify a plausible parametrization of the variable trade cost. From the model, the ratio between

the output sold in the domestic market and the exported output depends on the relative market

size,
                                                             1/η
                                             qdd         E
                                                 =                   τ η−1                                     (18)
                                             qdx         E∗

The domestic market size E and the foreign market size E ∗ depend on the set of initial parameters.

However, if the primitives are identical, the domestic and the foreign country have the same size,

E = E ∗ . Therefore, equation (18) implies τ = 1.513.

       We normalize fL = 0 and fH → ∞; therefore, the fraction of firms λ drawing the low fixed

export cost corresponds to the fraction of exporters. In our data, λ = 0.8.33

       We set the search cost c to match the average within-firm wage dispersion in the data. This

implies c = 0.025. For the meeting rate and the match dissolution rate, we refer to the estimates

from Hairault et al. (2015) for the job finding probability and the separation probability.34
  32
     See Head & Mayer (2014)
  33
     In our dataset, firm-level information is available only for firms with more than 20 employees. This threshold
excludes the biggest portion of non-exporting French firms.
  34
     Using administrative data on the labour market, Hairault et al. (2015) estimate the job finding probability and
the separation probability from 1994 onwards. They find that the average separation probability is 1.7%, while the
average job finding probability is 13.5%



                                                         38
   Finally, we parametrically estimate the worker ability distribution gθ (θ) and the firm produc-

tivity distribution gψ (ψ) using our proxies for agents’ types, average lifetime wage for the worker

and (the rank of the) domestic market share. We assume that both distributions are Beta with

parameters (αθ , βθ ) for workers and (αψ , βψ ) for firms. Table 18 summarizes the parameters from

the calibration.

   Next, we move to the welfare analysis. Our analysis focuses on two welfare proxies: changes

in real expenditure and changes in relative deviations from the optimal worker-to-firm assignment,

expression (17). We characterize the steady state equilibrium in the model with two symmetric

countries under the parametrization from Table 14; we then compare the steady state autarky

equilibrium that we derive when setting the share of exporters λ = 0 to the initial equilibrium. In

our formulation this is equivalent to a very large increase in the fixed export costs, fL = fH → ∞.

We find that moving to autarky reduces real expenditure by 22%. The change in real expenditure,

however, captures 3 effects: the change in the number of available varieties, the change in the

worker selection patterns and a price effect. While the first two effects are positively related to

welfare, the third effect, instead, acts to reduce welfare after a trade liberalization. This is due to

the capacity constraint in our model: the output in a match is fixed and proportional to the agents’

types. The demand shock due to the trade liberalization has no impact on the firm’s production

decision; after trade opening, a firm only reallocates part of its output from the domestic to the

foreign market.

   The second measure we propose, instead , consists of changes in relative deviations from the

optimal worker-to-firm assignment, captures exclusively selection effects. We construct deviations

from the optimal worker-to-firm assignment comparing the realized real revenues in the presence

of search costs to the real revenues in the frictionless equilibrium; we normalize by the revenues

in the frictionless equilibrium. We find that, in an open economy, the losses are −86.08% of the



                                                  39
real revenues under optimal allocation; moving back to autarky implies an increase in the losses to

−87.44%. Therefore, opening to trade is associated with a reduction in the relative deviation from

the efficient allocation by −1.36%.

    Further, we look at how our two measures are affected by different levels of search cost c and

α.35 The results are shown in Tables 15 and 16. The numerical results suggest that gains from

trade and frictions are substitutes in our framework. Both changes in real revenues and changes in

relative real revenue losses seems to be non-decreasing in the level of search cost, for a given α.



5     Conclusions

Using linked employer-employee data from France, we show that exporters and non-exporters match

with sets of workers that are different. Exporters employ workers of higher average type and lower

type dispersion. We rationalize this finding using a model of matching with search frictions where

more productive firms and exporting firms match with better workers and tolerate a lower degree of

dispersion among the workers employed. We also show numerically that the welfare gains from trade

are higher when search costs are higher, which points to a substitutability between trade opening

and the lowering of trade frictions. Trade liberalization seems more important when frictions are

high and the workers allocation is relatively further away from the optimal. This paper therefore

establishes a novel source of gains from trade, where exposure to exports brings the economy closer

to the efficient allocation of workers to firms.




  35
     α collects demand and supply parameters, α = σ η−1
                                                     η
                                                        , where η is the elasticity of demand and σ is the curvature
of the production function.


                                                        40
References

Abowd, J., Haltiwanger, J., & Lane, J. (2009). Wage structure and labor mobility in the united

  states. In The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison (pp. 81–100). University of

  Chicago Press.


Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., Lengermann, P., & Pérez-Duarte, S. (2004). Are good workers employed

  by good firms? a test of a simple assortative matching model for france and the united states.

  Unpublished Manuscript.


Abowd, J., Kramarz, F., Lengermann, P., & Roux, S. (2005). Persistent inter-industry wage

  differences: Rent sharing and opportunity costs. In Seminar Paper presented at SFU.


Abowd, J. M., Creecy, R. H., & Kramarz, F. (2002). Computing person and firm effects using

  linked longitudinal employer-employee data. Technical report, Center for Economic Studies, US

  Census Bureau.


Abowd, J. M., Haltiwanger, J., Lane, J., McKinney, K. L., & Sandusky, K. (2007). Technology

  and the demand for skill: an analysis of within and between firm differences. Technical report,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.


Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., Lengermann, P., & Pérez-Duarte, S. (2003). Sorting workers between

  and within industries. Technical report, mimeo, February 2003, available at http://cep. lse. ac.

  uk/seminarpapers/28-02-03-KRA1. pdf.


Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Margolis, D. N. (1999). High wage workers and high wage firms.

  Econometrica, 67 (2), 251–333.


Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Roux, S. (2005). Wages, mobility and firm performance: an analysis

  using matched employee and employer data from france. Economic Journal.

                                               41
Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Roux, S. (2006). Wages, mobility and firm performance: Advantages

  and insights from using matched worker–firm data*. The Economic Journal, 116 (512), F245–

  F285.


Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Woodcock, S. (2008). Econometric analyses of linked employer–

  employee data. In The econometrics of panel data (pp. 727–760). Springer.


Abowd, J. M., McKinney, K. L., & Vilhuber, L. (2009). The link between human capital, mass

  layoffs, and firm deaths. In producer dynamics: New Evidence from Micro data (pp. 447–472).

  University of Chicago Press.


Amiti, M. & Cameron, L. (2012). Trade liberalization and the wage skill premium: Evidence from

  indonesia. Journal of International Economics, 87 (2), 277–287.


Andrews, M., Schank, T., & Upward, R. (2006). Practical fixed-effects estimation methods for the

  three-way error-components model. Stata Journal, 6 (4), 461.


Atakan, A. E. (2006). Assortative matching with explicit search costs. Econometrica, 74 (3), 667–

  680.


Becker, G. S. (1973). A theory of marriage: Part i. The Journal of Political Economy, 813–846.


Bernard, A., Eaton, J., Jensen, J., & Kortum, S. (2003). Plants and productivity in international

  trade. The American Economic Review, 93 (4), 1268–1290.


Bustos, P. (2012). The impact of trade liberalization on skill upgrading evidence from argentina.

  Unpublished manuscript.


Card, D., Heining, J., & Kline, P. (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west german

  wage inequality*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (3), 967–1015.



                                               42
Carneiro, A., Guimarães, P., & Portugal, P. (2012). Real wages and the business cycle: Accounting

  for worker, firm, and job title heterogeneity. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,

  4 (2), 133–152.


Costinot, A. & Vogel, J. E. (2010). Matching and inequality in the world economy. Journal of

  Political Economy, 118 (4), 747–786.


Davidson, C., Heyman, F., Matusz, S., Sjöholm, F., & Zhu, S. C. (2012).       Globalization and

  imperfect labor market sorting.


Davidson, C., Matusz, S. J., & Shevchenko, A. (2008). Globalization and firm level adjustment

  with imperfect labor markets. Journal of International Economics, 75 (2), 295–309.


Davidson, C. & Sly, N. (2012). Trade and the labor market: Recent developments and new frontiers.

  In M. Kreinin & M. G. Plummer (Eds.), Oxford Handbook on International Commercial Policy.

  Oxford University Press.


Eaton, J., Kortum, S., & Kramarz, F. (2011). An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from

  french firms. Econometrica, 79 (5), 1453–1498.


Eeckhout, J. & Kircher, P. (2011). Identifying sortingin theory. The Review of Economic Studies,

  78 (3), 872–906.


Feenstra, R. C. & Hanson, G. H. (1999). The impact of outsourcing and high-technology capital on

  wages: estimates for the united states, 1979–1990. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (3),

  907–940.


Frı́as, J. A., Kaplan, D. S., & Verhoogen, E. (2012). Exports and within-plant wage distributions:

  Evidence from mexico. The American Economic Review, 102 (3), 435–440.



                                               43
Guimaraes, P. & Portugal, P. (2010).       A simple feasible procedure to fit models with high-

  dimensional fixed effects. Stata Journal, 10 (4), 628.


Hagedorn, M., Law, T. H., & Manovskii, I. (2012). Identifying sorting.


Hairault, J.-O., Le Barbanchon, T., & Sopraseuth, T. (2015). The cyclicality of the separation and

  job finding rates in france. European Economic Review, 76 (0), 60–84.


Head, K. & Mayer, T. (2014). Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. Handbook of

  International Economics, 4, 131.


Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., & Redding, S. (2010). Inequality and unemployment in a global economy.

  Econometrica, 78 (4), 1239–1283.


Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., & Redding, S. (2013). Trade and inequality: From theory to estimation.

  Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.


Kremer, M. & Maskin, E. (1996). Wage inequality and segregation by skill. National Bureau of

  Economic Research.


Krishna, P., Poole, J. P., & Senses, M. Z. (2014). Wage effects of trade reform with endogenous

  worker mobility. Journal of International Economics, 93 (2), 239–252.


Krugman, P. R. (1979). Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international trade.

  Journal of international Economics, 9 (4), 469–479.


Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry

  productivity. Econometrica, 71 (6), 1695–1725.


Naboulet, A. & Carlier, A. (2007). principal: Négociations collectives et grèves dans le secteur

  marchand: en 2005, la moitié des entreprises dau moins 50 salariés a négocié.


                                                 44
Sampson, T. (2012). Selection into trade and wage inequality. American Economic Journal: Mi-

  croeconomics, Forthcoming.


Shapley, L. S. & Shubik, M. (1971). The assignment game i: The core. International Journal of

  Game Theory, 1 (1), 111–130.


Shimer, R. & Smith, L. (2000). Assortative matching and search. Econometrica, 68 (2), 343–369.


Smyth, G. K. (1996). Partitioned algorithms for maximum likelihood and other non-linear estima-

  tion. Statistics and Computing, 6 (3), 201–216.


Tito, M. D. (2014). Trade and worker sorting under self-selection into exporting. note.


Torres, S., Portugal, P., Addison, J. T., & Guimarães, P. (2012). The sources of wage variation: a

  three-way high-dimensional fixed effects model.


Verhoogen, E. A. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the mexican manufac-

  turing sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (2), 489–530.


Woodcock, S. D. (2008). Wage differentials in the presence of unobserved worker, firm, and match

  heterogeneity. Labour Economics, 15 (4), 771–793.




                                                45
               Table 1: Rank Correlation Matrix, proxies for firms’ types

                                             Avg.     Avg.     Avg.Dom.       Avg.VA      Avg.
                                      ψ
                                             Type     Wage      Share         per w.      Empl.
 ψ                                    1
 Avg.   Worker Type by Firm         -0.80       1
 Avg.   Wage by Firm                 0.13     0.35       1
 Avg.   Dom. Share                   0.01     0.08     0.20          1
 Avg.   VA per worker               0.001     0.05     0.13        0.64           1
 Avg.   Empl.                       -0.01     0.06     0.12        0.78         0.72         1
 ψ: Firms’ fixed effects, from the AKM decomposition.
 Avg. Wage by Firm: average of the workers’ wages over job spells.
 Avg. Worker Type by Firm: Average of workers’ fixed effects by firm, from the AKM decomposition.
 Avg. VA per worker: Average value added per worker, normalized by 4-digit industries.
 Avg. Dom. Share: Average domestic market share at a 4-digit level.
 Avg. Empl.: Average employment, normalized by 4-digit industries.
 Notes: Rank correlation between proxies of firms types. We do not report the p-values but all rank
correlations are significantly different from zero.




                                                46
     Table 2: Measuring Sorting Patterns, Manufacturing Sectors

                                                   (4)     (5)   (6)    (7)
                                                    ψ, Avg.      Avg. Share,
                                                      T ype      Avg. W age
    NAF   Industry Label            No Firms           1
                                                    ρS p-val   2  ρS 1 p-val2
    10    Food                              9     -0.96    0.00       -        -
    11    Beverage                          8        -1    -          -        -
    12    Tobacco prods                     -         -    -          -        -
    13    Textiles                          -         -    -          -        -
    14    Clothing                        270     -0.84    0.00    0.18     0.00
    15    Leather/shoes                     -         -    -          -        -
    17    Paper                          1317     -0.85    0.00    0.14     0.00
    18    Printing                       1286     -0.86    0.00    0.14     0.00
    19    Refining                        402     -0.88    0.00    0.42     0.00
    20    Chemical                        666     -0.86    0.00    0.17     0.00
    21    Pharma                          780     -0.79    0.00    0.30     0.01
    22    Plastics                       2070     -0.76    0.00    0.13     0.00
    23    Non-metallic prods               59     -0.64    0.00    0.13     0.33
    24    Metalworking                   1565     -0.72    0.00    0.33     0.00
    25    Metal prods                    1987     -0.83    0.00    0.25     0.00
    26    Info/elec/opt                   947     -0.82    0.00    0.27     0.00
    27    Elec equip                      595     -0.84    0.00    0.14     0.00
    28    Machinery                      5433     -0.81    0.00    0.21     0.00
    29    Automotive                     2898     -0.82    0.00    0.28     0.00
    30    Other trans equip               126     -0.74    0.00    0.16     0.07
    31    Furniture                       969     -0.81    0.00    0.25     0.00
    32    Other mfg                       878     -0.71    0.00    0.13     0.00
    33    Repairs                        1197     -0.79    0.00    0.23     0.00
          Manufacturing                 23388     -0.80    0.00    0.20     0.00
1
  Spearman correlation coefficient.
2
  p-value from testing independence between the variables.
 Notes: Columns (4)-(5): Rank correlation and significance level between the av-
erage worker type, (Avg. W orker), and the firm fixed effect (ψ) from an AKM
decomposition including a quartic polynomial in experience, a dummy for workers
residing in Ile-de-France, time dummies and all the interactions with the gender
dummy.
 Columns (6)-(7): Rank correlation and significance level between the average life-
time wage of workers, (Avg. W age), and the firm type, proxied by the average
domestic market share in 4-digit sectors Avg. Share.




                                        47
Table 3: Pooled Cross-Section Regressions: Average Lifetime Wage,
                      more than 5 workers

                          (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)            (6)
  Variables                       Average Lifetime Wage, more than 5


  Export               0.167a     0.073a      0.078a    0.097a    0.050a    0.034b
                       (0.013)    (0.012)     (0.013)   (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.014)
  N.Occ.                          0.016a      0.035a    0.037a    0.011a     -0.003
                                  (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
  log empl                        0.135a                          0.133a    0.139a
                                  (0.007)                         (0.007)   (0.007)
  log dom.share                               0.027a              0.004b      0.003
                                              (0.002)             (0.002)   (0.002)
  log VA per worker                                     0.168a    0.167a    0.111a
                                                        (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.009)
  white share                                                               0.496a
                                                                            (0.021)
  log N. Products                                                           0.009b
                                                                            (0.004)

 Sector-Year              y          y          y         y         y         y

 Obs.                   58,541    58,541      58,541    58,541    58,541    58,541
 R2                      0.119     0.179       0.164     0.183     0.208    0.254
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-Sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years
1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at
the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first
include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision
of the left-hand side variable.




                                         48
  Table 4: Pooled Cross-Section Regressions: Standard Deviation of
                Lifetime Wage, more than 5 workers

                           (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
 Variables                  Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Export                  -0.035a   -0.020c      -0.039a   -0.053a   -0.024b   -0.037a
                         (0.011)   (0.011)      (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.013)
 N.Occ.                            0.030a        0.013a    0.011a    0.029a    0.025a
                                   (0.002)      (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)
 log empl                          -0.095a                          -0.095a   -0.091a
                                   (0.005)                          (0.005)   (0.005)
 log dom.share                                  -0.007a              0.001    -0.0001
                                                (0.002)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                        0.038a     0.036a    0.024a
                                                          (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)
 white share                                                                   0.154a
                                                                              (0.016)
 log N. Products                                                               0.008b
                                                                              (0.003)
 Avg Lifetime Wage                                                            -0.087a
                                                                              (0.005)
 Sector-Year                y          y          y         y          y          y

 Obs.                    57,996     57,996      57,996    57,996    57,996     57,996
 R2                       0.070      0.091       0.074     0.075     0.093      0.124
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-Sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the
level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include
a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the
left-hand side variable.




                                           49
 Table 5: Pooled Cross-sectional Regressions: Average of Workers’
               Fixed Effects, more than 5 workers

                         (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
  Variables                 Average of Workers’ Fixed Effects, more than 5


 Export                0.079a     0.030       0.036     0.039     0.025     0.013
                       (0.027)   (0.028)     (0.028)   (0.027)   (0.028)   (0.031)
 N.Occ.                          0.014a      0.022a    0.022a    0.012a      0.001
                                 (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)
 log empl                        0.053a                          0.055a    0.059a
                                 (0.013)                         (0.014)   (0.014)
 log dom.share                               0.007c               -0.002    -0.003
                                             (0.004)             (0.004)   (0.005)
 log VA per worker                                     0.060a    0.062a      0.014
                                                       (0.014)   (0.015)   (0.015)
 white share                                                               0.421a
                                                                           (0.036)
 log N. Products                                                            0.007
                                                                           (0.009)
 Sector-Year              y         y          y         y         y           y

 Obs.                  54,633     54,633     54,633    54,633    54,633    54,633
 R2                     0.020      0.027     0.026      0.027     0.028     0.040
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years
1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at
the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first
include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision
of the left-hand side variable.




                                        50
  Table 6: Pooled Cross-sectional Regressions: Standard Deviation of
            Workers’ Fixed Effects, more than 5 workers

                         (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
  Variables            Standard Deviation of Workers’ Fixed Effects, more than 5


 Export                -0.036a    -0.020c        -0.039a   -0.052a   -0.029b   -0.042a
                       (0.011)    (0.011)        (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.013)
 N.Occ.                           0.029a          0.013a    0.010a    0.028a    0.025a
                                  (0.002)        (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)
 log empl                         -0.096a                            -0.096a   -0.092a
                                  (0.005)                            (0.006)   (0.006)
 log dom.share                                   -0.007a             0.0004     -0.001
                                                 (0.002)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                         0.036a     0.035a    0.024a
                                                           (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)
 white share                                                                    0.130a
                                                                               (0.016)
 log N. Products                                                                0.010a
                                                                               (0.003)
  Avg Worker Type                                                              -0.086a
                                                                               (0.005)
 Sector-Year              y          y             y         y         y           y

 Obs.                   54,633    54,633         54,633    54,633    54,633    54,633
 R2                      0.065    0.087           0.069     0.070    0.088      0.120
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 Avg Worker Type: average worker fixed effect, estimated by the AKM decomposi-
tion, by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level
of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a
quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-
hand side variable.




                                            51
Table 7: IV Regression - First Stage: Standard Deviation of Lifetime
                    Wage, more than 5 workers

                         (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
  Variables               Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Export                -0.075a   -0.095a     -0.061a   -0.099a   -0.102a   -0.153a
                       (0.019)   (0.020)     (0.021)   (0.022)   (0.020)   (0.035)
 N.Occ.                          0.014a       0.028a    0.014a    0.013a    0.020a
                                 (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
 log empl                                    -0.091a                       -0.013a
                                             (0.006)                       (0.005)
 log dom.share                                          -0.002             0.010a
                                                       (0.002)             (0.001)
 log VA per worker                                               0.039a     0.101a
                                                                 (0.007)   (0.005)
 white share                                                                0.465a
                                                                           (0.015)
 log N. Products                                                            0.045a
                                                                           (0.015)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                        -0.733a
                                                                           (0.012)
 Sector-Year              y         y          y         y         y           y

 Obs.                   16,072   16,072      16,072    16,072    16,072    16,072
 R2                      0.058   0.062        0.081     0.062     0.064     0.544
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for
France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable
is zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years
1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered
at the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the
first include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the
precision of the left-hand side variable.




                                        52
Table 8: Group-Weighted Regressions: Standard Deviation, more than 5
                             workers

                           (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)
 Variables               Standard Deviation of Average Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Export                  -0.012b    -0.023a        -0.026a   -0.030a   -0.022a   -0.031a
                         (0.005)    (0.005)        (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)
 N.Occ.                             0.016a          0.012a    0.011a    0.016a    0.017a
                                    (0.001)        (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 log empl                           -0.023a                            -0.022a    0.025a
                                    (0.003)                            (0.003)   (0.003)
 log dom.share                                     -0.003a              -0.000    -0.001
                                                   (0.000)             (0.001)   (0.001)
 log VA per worker                                            -0.002    -0.001   0.117a
                                                             (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 white share                                                                     -0.150a
                                                                                 (0.008)
 log N. Products                                                                  0.003c
                                                                                 (0.002)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                               0.011a
                                                                                 (0.001)
 Sector-Year                y          y             y         y         y           y

 Obs.                     54,436    54,436         54,436    54,436    54,436    54,436
 R2                        0.037     0.072          0.069     0.068     0.072    0.108
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Group-weighted Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. The dependent variable is a weighted average of the standard deviations for
managers, executives and blue collar workers, using as weights the average employment
compositions of those groups within firm over time. Different specifications in the
columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis.
All specifications but the first include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers,
to control for the precision of the left-hand side variable.




                                              53
  Table 9: Pooled Cross-sectional Regressions: Inter-quartile Range,
                       more than 5 workers

                            (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)
 Variables                        Inter-quartile of Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Export                  -0.083a      -0.010     -0.049a   -0.073a    -0.021   -0.024b
                         (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.012)
 N.Occ.                              0.019a      -0.012a   -0.016a    0.016a   0.005a
                                     (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)
 log empl                            -0.178a                         -0.179a   -0.068a
                                     (0.007)                         (0.007)   (0.006)
 log dom.share                                   -0.011a               0.003    0.004a
                                                 (0.002)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                         0.084a     0.079a   0.142a
                                                           (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.007)
 white share                                                                    0.789a
                                                                               (0.019)
 log N. Products                                                               0.019a
                                                                               (0.003)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                            -0.930a
                                                                               (0.016)
 Sector-Year                 y          y          y         y         y           y

 Obs.                     57,469      57,469     57,469    57,469    57,469    57,469
 R2                        0.056      0.094       0.062     0.066     0.099     0.493
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the
level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include
a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the
left-hand side variable.




                                            54
  Table 10: Market Access Regressions: Average, more than 5 workers

                              (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)
 Variables                          Average Lifetime Wage, more than 5 workers


 Market Access*Export        0.014a     0.012a      0.011a    0.012a    0.013a   0.013a
                            (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 Market Access              -0.016a    -0.014a     -0.013a   -0.012a   -0.015a   -0.018a
                            (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.003)
 Export                      -0.052     -0.078     -0.106b   -0.114b   -0.108b   -0.168a
                            (0.051)    (0.050)     (0.047)   (0.050)   (0.050)   (0.050)
 N.Occ.                                0.039a       0.015a    0.032a    0.035a    -0.002
                                       (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 log empl                                          0.125a                         0.125a
                                                   (0.005)                       (0.005)
 log dom.share                                               0.031a               0.004b
                                                             (0.002)             (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                                     0.158a    0.096a
                                                                       (0.008)   (0.006)
 white share                                                                      0.500a
                                                                                 (0.024)
 log N. Products                                                                  0.008b
                                                                                 (0.003)
 Sector-Year                   y          y          y         y          y          y

 Observations                44,728     44,728     44,728    44,728    44,728     44,728
 R-squared                    0.142      0.184     0.209      0.196    0.215      0.299
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 Market Access: weighted-average - across destinations - of the demand faced by a
given industry i at time t, where the weights are the share of world exports to that
particular destination in that industry the previous year.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of
the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a quadratic
in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-hand side
variable.




                                              55
Table 11: Market Access Regressions: Standard Deviation, more than 5
                             workers

                              (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
  Variables                    Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Market Access*Export       -0.009a    -0.009a     -0.009a   -0.009a   -0.009a   -0.009a
                            (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 Market Access              0.011a      0.012a      0.011a    0.011a    0.012a    0.011a
                            (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 Export                      0.096b     0.089c      0.113b    0.096b    0.080c    0.094b
                            (0.048)    (0.047)     (0.046)   (0.048)   (0.046)   (0.041)
 N.Occ.                                0.011a       0.031a    0.012a    0.010a    0.026a
                                       (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
 log empl                                          -0.107a                       -0.105a
                                                   (0.004)                       (0.004)
 log dom.share                                               -0.006a              0.002
                                                             (0.002)             (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                                     0.050a     0.033a
                                                                       (0.006)   (0.005)
 white share                                                                      0.158a
                                                                                 (0.018)
 Avg Lifetime Wage                                                               -0.104a
                                                                                 (0.004)
 log N. Products                                                                  0.009a
                                                                                 (0.003)
 Sector-Year                   y          y          y         y          y          y

 Obs.                        44,728    44,728      44,728    44,728    44,728     44,552
 R2                           0.068    0.071        0.094     0.072     0.075      0.143
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 Market Access: weighted-average - across destinations - of the demand faced by a
given industry i at time t, where the weights are the share of world exports to that
particular destination in that industry the previous year.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of
the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a quadratic
in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-hand side
variable.




                                              56
        Table 12: Tariff Regressions: Average, more than 5 workers

                               (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)
 Variables                              Average Lifetime Wage, more than 5


 Weighted Tariff*Export       0.002     0.001      0.001     -0.001     -0.001     -0.004
                             (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
 Weighted Tariff              0.001     0.002      0.002    0.00395    0.006c     0.012a
                             (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
 Export                      0.128a    0.082a     0.045b     0.050b    0.071a     0.039c
                             (0.023)   (0.021)    (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.021)    (0.021)
 N.Occ.                                0.039a     0.016a     0.033a    0.035a      -0.002
                                       (0.001)    (0.002)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
 log empl                                         0.123a                          0.124a
                                                  (0.005)                         (0.005)
 log dom.share                                               0.031a               0.005a
                                                             (0.002)              (0.002)
 white share                                                                      0.512a
                                                                                  (0.021)
 log VA per worker                                                     0.161a     0.099a
                                                                       (0.008)    (0.007)
 log N. Products                                                                    0.004
                                                                                  (0.003)
 Sector-Year                    y         y          y          y         y           y

 Observations                48,280     48,280    48,280     48,280     48,280    48,280
 R-squared                   0.143       0.185     0.210     0.197      0.217     0.303
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Weighted Tariff: weighted average - across destination - of tariff levels in a given in-
dustry i at time t, where weights are the share of world exports to that particular
destination in that industry and year.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-2007.
Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of the
firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a quadratic in
the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-hand side variable.




                                            57
 Table 13: Tariff Regressions: Standard Deviation, more than 5 workers

                                (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)
  Variables                      Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wages, more than 5


 Weighted Tariff*Export        0.007b     0.007b     0.007b     0.007b    0.006b      0.002
                              (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.002)
 Weighted Tariff              -0.013a    -0.012a    -0.012a    -0.013a   -0.011a     -0.001
                              (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.002)
 Export                       -0.059a    -0.069a    -0.037b    -0.062a   -0.073a    -0.032b
                              (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.013)
 N.Occ.                                  0.011a      0.031a     0.013a    0.010a     0.025a
                                         (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)
 log empl                                           -0.108a                         -0.022a
                                                    (0.004)                         (0.003)
 log dom.share                                                 -0.007a               0.005a
                                                               (0.002)              (0.001)
 white share                                                                        0.480a
                                                                                    (0.010)
 log VA per worker                                                       0.047a      0.103a
                                                                         (0.006)    (0.004)
 log N. Products                                                                    0.014a
                                                                                    (0.002)
 Avg Lifetime Wage                                                                  -0.727a
                                                                                    (0.010)
 Sector-Year                     y          y          y          y          y          y

 Observations                 48,280     48,280     48,280     48,280     48,280     48,280
 R-squared                     0.068      0.071     0.094       0.072     0.074      0.550
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 Weighted Tariff: weighted average - across destination - of tariff levels in a given industry
i at time t, where weights are the share of world exports to that particular destination
in that industry and year.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-2007.
Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of the firm,
are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a quadratic in the
number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-hand side variable.




                                             58
                                Table 14: Model Calibration

Parameter                    Model                       Data Moment
η=4                          Demand Elasticity           Average trade elasticity
σ = 0.653                    Production Curvature        Worker type elasticity
τ = 1.513                    Variable trade cost         Average foreign to domestic shipments
λ = 0.8                      Share of exporters          Average share of exporters
                                                         Average separation probability
δ = 1.7%                     Destruction rate
                                                         Hairault et al. (2015)
                                                         Average number of new hires
ρ = 13.5%                    Meeting rate
                                                         Hairault et al. (2015)
c = 0.025                    Search cost                 Within-firm wage dispersion
B (αθ = 39.92, βθ = 28.96)   Worker distribution         Empirical distribution
B (αψ = 0.89, βψ = 1.09)     Firm distribution           Empirical distribution

                         Table 15: Changes in Real Expenditure

                                        α = 0.75     α=1       α = 1.25
                        cH = 0.025        22.0%      27.2%      34.1%
                        cM = 0.005        15.6%       16%       16.1%
                        cL = 0.001        15.4%      15.2%      15.9%
                        Notes: Changes in real expenditure relative to
                       autarky, by search cost, ci , i = {H, M, L} and α.
                       α collects demand and supply parameters, α =
                       σ η−1
                           η , where η is the elasticity of demand and σ
                       is the curvature of the production function. Sim-
                       ulated results with variable trade cost τ = 1.513,
                       share of exporters (after trade opening) λ = 0.8
                       and empirical distributions for worker and firm
                       types.

                         Table 16: Real Relative Revenue Losses

                                        α = 0.75     α=1       α = 1.25
                        cH = 0.025       -1.36%      -1.11%     -1.01%
                        cM = 0.005       -1.12%      -0.95%     -0.85%
                        cL = 0.001       -1.05%      -0.95%     -0.82%
                        Notes: changes in relative revenue losses com-
                       pared to autarky, by search cost, ci , i = {H, M, L}
                       and α. α collects demand and supply parameters,
                       α = σ η−1η , where η is the elasticity of demand
                       and σ is the curvature of the production function.
                       The revenue losses are relative deviation of the
                       realized from the revenues under the optimal as-
                       signment; we normalized by the revenues under
                       the optimal assignment. Simulated results with
                       variable trade cost τ = 1.513, share of exporters
                       (after trade opening) λ = 0.8 and empirical distri-
                       butions for worker and firm types.


                                               59
A     Appendix

A.1      Proof of decreasing normalized matching range under assumption of ho-

         mogeneity of revenue function

Assume revenue function f (θ, ϕ) is increasing, symmetric, supermodular and homogeneous in θ

and ϕ.


A.1.1     Outside options: wages and profits


At the optimum, the marginal benefit from hiring a better worker has to equalize the marginal

increase in wage:
                                            dw∗   ∂f (θ, ϕ)
                                                =
                                             dθ      ∂θ

Outside option for the worker is given by:


                                                 Rθ∂f (t,x)
                                      w∗ (θ) =       ∂t            dt
                                                 0          x=µ(t)




where, because of symmetry, µ (t) = t.

    It is useful to use the following result relating the partial and total derivatives of f :


                               df (θ, θ)   ∂f (θ, x)              ∂f (x, θ)
                                         =                    +
                                  dθ          ∂θ        x=θ          ∂θ       x=θ



    Again, symmetry implies that the two partial derivatives are identical:


                                     ∂f (θ, x)              ∂f (x, θ)
                                                       =
                                        ∂θ       x=θ           ∂θ       x=θ




                                                       60
therefore the wage w∗ (θ) can be rewritten as:


                                                     Rθ   1 df (t,t)
                                         w∗ (θ) =         2 dt dt      = 21 f (θ, θ)
                                                     0



       The profit function is derived residually as:


                                                            1
                                                   π ∗ (ϕ) = f (ϕ, ϕ)
                                                            2


       The matching range is defined by the set of θ that satifies the following inequality:


                                             1          1
                                   f (θ, ϕ) − f (θ, θ) − f (ϕ, ϕ) + 2c ≥ 0
                                             2          2


A.1.2       Normalized matching range


Let us normalize the matching range by the firm type ϕ:


                                                   
                                       θ     1    θ θ    1           2c
                               f         ,1 − f    ,    − f (1, 1) +    ≥0                                   (A-1)
                                       ϕ     2    ϕ ϕ    2           ϕ


Assuming that the function is well behaved and that (A-1) is satisfied with equality for only two
                                                                                                    u(ϕ)
values of θ, we can study the behavior of the normalized upper bound u1 (ϕ) =                       a(ϕ)   and the
                                          l(ϕ)
normalized lower bound l1 (ϕ) =           a(ϕ) .    In particular we are interested in proving the following

proposition.


Proposition A-1 The normalized matching range d1 (ϕ) = u1 (ϕ) − l1 (ϕ) is decreasing in ϕ.

                                                             θ
Proof. Define normalized worker type as θb =                 ϕ   and rewrite (A-1) with equality as a function of

θb :
                                      1   1
                                             b θb − f (1, 1) + 2c = 0
                                     b 1 − f θ,
                                   f θ,
                                          2        2           ϕ

                                                             61
We apply the implicit function theorem to study how θb varies with ϕ.

                                                                     
                                       ∂f θ,
                                          b1 b
                                             dθ                  1 df  θ,
                                                                       b θb b
                                                                            dθ                     2c
                                                             −                             −          =0
                                           ∂ θb       dϕ         2       dθb          dϕ           ϕ2


              dθb
Solving for   dϕ    we find the following:


                                                                             2c
                                                  dθb                        ϕ2
                                                      =                                        .                       (A-2)
                                                  dϕ         ∂f (θ,1
                                                                 b )
                                                                                  1 df (θ,θ)
                                                                                        bb
                                                                             −    2 dθb
                                                                ∂ θb


                                                                                                                      dθb
The sign of the denominator in (A-2) determines the sign of the derivative of interest                                dϕ .   It
                           df (θ,
                               b θb)
convenient to rewrite                  as follows:
                              dθb

                                                                                                  
                                   df θ, θ
                                      b  b               ∂f x, θ
                                                               b                      ∂f θ,
                                                                                         bx
                                                  =                               +                               ,
                                        dθb                  ∂ θb                           ∂ θb
                                                                         x=θb                              x=θb


where by symmetry:                                                               
                                              ∂f x, θb                       ∂f θ,
                                                                                 bx
                                                                     =                                 .
                                                  ∂ θb                             ∂ θb
                                                              x=θb                             x=θb

We can therefore rewrite (A-2) as:


                                                                             2c
                                               dθb                           ϕ2
                                                   =                                               .
                                               dϕ          ∂f (θ,1
                                                               b )           ∂f (θ,x
                                                                                 b )
                                                                        −
                                                              ∂ θb              ∂ θb
                                                                                           x=θb


The assumption of supermodularity of function f (·, ·) implies that:

                                                                            
                                                  ∂f θ,
                                                     b1                 ∂f θ,
                                                                            bx
                                                                    >
                                                      ∂ θb                    ∂ θb
                                                                                           x=θb



for θb < 1 and viceversa if θb > 1 which in turn implies that u1 is decreasing in ϕ (case θb > 1) and

l1 is increasing in ϕ (case θb < 1).


                                                                        62
A.2    Identification of Worker Type: Average Lifetime Wage

Agents’ types are positively correlated with the average realization of their pay-offs over their job

spells. In particular, a more productive worker makes larger contribution to revenues and tends to

match with a better firm in the frictionless equilibrium, obtaining, on average, a higher pay-offs.

Following the model, we propose to identify the agents’ type using the average wage. In fact, there

exists a well-defined relation. In fact, the average wage of a worker of type θ,


                                          Z (θα +2√c)1/α  2α
                                                               θα y α y 2α
                                                                           
                           1                              θ
w̄ (θ) =        √ 1/α            √ 1/α         √ 1/α
                                                             +       −       dy
        (θα + 2 c)      − (θα − 2 c)     (θα −2 c)         4     2     4
                  α (θ α + 2√c) α − (θ α − 2√c) α
                                α+1              α+1
                   h                                 i
          2α    θ                                                 √ 2α+1           √ 2α+1
        θ                                                  (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α
      =
         4
             +           h       √ 1            √ 1i −            h      √ 1            √ 1i
               2 (α + 1) (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α   4 (2α + 1) (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α


In particular, if α = 1,
                                                      θ2   c
                                           w̄ (θ) =      −
                                                      4    3

If the demand elasticity α and the search cost c were known, we could back up exactly the worker

types. In order to prove that the average wage is increasing in θ, we’ll break the proof into two parts.

First, it is trivial to prove that the outside option is increasing in the worker type. The second

part of the proof will show that a worker of higher ability generates a larger surplus and obtains a




                                                  63
larger share of it. In the two-period model, under the assumption of a uniform distribution,


                                         R (θα +2√c)1/α h                             θ2α         y 2α
                                                                                                          i
              R u(θ)
                       s (θ, y) dy                    √        1/α    θα · yα −        2      −     2         dy
               l(θ)                       (θα −2 c)
                  R u(θ)             =              √ 1/α          √ 1/α
                      l(θ)    dy             (θα + 2 c)   − (θα − 2 c)
                                             h                                            i (θα +2√c)1/α
                                                 θα ·y α        θ2α          y 2α
                                         y        α+1      −     2     −   2(2α+1)                    √       1/α
                                                                      (θα −2 c)
                                     =                  √ 1/α          √ 1/α
                                                 (θα + 2 c)   − (θα − 2 c)
                                             h                                                                          i (θα +2√c)1/α
                                                                     θ2α       y 2α          α ·y α            2αy 2α
                                         y       θα   ·   yα    −     2    −     2    +   α θα+1      +       2(2α+1)          √    1/α
                                                                                                                          (θα −2 c)
                                     =                         1/α             √
                                                                            √ 1/α
                                                    (θα + 2 c)     − (θα − 2 c)
                                               h         √ 1+α            √ 1+α i
                                                 (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α          (3α + 2) θα
                                     = −2c + α             √ 1            √ 1                        +
                                                    (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α     (α + 1) (2α + 1)
                                                      α + 2√c) α + (θ α − 2√c) α
                                                               1+α              1+α
                                                  h                                 i
                                           √       (θ
                                          2 c
                                     +α                      √ 1            √ 1
                                        (2α + 1)      (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α


The surplus is increasing for all α > 0. In fact,

                  √                          √
   h                        1+α                          1+α
                                                                i                                                           
        (θα+ 2 c)     −     − 2 c)
                              α    (θα                     α                                                        √   2  √    2
∂                                                                = αθα−1  1+α       1 (θα + 2 c) + (θα − 2 c) α             α

                √              √ 1                                                  −                                          +
∂θ                  1                                                      
                                                                               α       α           √ 1             √ 1 2 
         (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α                                                       (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α
                                                                                                              h α √              √ i
                                                                                    α + 2√c) α (θ α − 2√c) α θ +2√c + θ −2√c
                                                                                             1             1               α

                                                                             1  (θ                            θα −2 c    θα +2 c 
                                                                     + αθα−1 
                                                                               α
                                                                                                  √  1            √   1
                                                                                                                          2         
                                                                                           (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α
                                                                                            √ 1         √ 1 h α √c θα −2√c             i
                                                                                   (θα + 2 c) α (θα − 2 c) α θθα +2   √ + α √ −2
                                                                                                                   −2 c       θ +2 c
                                                                   = αθα−1 + θα−1                    √   1            √     1 2
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                               (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α


and


       α + 2√c) α + (θ α − 2√c) α
   h          1+α              1+α 
                                   i
                                                     α + 2√c) α + (θ α − 2√c) α
                                                "              1               1 #
∂  (θ                                            (θ
                                      = αθ α−1
∂θ           √ 1            √ 1                            √ 1             √ 1 +
      (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α                 (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α
                                                                                   h α √            √ i
                                                          α + 2√c) α (θ α − 2√c) α θ +2√c − θ −2√c
                                                                   1            1              α

                                                   1  (θ                           θα −2 c    θα +2 c 
                                         + αθα−1 
                                                     α
                                                                       √   1           √   1
                                                                                              2       
                                                                 (θα + 2 c) α − (θα − 2 c) α




                                                                                 64
are both positive.


A.3     Relative Losses: Variation by Firm Type

Proof of proposition 2 In order to show that RL (ϕ) is decreasing in ϕ it is convenient to rewrite

it as follows:

                                          h        1+α          1+α
                                                                    i
                                2 (1 + 2α) (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α ϕα
  RL (ϕ) = 1 −        n        1+2α           1+2α
                                                                h      1            1
                                                                                      io .
               (1 + α) (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α + ϕ2α (1 + 2α) (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α


It is easy to verify that RL (ϕ) is decreasing if and only if:


                                                   N 0 (ϕ)   D0 (ϕ)
                                                           >                                                (A-3)
                                                   N (ϕ)     D (ϕ)


where


                      h        1+α          1+α
                                                i
          N (ϕ) =      (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α ϕα ,
                                1+2α                   1+2α
                                                                               h         1            1
                                                                                                        i
          D (ϕ) = (ϕα + b)       α     − (ϕα − b)       α        + ϕ2α (1 + 2α) (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α



and


                                        1            1
                                                                  1+α          1+α
                                                                                     
      N 0 (ϕ) = ϕα−1 (α + 1) ϕα (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α + α (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α
                            h        1+α          1+α
                                                                    1            1
                                                                                    i
      D0 (ϕ) = ϕα−1 (2α + 1) (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α + 2αϕα (ϕα + b) α − (ϕα − b) α
                                             h             1−α               1−α
                                                                                   i
                     α−1                2α         α                  α
                 +ϕ        (2α + 1) ϕ            (ϕ + b)    α    − (ϕ − b)    α




   We can now operate a change of variables as follows:




                                                            65
                                                             1
                                                    ϕα + b
                                                
                                                              α
                                         h =
                                                     ϕα
                                                             1
                                                    ϕα − b
                                                
                                                              α
                                         d =
                                                     ϕα


and substitute in inequality (A-3) to obtain the following inequality:




   (α + 1) (h − d) + α h1+α − d1+α     (2α + 1) h1+α − d1+α + 2α (h − d) + h1−α − d1−α
                                                                                      
                                     >                                                    .
              h1+α − d1+α                       h1+2α − d1+2α + (1 + 2α) (h − d)


If we multiply each sides by the two denominators and divide by (h − d) we obtain a simplified

inequality:


                     h1+2α − d1+2α                         h1+α − d1+α h1+2α − d1+2α
              (α + 1)               + (α + 1) (1 + 2α) + α                           >       (A-4)
                       " h − d                               h − d         h − d
                                      2                                                  #
                          h1+α − d1+α        h1+α − d1+α
                                                             1−α
                                                                    − d1−α
                                                                             1+α
                                                              h                h   − d1+α
              (2α + 1)                   +α               +
                             h−d                 h−d              h−d             h−d


  1. For c → 0, using an approximation of h around d:


                                     h1+2α − d1+2α
                                                       ≈ (1 + 2α) d2α ,
                                          h−d
                                       h1+α − d1+α
                                                       ≈ (1 + α) dα ,
                                           h−d
                                       h 1−α − d1−α
                                                       ≈ (1 − α) d−α .
                                           h−d




                                                 66
   We can therefore simplify inequality (A-4) as follows:



                  (α + 1) (1 + 2α) d2α + (α + 1) (1 + 2α) + α (1 + α) dα (1 + 2α) d2α >
                          h                                                     i
                  (2α + 1) (1 + α)2 d2α + α (1 + α) dα + (1 − α) d−α (1 + α) dα



   which further simplifies to:

                                          (dα − 1)2 (dα + 1) ≥ 0,


   which is verified for all α.


2. If we do not put any restrictions on the search costs, the proof simplifies for specific values

   of α. For α = 1,


                                                        h                i
           2 h2 + hd + d2 + 6 + (h + d) h2 + hd + d2 > 3 (h + d)2 + h + d
                                                   


           2 h2 + hd + d2 + 6 + (h + d) h2 + hd + d2 > 3 h2 + 2hd + d2 + h + d
                                                                           


                   (2 + d + h) · 3 + d2 + (d + h) (h − 3) > 0
                                                        




   Using the definition of h and d,

                                  "           2            #
                                                                 b2
                                                     
                                         b               b
                       (2 + 2) · 3 + 1 −           +2· 1+ −3   =4 2 >0
                                         ϕ               ϕ       ϕ




                                                 67
   • For α = 2,


                                                          h5 − d5            h3 − d3 h5 − d5
                                                                  + 15 + 2 ·
                                                                          3                   >
                                     "                    h − d              h − d   h − d
                                                2                −1                    #
                                        h3 − d3        h3 − d3    h − d−1
                                                                               3
                                                                                  h − d3
                                   5                +2         +
                                          h−d           h−d          h−d           h−d

      3 h4 + h3 d + h2 d2 + hd3 + d4 + 15 + 2 h4 + h3 d + h2 d2 + hd3 + d4 h2 + hd + d2 >
                                                                                          
                                    "                                                     #
                                        2          2 2
                                                           2         2
                                                                            h2 + hd + d2
                                  5 h + hd + d         + 2 h + hd + d −
                                                                                  hd


      Using the definition of h and d,

                                                        1/2 
                                                     b2
                  −2b4   +   4b2    3+2 1−           ϕ4
                                                                   ϕ4         "        1/2 #
                                                                                  b2                   b2
                                                                                  
                                             1/2                       ≥0⇔ 3+2 1− 4            ϕ4 ≥
                              
                                        b2                                        ϕ                    2
                                   1−   ϕ4
                                                    ϕ8


      Recalling that ϕ2 ≥ b, the inequality is always verified.


   • For α = 21 , the expression simplifies to


                                                               b2
                                                                  ≥0
                                                               ϕ


      under the assumptions on b.


A.4    Numerical simulation


We simulate the model using the empirical distribution of worker and firm types to show that

the properties of matching bounds are verified under this specification (see Figure A5 for the

distribution of worker types and A6 for the distribution of firm types). Figure A1 shows the

matching set of the economy when normalizing the aggregate price index to unity and assuming

the search cost c = 0.01, the meeting rate ρ = 1 and the exogenous separation rate δ = 1. Using


                                                                   68
the simulation results, we construct two measures of dispersions of worker types by firm, the length

and the standard deviation36 of the firm matching set. Figure A2 and A3 show that both measures

are decreasing in firm type, when normalized by the average worker type.




                         Figure A1: Matching Set for the Simulated Economy.
                       For a given firm type ϕ, the matching set is [l (ϕ) , u (ϕ)].




        Figure A2: Standard Deviation of the                       Figure A3: Standard Deviation of the
        Matching Set by firm type, normalized                      Matching Set by firm type, normalized
         by the average worker type (d1 (ϕ))                           by the average worker type
  36
    In the empirical analysis, our preferred measure of dispersion is the standard deviation of the worker types by
firm, since it is less sensitive to outliers.



                                                        69
A.5   Additional empirical results




 Figure A4: Distribution of Value Added per Worker in Exporting and Non-Exporting Firms




           Figure A5: Distribution of Individual Effects, largest connected group




                                            70
Figure A6: Distribution of Firm Effects, largest connected group




          Figure A7: Wage changes by wage quartile




                              71
                Table A1: Wage changes when moving to a new job.

                              Wage Change        Percentage
                              Positive            54.82%
                              Negative            45.18%


Table A2: Classification of CS Occupation into ’white’ and ’blue’ collar workers.

      CS code    White Collar Jobs
      3          Executives and Higher Intellectual Professions
      31         Health Professionals and Lawyers
      33         Senior Official in Public Administration
      34         Teachers, Scientific Professions
      35         Information, arts and entertainment
      37         Administrative and Commercial skilled workers
      38         Engineers and technical managers
      4          Intermediate Occupations
      42         Teachers and related
      43         Intermediate occupations, health and social work
      44         Religious
      45         Intermediate administrative professions in Public Administration
      46         Intermediate administrative and commercial occupation in Enterprises
      47         Technicians
      48         Foremen, supervisors
      CS code    Blue Collar Jobs
      5          Clericals
      52         Civilian Employees and officers in Public Service
      53         Protective Services
      54         Administrative Employees
      55         Commercial workers
      56         Personal services workers
      6          Labourers
      62         Qualified Industrial Labourers
      63         Qualified craft labourers
      64         Drivers
      65         Storage and Transport workers
      67         Non-Qualified Industrial Labourers
      68         Non-Qualified craft labourers
      69         Farm Workers




                                            72
                         Table A3: Summary Statistics
                                                   Mean    Median    Std Deviation
    Avg. Worker Type                               -0.04     -0.02            0.86
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effects                   0.62      0.52            0.41
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effects, White Collars    0.55      0.47            0.36
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effects, Blue Collars     0.50      0.36            0.41
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effectsa                  0.62      0.52            0.41
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effects, White Collarsa   0.55      0.47            0.36
    Std Dev. Worker Fixed Effects, Blue Collarsa    0.50      0.36            0.41
    Num. Occupation                                 4.90      4.00            2.44
    Domestic Market Share                           0.03      0.01            0.08
    Employment                                    290.48    134.00         715.65
    Products                                        8.57      9.01            4.22
    Share of Non Production Worker                  0.34      0.29            0.25
    Value Added per worker                         70.76     45.71         161.35
a
    Conditioning on a sample of firms with more than 5 sampled workers.




            Table A4: Summary Statistics: Market Access Shocks

                                        Mean    Median      Std Deviation
          Weighted Tariff               5.58    5.03        3.49
          Market Access Shock 1         12.93   14.32       6.15
          Market Access Shock 2         12.89   14.27       6.12
         Weighted Tariff : Weighted average - across destination - of tariff
        levels in a given industry i at time t, where weights are the share
        of world exports to that particular destination in that industry and
        year.
         Market Access Shock 1 : Weighted average - across destinations, ex-
        cluding France - of the demand faced by a given industry i at time t,
        where the weights are the share of world exports to that particular
        destination in that industry the previous year.
         Market Access Shock 2 : Weighted-average - across destinations - of
        the demand faced by a given industry i at time t, where the weights
        are the share of world exports to that particular destination in that
        industry the previous year.




                                         73
  Table A5: Pooled Cross-sectional Regressions: Standard Deviation of newly
                                hired workers

                          (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)
 Variables                           Standard Deviation of lifetime wage, hired


 Export                  -0.025    -0.048b     -0.057a     -0.063a      -0.056a     -0.057a
                        (0.020)    (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)      (0.020)     (0.017)
 N.Occ.                             0.031a      0.024a      0.022a       0.030a     0.0198a
                                  (0.00289)   (0.00234)   (0.00223)    (0.00289)   (0.00209)
 log empl                          -0.028a                              -0.031a     -0.023a
                                   (0.007)                              (0.008)     (0.006)
 log dom.share                                 -0.0002                   0.002       0.004c
                                               (0.003)                  (0.003)     (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                          0.038a       0.038a      0.048a
                                                            (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.008)
 white share                                                                         0.332a
                                                                                    (0.019)
 log N. Products                                                                     0.018a
                                                                                    (0.004)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                                 -0.444a
                                                                                    (0.011)
 Sector-Year               y          y            y          y            y            y

 Obs.                   14,971     14,971       14,971      14,971      14,971      14,971
 R2                      0.154      0.168        0.166      0.168        0.169      0.483
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero for non-
exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 Legend : a significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-2007. Dif-
ferent specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level of the firm, are
reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a quadratic in the number of
sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-hand side variable.




                                              74
 Table A6: Pooled Cross-sectional Regressions: Standard Deviation of
                          current workers

                           (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
 Variables                         Standard Deviation of lifetime wage, stayers


 Export                  0.020b       0.010       0.002     -0.003     0.006     -0.014
                         (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.009)   (0.010)
 N.Occ.                              0.025a      0.020a    0.018a      0.024a    0.018a
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
 log empl                            -0.032a                          -0.033a   -0.017a
                                     (0.004)                          (0.004)   (0.004)
 log dom.share                                    -0.001             -8.06e−5     0.001
                                                 (0.001)              (0.001)   (0.001)
 log VA per worker                                         0.040a      0.041a    0.080a
                                                           (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.005)
 white share                                                                     0.381a
                                                                                (0.013)
 log N. Products                                                                0.011a
                                                                                (0.002)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                             -0.447a
                                                                                (0.012)
 Sector-Year                y           y          y         y          y           y

 Obs.                    40,579       40,579     40,579    40,579    40,579     40,579
 R2                       0.043        0.071      0.066     0.072    0.077      0.253
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level
of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include a
quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the left-
hand side variable.




                                            75
      Table A7: Pooled GLS Regressions: Average Lifetime Wage

                         (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
 Variables                                  Average Lifetime Wage


 Export                0.174a     0.047a         0.050a    0.072a     0.021b    -0.009
                       (0.011)    (0.010)        (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.012)
 N.Occ.                            -0.004        0.013a    0.019a    -0.006b   -0.009a
                                  (0.003)        (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 log empl                         0.097a                             0.085a     0.075a
                                  (0.007)                            (0.006)   (0.006)
 log dom.share                                   0.032a              0.006a     0.004b
                                                 (0.003)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                         0.177a    0.167a     0.103a
                                                           (0.010)   (0.009)   (0.009)
 white share                                                                    0.559a
                                                                               (0.022)
 log N. Products                                                                0.014a
                                                                               (0.004)
 Sector-Year              y          y             y         y         y           y

 Obs.                  148,784    148,784        148,784   148,784   148,784   148,784
 R2                     0.181      0.253          0.244     0.268     0.289     0.360
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is zero
for non-exporters.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the
level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include
a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the
left-hand side variable.




                                            76
   Table A8: Pooled GLS Regressions: Average of Workers Fixed
                           Effects

                         (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
 Variables                         Average of Workers Fixed Effects


 Export                0.107a     0.030       0.026     0.035     0.018     -0.004
                       (0.025)   (0.024)     (0.024)   (0.024)   (0.025)   (0.028)
 N.Occ.                           0.007      0.011a    0.013a     0.007    0.0057
                                 (0.005)     (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.005)   (0.005)
 log empl                        0.028b                           0.021      0.010
                                 (0.014)                         (0.013)   (0.014)
 log dom.share                               0.012b               0.005      0.003
                                             (0.005)             (0.005)   (0.005)
 log VA per worker                                     0.065a    0.060a      0.013
                                                       (0.017)   (0.016)   (0.016)
 white share                                                               0.404a
                                                                           (0.037)
 log N. Products                                                             0.011
                                                                           (0.008)
 Sector-Year              y         y          y         y         y           y

 Obs.                  79,689     79,689     79,689    79,689    79,689    79,689
 R2                     0.052      0.073     0.073      0.075     0.076     0.089
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years
1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at
the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first
include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision
of the left-hand side variable.




                                        77
 Table A9: Pooled GLS Regressions: Standard Deviation of Lifetime
                             Wage

                            (1)       (2)     (3)        (4)       (5)           (6)
 Variables                          Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage


 Export                   -0.017     -0.017     -0.038a   -0.050a   -0.025b   -0.035a
                         (0.011)    (0.012)     (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.010)
 N.Occ.                             0.024a       0.012a   0.010a     0.024a    0.017a
                                    (0.003)     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 log empl                           -0.055a                         -0.060a    -0.004
                                    (0.009)                         (0.008)   (0.006)
 log dom.share                                   -0.004              0.004c    0.006a
                                                (0.003)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                        0.037a     0.040a    0.095a
                                                          (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.007)
 white share                                                                  0.508a
                                                                              (0.016)
 log N. Products                                                              0.014a
                                                                              (0.003)
 Avg. Lifetime Wage                                                           -0.713a
                                                                              (0.012)
 Sector-Year                 y         y          y         y          y          y

 Obs.                     88,790    88,790      88,790    88,790    88,790     88,790
 R2                        0.099     0.119       0.108     0.111     0.123     0.553
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.6 codes). This vari-
able is zero for non-exporters.
 Avg. Lifetime Wage: workers’ lifetime wage, averaged by firm.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-
2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the
level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include
a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of the
left-hand side variable.




                                           78
Table A10: Pooled GLS Regressions: Standard Deviation of Worker
                        Fixed Effects

                         (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)
 Variables                     Standard Deviation of Worker Fixed Effects


 Export                -0.023c    -0.026b       -0.045a   -0.054a   -0.034a   -0.043a
                       (0.012)    (0.013)       (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.014)
 N.Occ.                           0.022a         0.011a    0.010a    0.021a    0.021a
                                  (0.003)       (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)
 log empl                         -0.048a                           -0.053a   -0.056a
                                  (0.009)                           (0.008)   (0.008)
 log dom.share                                   -0.004              0.003     0.003
                                                (0.003)             (0.002)   (0.002)
 log VA per worker                                        0.032a     0.035a    0.023a
                                                          (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.008)
 white share                                                                   0.152a
                                                                              (0.020)
 log N. Products                                                               0.005
                                                                              (0.004)
 Avg Worker Type                                                              -0.092a
                                                                              (0.006)
 Sector-Year              y         y             y         y         y           y

 Obs.                  79,689     79,689        79,689    79,689    79,689    79,689
 R2                     0.106      0.123        0.115      0.117     0.126     0.158
 Export: dummy=1 if firm exports
 N.Occ.: number of occupations, based on 2 digit occupational codes for France.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 log dom.share: log-domestic market share, at the 4 digit sector level.
 white share: share of non-production worker.
 log N. Products: log-number of exported products (HS6 codes). This variable is
zero for non-exporters.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Cross-sectional Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years
1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at
the level of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first
include a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision
of the left-hand side variable.




                                           79
                                 Table A11: Sectoral Rank Correlations

                               (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)      (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
    Variables                                                              Rank Correlation


    Export                  0.042a           0.029a          0.023b        0.017c    0.042a      0.037a             0.026a          0.027c
                            (0.008)          (0.010)         (0.010)       (0.010)   (0.008)     (0.014)            (0.010)         (0.014)
    log empl                                 0.009c                         0.004                 0.003                              -0.001
                                             (0.005)                       (0.005)               (0.009)                            (0.009)
    log VA per worker                                        0.077a        0.075a                                   0.064a          0.064a
                                                             (0.017)       (0.017)                                  (0.023)         (0.024)
    Sector,Year                y1              y1               y1            y1         y2           y2               y2               y2

    Obs.                    3,836            3,836           3,836          3,836    3,836          3,836           3,836           3,836
    R2                      0.041            0.042           0.049          0.049    0.195          0.195           0.198           0.198
1
  2 digit sector dummies.
2
  4 digit sector dummies.
 log empl: log-employment.
 log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: Industry regressions, years 1995-2007. Standard errors, clustered at the sector-level, are
reported in parenthesis.




                       Table A12: GLS Regressions: Sectoral Rank Correlations

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)      (4)       (5)                 (6)             (7)
           Variables                                                      Rank Correlation


           Export                    0.037a          0.033a          0.018b    0.024a     0.035a             0.011          0.022b
                                     (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.011)           (0.007)         (0.011)
           log empl                                   0.002                     -0.004     -0.001                            -0.008
                                                     (0.004)                   (0.004)    (0.007)                           (0.007)
           log VA per worker                                         0.074a    0.078a                       0.096a          0.100a
                                                                     (0.014)   (0.015)                      (0.020)         (0.021)
           Sector,Year                 y1              y1               y1         y1          y2              y2               y2

           Obs.                      3,812           3,812           3,812      3,812         3,812         3,812           3,812
           R2                        0.082           0.082           0.094      0.094         0.333         0.343           0.343
       1
        2 digit sector dummies.
       2
        4 digit sector dummies.
       log empl: log-employment.
       log VA per worker: log-value added per worker.
       a
         significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
       Notes: Industry regressions, years 1995-2007. Different specifications in the columns. Stan-
       dard errors, clustered at the sector-level, are reported in parenthesis.




                                                                      80
  Table A13: IV Regressions: Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage,
                       more than 5 workers

                          (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
  Variables                Standard Deviation of Lifetime Wage, more than 5


                                               Second Stage
 Export                 -0.075a   -0.095a   -0.061a -0.099a      -0.102a   -0.153a
                        (0.019)   (0.020)   (0.021) (0.022)      (0.020)   (0.035)
                                                First Stage
 Firm Tariff            0.120a    0.112a     0.106a     0.099a   0.110a    0.043a
                        (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004) (0.004)      (0.004)   (0.001)
 F-stat (First Stage)     528       551       543        540       551       599
 Obs.                   16,072    16,072    16,072    16,072     16,072    16,072
 Firm Tariff: (inverse of) average applied tariff across industry-destination,
weighted by the share of firm j exports to each industry-destination the pre-
vious period.
 a
   significant at 1%, b significant at 5%, c significant at 10%.
 Notes: IV Regressions for firms with more than 5 workers, years 1995-2007.
Different specifications in the columns. Standard errors, clustered at the level
of the firm, are reported in parenthesis. All specifications but the first include
a quadratic in the number of sampled workers, to control for the precision of
the left-hand side variable.




                                       81
