                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FINANCIAL MARKETS WHERE TRADERS NEGLECT THE INFORMATIONAL
                         CONTENT OF PRICES

                                             Erik Eyster
                                           Matthew Rabin
                                           Dimitri Vayanos

                                        Working Paper 21224
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21224


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2015




We thank Nick Barberis, John Campbell, Kent Daniel, Xavier Gabaix, Tristan Gagnon-Bartsch, Josh
Schwartzstein, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, seminar participants at Columbia, Humboldt, NYU Stern,
UC Berkeley, UC Davis, and Wharton, and participants at the NBER Behavioral Finance Conference,
the Paris School of Economics Workshop in Bounded Rationality, the Miami Behavioral Finance Conference,
and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics for helpful comments. We also thank Tristan
Gagnon-Bartsch and Tarso Mori Madeira for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Erik Eyster, Matthew Rabin, and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Markets where Traders Neglect the Informational Content of Prices
Erik Eyster, Matthew Rabin, and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 21224
May 2015
JEL No. D53,D84,G02,G11,G12,G14

                                            ABSTRACT

We present a model of a financial market where some traders are "cursed" when choosing how much
to invest in a risky asset, failing to fully take into account what prices convey about others' private
information. Cursed traders put more weight on their private signals than rational traders. But because
they neglect that the price encodes other traders' information, prices depend less on private signals
and more on public signals than rational-expectation-equilibrium (REE) prices. Markets comprised
entirely of cursed traders generate more trade than those comprised entirely of rationals; mixed markets
can generate even more trade, as rationals employ momentum-trading strategies to exploit cursed traders.
We contrast our results to other models of departures from REE and show that per-trader volume with
cursed traders increases when the market becomes large, while natural forms of overconfidence predict
that volume should converge to zero.


Erik Eyster                                        Dimitri Vayanos
The London School of Economics                     Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
Houghton St.                                       London School of Economics
London WC2A 2AE, UK                                Houghton Street
eeyster@gmail.com                                  London WC2A 2AE
                                                   UNITED KINGDOM
Matthew Rabin                                      and CEPR
Department of Economics                            and also NBER
Littauer Center M-8                                d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
MatthewRabin@fas.harvard.edu
1        Introduction

People might rationally trade ﬁnancial assets for a variety of non-speculative motives, such as
portfolio rebalancing and liquidity. But ever since Milgrom and Stokey (1982), researchers have
understood that common knowledge of rationality combined with a common prior precludes purely
speculative trade. Even in settings where non-speculative motives enable speculation, a rational un-
derstanding of the adverse-selection problem causes the overall volume of trade to be constrained by
non-speculative motives. In many people’s estimation, trading volume in ﬁnancial markets greatly
exceeds what can be plausibly explained by models applying rational-expectations equilibrium
(REE).1
    Researchers have sought to explain excessive trading volume by relaxing the common-prior
assumption. Harrison and Kreps (1978) show how non-common priors about an asset’s payoﬀ gen-
erate volume in a dynamic model where risk-neutral traders cannot sell the asset short. Scheinkman
and Xiong (2003) use Harrison and Kreps’ framework to explore traders who are “overconﬁdent”:
all signals about the payoﬀ are observed by all traders, yet certain traders overestimate the informa-
tion content of certain signals.2 In these complete-information models, trade derives from traders
agreeing to disagree about the relationship between future return and publicly available informa-
tion. A second approach incorporates non-common priors into incomplete-information models by
assuming that privately informed traders agree to disagree about the precision of traders’ private
information. Daniel, Hirshleifer and Subrahmanyam (1998, 2001) and Odean (1998), for example,
show how traders’ overconﬁdence about the precision of their private information can increase trad-

    1
        For example, in his presidential address to the American Finance Association, French (2008) notes that
the capitalized cost of trading exceeds 10% of market capitalization, and turnover in 2007 was 215%, creating
a puzzle that “[f]rom the perspective of the negative-sum game, it is hard to understand why equity investors
pay to turn their aggregate portfolio over more than two times in 2007” (page 1552).
    2
        Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong (2006) model overconﬁdence similarly, allowing also for heterogenous
priors, in a model where the number of shares of a risky asset increases over time due to the expiration of
lock-up clauses.




                                                        1
ing volume.3 Similarly, Odean (1998), Banerjee, Kaniel and Kremer (2009), Banerjee and Kremer
(2010), and Banerjee (2011) show that when traders downplay the precision of one another’s private
signals—which we call contemptuousness—volume also increases.
   Models of agreeing to disagree depict traders who recognize their disagreements in beliefs and
trade based on them. This paper takes a diﬀerent tack: people trade because they neglect disagree-
ments in beliefs. This approach may seem retrograde, moving the theory of asset markets back to
before the rational-expectations revolution. But it builds on evidence and modeling that people do
not suﬃciently attend to the information content of others’ behavior—even in the absence of in-
trinsic disagreements. Laboratory evidence from settings with asymmetric information shows that
people trade in ways that are consistent with disagreement neglect but that cannot be explained
by non-common priors, overconﬁdence or contemptuousness. We present a simple and tractable
model of markets where some or all traders, when choosing their demands, do not fully attend to
the informational content of prices or others’ trades. We draw out several implications that follow
from this simple assumption, and contrast the model both to fully rational models and to existing
alternatives to REE.
   The most important implication is also the most basic: trading volume exceeds that of REE.
Our model predicts that per-trader volume grows with the number of traders in the market. We
contrast this result to markets where traders are overconﬁdent and/or contemptuous but otherwise
infer correctly from prices, in which case per-trader volume vanishes as the market becomes large.
This suggests that disagreement neglect is a necessary condition for large volume in large markets:
overconﬁdence and contemptuousness do not by themselves create large volume.4 We show addi-
tionally that disagreement neglect not only generates large volume, but also enables other biases

   3
       Other models of trade deriving from diﬀerences in beliefs include Varian (1985), where traders have
diﬀerent subjective priors, DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, Waldmann (1990), where symmetrically informed
traders disagree because some of them (“noise traders”) misperceive next-period prices for exogenous reasons,
as well as Harris and Raviv (1993) and Kandel and Pearson (1995), where traders disagree about the
informativeness of public signals. Hong and Stein (2007) provide an overview of this literature.
   4
       As argued earlier, large volume is hard to explain within REE settings as well.




                                                        2
such as overconﬁdence and contemptuousness to matter in large markets.
   Our model diﬀers from REE not only in its predicted extent of trade, but also in its predic-
tions about the qualitative properties of trading volume and prices. The price responds more to
public information and less to private information than in REE. This implies that, unlike in REE,
changes in asset prices are predictable from public information even in settings where traders lack
non-speculative motives for trade such as random endowments. Returns are positively serially cor-
related when endowments are small—returns exhibit momentum—yet negatively correlated when
endowments are large. Trading volume is hump-shaped in the precision of traders’ private infor-
mation, while (the smaller) volume in REE is inverse hump-shaped. Moreover, volume can be
higher when some traders are rational and others neglect disagreement than when they all neglect
disagreement. Also in contrast to REE, traders with more precise private information can be worse
oﬀ than traders with less precise information.
   Ours is not the ﬁrst paper to use the assumption that some market participants fail to invert
prices. Hong and Stein (1999) assume that some or all traders are “newswatchers” who trade based
on news or signals they observe without inverting price to infer news that they haven’t yet heard.
They show how prices move predictably when information diﬀuses gradually through the market,
similar to our result on momentum. Our work diﬀers from theirs both in its formalization of the
error traders make and in its applications. Conceptually, we relax Hong and Stein’s assumption
that traders infer nothing from market price to allow traders to partially infer from price, which
we formalize in a general market-equilibrium concept. Content-wise, although Hong and Stein
demonstrate the existence of volume, they do not explore the properties of volume nor compare its
level to that predicted by alternative models such as overconﬁdence and contemptuousness.
   Section 2 outlines the basic model upon which our approach builds. Based on evidence from
strategic situations, Eyster and Rabin (2005) deﬁne cursed equilibrium in Bayesian games by the
requirement that every player correctly predicts the behavior of others, but fails to fully attend to
its informational content. Cursed equilibrium is meant to capture the intuitive psychology behind
the “winner’s curse” in common-values auctions, as well as related phenomena in other strategic




                                                 3
settings.5 Section 2 then illustrates the workings of cursed equilibrium in a simple zero-sum game
of speculative trade. We describe how the cursed-equilibrium prediction of trade in that setting is
supported by direct experimental evidence. Moreover, that evidence cannot be accounted for by
alternative approaches such as non-common priors, overconﬁdence or contemptuousness.
   Section 3 introduces our formal set-up, based on Grossman (1976), Hellwig (1980) and Diamond
and Verrechia (1981). We consider a market in which traders can exchange a risky for a riskless
asset over one period. Traders observe public and private signals about the risky asset’s payoﬀ.
We introduce a non-speculative motive to trade by assuming that traders receive random endow-
ments correlated with the asset payoﬀ. We deﬁne cursed-expectations equilibrium (CEE) by the
requirement that some traders do not fully extract information from asset prices. CEE transplants
the concept of cursed equilibrium from strategic games to price-taking competitive settings. As an
application of a more general equilibrium concept, it has the methodological beneﬁt of not having
been designed speciﬁcally to explain the particular ﬁnancial-market puzzles that we explore. For
tractability, we assume that traders have constant-absolute-risk-aversion (CARA) preferences and
that probability distributions are normal.
   Section 4 analyzes the model without random endowments. As in Grossman (1976), there is a
unique linear REE with the classical prediction of no trade, and a price that aggregates eﬃciently
all public and private signals. We next solve for CEE when all traders are fully cursed, inferring
nothing from price. Although each cursed trader relies too much upon his own private signal when
estimating the asset payoﬀ, because other traders fail to appreciate how that signal inﬂuences the
price, private signals enter the price with a smaller weight than in REE. Conversely, the public
signal enters the price with a larger weight because each trader relies on it more than in REE. These
two eﬀects make returns a predictable function of observables: future return depends positively on

   5
       Cursedness explains the voluminous evidence on bidders succumbing to the “winner’s curse” in common-
values auctions—where the average price paid by the winner exceeds the average value of the object being
auctioned—reviewed in Kagel and Levin (2002). Additional evidence consistent with cursedness comes from
settings ranging from social learning (Weizsäcker (2010)), voting (Esponda and Vespa (2013)), and trade
in positive-sum (Samuelson and Bazerman (1985), Holt and Sherman (1994)) and zero-sum (Carrillo and
Palfrey (2011)) environments.


                                                      4
past return and negatively on the public signal in a bivariate regression, and it depends positively
on past return in a univariate regression. The positive coeﬃcient on past return accords with the
empirical evidence on momentum.6
   We show additionally that traders with more precise private signals trade more than those with
less precise ones, but can be worse oﬀ because cursedness causes them to trade too aggressively.
The total volume of trade approaches inﬁnity as the number of agents becomes large, and is hump-
shaped in the average precision of private signals. Intuitively, there is little private information
when either signals are very imprecise—everybody knows very little—or when signals are very
precise—everybody is fully informed.
   We complete Section 4 by solving for CEE in two intermediate cases. We ﬁrst ﬁnd CEE when
all traders are partially cursed to the same degree. The greater the extent of traders’ cursedness,
the more weight the public signal has and the less weight private signals have on price. The
per-trader volume of trade increases in the number of market participants, whatever the level of
traders’ cursedness. Next, we consider markets where some traders are rational and others are
fully cursed. Rational traders exploit the under-reaction of price to cursed traders’ private signals
by engaging in momentum trading, buying when the price goes up and selling when it goes down.
Cursed traders take the other side of those trades. Because rational traders weight the private
signals of cursed traders by inverting the price, whereas fully cursed traders do not weight the
private signals of rational traders whatsoever, the precision-adjusted impact of the private signals
of the cursed traders on prices exceeds that of the rational traders. Moreover, volume can be
larger when some traders are rational and others fully cursed than when all are rational or all fully
cursed. Intuitively, a cursed trader trades more against someone who does the opposite—a rational
momentum trader—than against another cursed trader.
   Section 5 analyzes the model with random endowments. As in Hellwig (1980) and Diamond
and Verrechia (1981), trade happens even in REE. We show that in REE, the future return is a
predictable, decreasing function of past return. When all traders are fully cursed, returns exhibit
these same reversals if and only if endowment shocks are large enough. We show that REE trading

  6
      See Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), and Jegadeesh and Titman (2011) for a recent survey.



                                                    5
volume is inverse hump-shaped in the precision of private signals—the exact opposite result than
when traders are cursed.7 Intuitively, adverse selection reduces volume when there are private
signals, but disappears when everybody knows little due to imprecise signals or is fully informed
because of very precise signals (Akerlof (1970), Hirshleifer (1971)).
   Section 6 contrasts our approach and results to those of overconﬁdence—where traders exagger-
ate the precision of their own private signals—and contemptuousness—where traders downplay the
precision of other traders’ private signals.8 As in the literature, in the model of overconﬁdence and
contemptuousness that we construct for comparison traders are otherwise rational: they understand
the mapping between the price and other traders’ private information—but they agree to disagree
about the meaning of that information. We show that overconﬁdence leads to prices that depend
too much on private information and too little on public information relative to REE—the exact
opposite of our ﬁndings with cursed traders. Contemptuousness is a cousin of sorts to cursedness,
and traders who downplay the informativeness of others’ signals behave similarly to cursed ones.
Traders who are overconﬁdent or contemptuous trade too much.
   More interesting is the contrast in the extent of over-trading as the market becomes large.
Whereas the per-trader volume under cursedness increases with the number of traders, per-trader
volume under overconﬁdence or contemptuousness converges to zero. Intuitively, while each trader
thinks he knows more than he does, he understands that the total amount of “valid” information
reﬂected in the price in a large market swamps his own information. Hence, the same no-trade
logic that prevails in REE also prevails in large markets of overconﬁdent or contemptuous traders.9
   Disagreement neglect enables overconﬁdence to matter in large markets. We show that in

   7
       Banerjee (2011) ﬁnds that contemptuousness predicts this same pattern relative to REE.
   8
       This form of overconﬁdence is not exactly equivalent to people’s sensation that they are more skilled
than they are, as in the work of Malmendier and Tate (2005) on CEOs. Instead, it corresponds to people
thinking “my private signals are better than they are,” which might result from people thinking they are
better than others at reading information, making it akin to ego-related overconﬁdence.
   9
       Our ﬁnding that the per-trader volume of overconﬁdent trade vanishes in large markets would also
hold if all signals in the model were made public, which resembles the form of overconﬁdence assumed in
Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).


                                                      6
a large market of cursed overconﬁdent traders, per-trader volume remains non-negligible. In this
sense, cursedness and overconﬁdence work as complements, and cursedness helps vindicate the basic
intuition from the literature that overconﬁdence can be a signiﬁcant source of trading volume.
    We conclude in Section 7. We discuss some of the limits of our model, especially the challenges
in extending cursedness to multi-period settings. We also describe how cursedness may interact
with other biases. In particular—as with overconﬁdence discussed in Section 6—cursedness may
serve as an “enabler” of various cognitive errors to which traders seem to fall prey: many errors
matter signiﬁcantly for prices and volume if and only if traders are cursed.


2    Cursed Equilibrium

In this section, we use a simple trading game to illustrate Eyster and Rabin’s (2005) concept of
cursed equilibrium, which underlies our concept of cursed-expectations equilibrium introduced in
Section 3. In the context of this game, we show how cursed equilibrium diﬀers from other theories
that have been explored in the ﬁnance literature such as non-common priors, overconﬁdence and
contemptuousness. A general deﬁnition of cursed equilibrium is in Appendix A.
    The trading game works as follows. A seller owns an asset that he knows to be worth s both
to himself and to a potential buyer. The buyer does not know s, but believes that it is randomly
drawn from [0, 1] with a cumulative distribution function F . The buyer makes the seller a take-it-
or-leave-it oﬀer p for the asset.
    The seller’s optimal strategy is to accept the buyer’s oﬀer p if and only if s ≤ p. In a Bayesian
Nash equilibrium the buyer understands this, and so chooses p to maximize F (p)×(E[s|s ≤ p] − p).
This objective is the probability F (p) that the seller accepts the oﬀer p, times the buyer’s expected
surplus from acquiring the asset conditional on seller acceptance. Because E[s|s ≤ p] < p for each
p > 0, the buyer’s optimal oﬀer is p∗ = 0. Thus, no trade occurs, consistent with Milgrom and
Stokey’s (1982) celebrated result on the absence of speculative trade between rational agents.
    In a cursed equilibrium players fail to appreciate the informational content of others’ behavior.
This does not matter for the seller, who knows s perfectly and hence has nothing to learn, but
matters for the buyer. A buyer who is fully cursed completely neglects the relationship between the

                                                  7
seller’s willingness to sell at price p and the seller’s private information s, but correctly predicts the
probability distribution over the seller’s actions. As a consequence, a fully cursed buyer perceives
the expected value of an asset traded at price p to be its unconditional expectation, E[s]. A fully
cursed buyer thus chooses p to maximize F (p) × (E[s] − p). A partially cursed buyer appreciates
that the seller’s willingness to sell correlates with his private information but underestimates that
relationship. A buyer who is partially cursed with coeﬃcient χ perceives the expected value of an
asset traded at price p to be (1 − χ)E[s|s ≤ p] + χE[s]. This is the weighted average of the rational
belief with weight 1 − χ and the fully cursed belief with weight χ. In eﬀect, the buyer believes
that with probability 1 − χ the seller’s decision to sell conveys information about the asset, and
with probability χ it does not. The coeﬃcient χ measures the buyer’s naivety: χ = 0 corresponds
to full rationality, while χ = 1 corresponds to full cursedness. A χ-cursed buyer thus chooses p to
maximize F (p) × ((1 − χ)E[s|s ≤ p] + χE[s] − p). Since E[s] > 0, the buyer’s optimal oﬀer exceeds
zero for any χ > 0. Moreover, since the buyer’s objective function is supermodular in (p, χ) for
p ∈ [0, E[s]], Topkis’ Theorem implies that p∗ increases in χ. In summary, cursedness produces
trade in no-trade settings, and the more cursed the buyer, the higher the volume of trade.
   Cursed trade derives from people’s neglect of disagreement: the buyer neglects how the seller’s
willingness to trade at p signals beliefs that the object is worth less than p. Researchers have
proposed alternative models for speculative trade based on the idea that people are conscious of their
disagreement and “agree to disagree.” This is modelled as non-common priors about the distribution
of asset payoﬀs, or as disagreement over the information that diﬀerent signals convey about payoﬀs.
Models of overconﬁdence assume a speciﬁc type of disagreement over signals: people believe that
private signals they receive are more precise than private signals others receive. Such a belief may
arise because people overestimate the precision of their signals while holding a correct assessment
of the precision of others’ signals. Alternatively, people may correctly assess the precision of their
signals while underestimating the precision of others’ signals. Researchers have considered both of
these polar cases as well as their combination. We reserve the term overconﬁdence for the former
case (people are overconﬁdent about their ability to gather a precise signal), and use the term
contemptuousness for the latter (people are contemptuous about others’ ability).



                                                    8
    One way to identify cursedness in the data, and to distinguish from non-common priors, over-
conﬁdence and contemptuousness, is through laboratory experiments. Carrillo and Palfrey (2011)
conduct experiments on a trading game that is a variant of the one considered in this section. The
main diﬀerence is that in their game the buyer also has a private signal b, and the value of the
object is some function v(b, s). (The take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer is also made by the seller rather than
the buyer.) As in the game considered in this section, the Bayesian Nash equilibrium involves no
trade but the cursed equilibrium does. Moreover, neither non-common priors, nor overconﬁdence,
nor contemptuousness can generate trade. Carrillo and Palfrey argue indeed that behavior in their
experiments is well explained by cursed equilibrium.
    The failure of non-common priors, overconﬁdence and contemptuousness to generate trade can
be seen in the game considered in this section (and the same logic transposes to Carrillo and Palfrey’s
game). Non-common priors about the distribution of asset payoﬀs would amount to the buyer and
the seller employing diﬀerent cumulative distribution functions F . This would not yield trade.
Indeed, the seller has a dominant strategy that is independent of F , and the oﬀer p = 0 is optimal
for the buyer regardless of his assessment of F . Overconﬁdence has no bite because the seller knows
s perfectly and so cannot exaggerate further the precision of his private information, while the buyer
lacks private information whose precision to exaggerate. Contemptuousness would amount to the
buyer believing that the seller has less information than he actually has, e.g., observes a noisy
signal about s. Yet, the buyer would be unwilling to trade when the seller has private information
no matter how imprecise that information is. Moreover, the information structure is announced
clearly to all experiment participants.
    In Section 6 we examine the relationship between cursedness, overconﬁdence and contemptu-
ousness within our ﬁnancial markets model. We show that cursedness yields distinct predictions
concerning trading volume and its behavior in large markets.


3    Model, Equilibrium Concept, and Equilibrium Conditions

In this section, we begin by deﬁning cursed-expectations equilibrium in a general version of our
model, before making more speciﬁc assumptions on traders’ cursedness coeﬃcients, the distribution

                                                  9
of their information, and their utility functions that allow us to derive analytically tractable, linear
equilibria. There are two periods, 1 and 2, and two assets that pay oﬀ in terms of a consumption
good in Period 2. One asset is riskless and pays oﬀ one unit of the consumption good with certainty.
The other asset is risky and pays d = d + ϵ + ζ units, where d is a constant and (ϵ, ζ) are random
variables with mean zero. We use the riskless asset as the numeraire, and denote by p the price
of the risky asset in Period 1. Our choice of numeraire implies that the price of the risky asset in
Period 2 is d and the riskless rate is zero. We assume that the risky asset is in zero supply.
    There are N traders who can exchange the two assets in Period 1. Trader i = 1, .., N observes
the private signal

      si = ϵ + ηi ,                                                                                 (1)

as well as the public signal

      s = ϵ + θ,                                                                                    (2)

which is also observed by all other traders. The random variables ({ηi }i=1,..,N , θ) have mean zero.
The signals are observed in Period 1. They provide information about the component ϵ of the risky
asset’s payoﬀ but not about ζ.
    Trader i starts with a zero endowment of the riskless and the risky assets, and receives an
endowment zi d of the consumption good in Period 2. We refer to zi as the endowment shock, and
assume that it is observed in Period 1 and has mean zero. Through its correlation with d, the
endowment generates a hedging motive to trade. When, for example, zi > 0, trader i is exposed
to the risk that d will be low and wishes to hedge by selling the risky asset. We assume that the
variables (ϵ, ζ, {ηi }i=1,..,N , θ, {zi }i=1,..,N ) are mutually independent.
    The budget constraint of trader i is

      Wi = xi (d − p) + zi d,                                                                       (3)

where xi denotes the number of shares of the risky asset held by the trader in Period 1. We impose
no portfolio constraints, e.g., on short sales or leverage, and allow xi to take any value in R.


                                                       10
   Traders maximize expected utility of consumption in Period 2. We denote by ui (Wi ) the utility
of trader i. If the trader is rational, he maximizes the expected utility

      E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi , p}],

where we use (3) to substitute for Wi . A rational trader conditions his estimate of the asset payoﬀ
d on his private signal, the public signal, the endowment shock, and the price. A fully cursed
trader completely neglects the relationship between the price and other traders’ information, and
maximizes the expected utility

      E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi }],

which diﬀers from the rational expected utility because there is no conditioning on the price. To
derive the objective of a partially cursed trader, we proceed as in Section 2 with a slight modiﬁcation
for tractability. Following the deﬁnition in Section 2, if trader i is χi -cursed, he maximizes the
expected utility

      (1 − χi )E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi , p}] + χi E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi }],

which is the weighted average of the rational expected utility with weight 1−χi and the fully cursed
expected utility with weight χi . For tractability, we employ the geometric average of utilities instead
of the arithmetic average, hence modifying trader i’s objective to

      E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi , p}]1−χi E[ui (xi (d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi }]χi .

As in the case of the arithmetic average, χi = 0 corresponds to rationality, χi = 1 to full cursedness,
and intermediate values of χi to traders who appreciate the information content of the price but
only partially. The demand function of partially cursed traders always lies between the rational
and the fully cursed demand functions.
   Our deﬁnition of cursed-expectations equilibrium combines utility maximization under cursed
expectations with market clearing. As in the case of REE, the equilibrium involves a price function
p that depends on all the random variables in the model. These are the private signals {si }i=1,...,N ,
the public signal s, and the endowment shocks {zi }i=1,...,N .

                                                           11
Definition 1 A price function p({si }i=1,...,N , s, {zi }i=1,...,N )) and demand functions {xi (si , s, zi , p)}i=1,...,N
are a cursed-expectations-equilibrium (CEE) if:

  (i) (Optimization) For each trader i = 1, . . . , N , and each (si , s, zi , p),
                      {                                                                                    }
          xi ∈ arg max E[ui (x(d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi , p}]1−χi E[ui (x(d − p) + zi d)|{si , s, zi }]χi , (4)
                        x


 (ii) (Market Clearing) For each ({si }i=1,...,N , s, {zi }i=1,...,N ),

              ∑
              N
                    xi = 0.                                                                                    (5)
              i=1

     We next specialize our analysis by making two assumptions, which allow us to derive tractable
linear equilibria. First, the variables (ϵ, ζ, {ηi }i=1,..,N , θ, {zi }i=1,..,N ) follow normal distributions,
with variances denoted by (σϵ2 , σζ2 , {ση2i }i=1,..,N , σθ2 , {σz2i }i=1,..,N ) and precisions, i.e., the inverses
of the variances, denoted by (τϵ , τζ , {τηi }i=1,..,N , τθ , {τzi }i=1,..,N ). Second, traders have negative
exponential, or constant absolute risk aversion (CARA), utility functions: ui (Wi ) = − exp(−αi Wi ),
where αi is the coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion.
     A linear CEE price function has the form
                 ∑
                 N                    ∑
                                      N
       p=d+            Ai si + Bs −         Ci zi ,                                                            (6)
                 i=1                  i=1

for coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B, {Ci }i=1,..N ). For CARA utility, we can write the expectations in (4)
as

       − E [exp [−αi (xi (d − p) + zi d)] |Ii ]
                [    (                                                       )]
                                                    1
       = − exp −αi xi (E(d|Ii ) − p) + zi E(d|Ii ) − αi (xi + zi ) Var(d|Ii ) ,
                                                                  2
                                                                                                               (7)
                                                    2
where the information set Ii is equal to Iir ≡ {si , s, zi , p} if χi = 0 (where r stands for rational)
and to Iic ≡ {si , s, zi } if χi = 1 (where c stands for fully cursed). The second step in (7) follows
because all variables are normally distributed. Substituting (7) into (4) and maximizing, we ﬁnd
the demand function
                (1 − χi )E(d|Iir ) + χi E(d|Iic ) − p
       xi =                                              − zi .                                                (8)
              αi [(1 − χi )Var(d|Iir ) + χi Var(d|Iic )]

                                                         12
The demand function is the solution to a mean-variance problem. The trader’s conditional ex-
pectation is the weighted average of the rational expectation with weight 1 − χi and the fully
cursed expectation with weight χi . The trader’s conditional variance is the same weighted average
of the rational and fully cursed variances. The geometric average formulation of utilities ensures
that traders’ optimization problems retain a tractable mean-variance structure even under partial
cursedness. Combining (8) with the market-clearing condition (5), we derive conditions in Propo-
sition 1 so that (6) is an equilibrium price. Proposition 1 does not show existence or uniqueness of
({Ai }i=1,..N , B, {Ci }i=1,..N ) satisfying these conditions, both of which are instead demonstrated in
the special cases studied in subsequent sections.
    To state Proposition 1, we introduce some notation. From the perspective of a rational trader
i, the price (6) includes information on (si , s, zi ), which the trader knows, and on ({si }j̸=i , {zi }j̸=i ),
which he does not. The latter information is summarized in the signal
     ∑                 ∑
        j̸=i Aj sj −     j̸=i Cj zj
              ∑                     ,                                                                       (9)
                  j̸=i Aj

which the trader can extract from the price. Using (1) and (2), we can write this signal as ϵ + ξi ,
where
             ∑                  ∑
               j̸=i Aj ηj   −   j̸=i Cj zj
      ξi ≡           ∑                       .                                                             (10)
                         j̸=i Aj

We denote the variance of ξi by σξ2i and its precision by τξi .

Proposition 1 The price (6) is an equilibrium price if and only if ({Ai }i=1,..N , B, {Ci }i=1,..N )




                                                      13
satisfy the conditions

        τηi (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi ) − (1 − χi )τξi ∑    Ai
                                                                Ak (τϵ   + τηi + τθ )
                                                         k̸=i

      αi [(τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi ) + τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )]
           ∑N (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ ) − (1 − χj )τξ ∑ 1         (τϵ + τηj + τθ )
                                                                    k̸=j Ak
                      j              j          j                j
      = Ai         [                                                                    ] ,     (11)
           j=1
                αj (τϵ + τηj + τθ )(τϵ + τηj + τθ + τξj ) + τζ (τϵ + τηj + τθ + χj τξj )
      ∑
      N
                                   τθ (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )
            αi [(τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi ) + τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )]
      i=1
             ∑
             N
                                   (τϵ + τηj + τθ )(τϵ + τηj + τθ + τξj )
      =B             [                                                                     ],   (12)
             j=1
                   αj (τϵ + τηj + τθ )(τϵ + τηj + τθ + τξj ) + τζ (τϵ + τηj + τθ + χj τξj )
                    (τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi ) + τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )
      Ci = Ai αi                                                                          .     (13)
                                       τζ τηi (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )


4     No Endowment Shocks

This section analyzes the model in the case where there are no endowment shocks. This case is
derived by setting the variances {σz2i }i=1,..,N of endowment shocks equal to zero. The shocks are
then equal to their mean, which is zero. Without endowment shocks, traders lack a hedging motive
to trade, and trade can occur only because of the private signals. The price (6) takes the form

                ∑
                N
      p=d+            Ai si + Bs.                                                               (14)
                i=1


4.1   All Traders Rational

We begin with the benchmark case where all traders are rational (χi = 0 for all i). Proposition
2 shows that the coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B) in the price (14), which are characterized by the
conditions in Proposition 1, are uniquely determined.

Proposition 2 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are rational. The price




                                                         14
(14) is an equilibrium price if and only if
                      τ ηi
      Ai =          ∑N                 ,                                                       (15)
             τϵ +     j=1 τηj   + τθ
                      τθ
      B=            ∑N                 .                                                       (16)
             τϵ +     j=1 τηj   + τθ
There is no trade in equilibrium.

   That there is no trade in equilibrium is a manifestation in the context of our model of the
no-trade theorem of Milgrom and Stokey (1982). Since traders start with zero endowments in the
risky asset and receive no endowment shocks, no-trade is a Pareto-eﬃcient allocation and hence
the unique equilibrium outcome.
   The coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B) with which the private and the public signals enter into the
price are proportional to these signals’ precisions. Therefore, the price aggregates all the signals
eﬃciently, as in Grossman (1976). The price equals the expected value of the asset payoﬀ d
conditional upon all of the signals in the market.


4.2   All Traders Fully Cursed

We next turn to the case where all traders are fully cursed (χi = 1 for all i). Proposition 3 shows
that the coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B) in the price (14) are uniquely determined.

Proposition 3 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are fully cursed. The
price (14) is an equilibrium price if and only if
                        τηi
               αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )
      Ai =   ∑N         τϵ +τηj +τθ     ,                                                      (17)
              j=1 αj (τϵ +τζ +τηj +τθ )
             ∑N             τθ
              j=1 αj (τϵ +τζ +τηj +τθ )
      B=     ∑N        τϵ +τηj +τθ      .                                                      (18)
              j=1 αj (τϵ +τζ +τηj +τθ )

   Unlike in the case where all traders are rational, the coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B) are not pro-
portional to the precisions of the corresponding signals. Therefore, the price does not aggregate
the signals eﬃciently. Proposition 4 compares the coeﬃcients ({Ai }i=1,..N , B) in the rational and
fully cursed cases.

                                                    15
Proposition 4 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are fully cursed. Com-
pared to the case where all traders are rational:

  (i) The coeﬃcient B with which the public signal enters into the price is larger.

 (ii) The sum across traders of the coeﬃcients {Ai }i=1,..,N with which private signals enter into
      the price is smaller. The coeﬃcient Ai for any given trader i can be larger or smaller.

(iii) The ratio Ai /B is smaller.

   Intuition for Proposition 4 and other results in this section can be derived from a general
property of the price in the absence of endowment shocks. Substituting the demand functions
{xi }i=1,..,N given by (8) into the market-clearing condition (5), setting {zi }i=1,..,N = 0, and solving
for p, we ﬁnd:
           ∑N        (1−χi )E(d|Iir )+χi E(d|Iic )
            i=1 αi [(1−χi )Var(d|Iir )+χi Var(d|Iic )]
      p=   ∑N                     1
                                                         .                                          (19)
            i=1 αi [(1−χi )Var(d|Iir )+χi Var(d|Iic )]

The price is thus a weighted average of traders’ conditional expectations of the asset payoﬀ d, with
trader i’s conditional expectation receiving weight
                         1
        αi [(1−χi )Var(d|Iir )+χi Var(d|Iic )]
      ∑N                      1
                                                    .
       j=1 αj [(1−χj )Var(d|Ijr )+χj Var(d|Ijc )]

The weight is larger for traders who are less risk averse or observe more precise signals. This
is because they trade more aggressively on any given discrepancy between the price and their
conditional expectation. In the rational case, all traders have the same conditional expectation
because they learn from the price, which aggregates all the signals eﬃciently. Therefore, the price
is also equal to that conditional expectation. In the fully cursed case, conditional expectations
diﬀer because traders do not learn other traders’ signals from the price.
   Since fully cursed traders form conditional expectations using fewer signals than rational traders,
they attach larger weight to each signal they use. The public signal thus receives larger weight in
each trader’s conditional expectation than in the rational case, and hence enters the price with a
larger coeﬃcient (Result (i) of Proposition 4). The private signal of any given trader i receives larger

                                                             16
weight in that trader’s conditional expectation but zero weight in all other traders’ expectation.
When trader i’s risk aversion is low, the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates and that signal enters the price
with a larger coeﬃcient than in the rational case. The second eﬀect dominates, however, when the
coeﬃcients are averaged across traders (Result (ii)). Note that when traders are symmetric, the
coeﬃcient corresponding to each trader equals the average coeﬃcient, and hence is smaller than in
the rational case. Finally, trader i gives the correct weight to his private signal relative to the public
signal. Because, however, other traders give zero weight to trader i’s private signal but positive
weight to the public signal, the price in the fully cursed case underweights the former signal relative
to the latter (Result (iii)).
   The results of Proposition 4 have implications for the predictability of asset returns. We deﬁne
the return of the risky asset between Periods 1 and 2 as the diﬀerence between the asset payoﬀ
d and the price p. We examine whether this return can be predicted using information available
in Period 1, i.e., whether including such information improves the accuracy of a return forecast.
When all traders are rational, the return is not predictable based on past information because p is
the expectation of d conditional on all the signals available in Period 1.

Proposition 5 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are fully cursed. The
bivariate regression

      d − p = γ1 (p − d) + γ2 s + ν                                                                  (20)

yields coeﬃcients γ1 > 0 and γ2 < 0. The univariate regressions

      d − p = γs + ν,                                                                                (21)

      d − p = γ(p − d) + ν,                                                                          (22)

yield coeﬃcients γ = 0 and γ > 0, respectively. All regression coeﬃcients are zero when all traders
are rational.

   The bivariate regression (20) predicts the asset return between Periods 1 and 2 using the public
signal s and the diﬀerence between the price p and the unconditional expectation d of the asset


                                                   17
payoﬀ. The diﬀerence p − d can be interpreted as the return between a Period 0, in which no
signals are observed and the asset trades at d, and Period 1. Hence, (20) measures the extent to
which past return and the public signal predict future return. Since the price p is inﬂuenced by
the private and the public signals, and (20) controls for the latter, the coeﬃcient γ1 measures the
eﬀect of the private signals.
   Because (γ1 , γ2 ) are non-zero, the return between Periods 1 and 2 is predictable. Holding the
public signal constant, high private signals in Period 1 predict a price rise in Period 2 (γ1 > 0).
Holding instead the private signals constant, a high public signal in Period 1 predicts a price drop
(γ2 < 0). The price thus under-reacts to the private signals and over-reacts to the public signal.
The under-reaction is consistent with Result (ii) of Proposition 4 that the average coeﬃcient with
which the private signals enter into the price is smaller in the fully cursed than in the rational case.
The over-reaction is consistent with Result (i) that the coeﬃcient with which the public signal
enters into the price is larger in the fully cursed than in the rational case.
   The univariate regressions (21) and (22) predict the asset return between Periods 1 and 2 using
only the public signal s or only the return between Periods 0 and 1. The coeﬃcient γ in each of
these regressions combines the eﬀects of γ1 and γ2 . Since γ1 and γ2 have opposite signs, the sign
of γ is a priori ambiguous.
   Since γ = 0 in the regression (21), the return between Periods 1 and 2 cannot be predicted
using the public signal alone, even when traders are fully cursed. This stems from the fact that
cursed traders process the limited set of signals that they observe correctly, and the public signal
belongs to that set. The law of iterative expectations thus implies that when a trader’s conditional
expectation of the asset payoﬀ d is “conditioned down” on the public signal s, it must equal the
expectation of d conditional on s. Since the price p equals a weighted average of traders’ conditional
expectations of d (Eq. (19)), the expectation of p conditional on s equals that of d conditional on
s, and so d − p cannot be predicted by s.
   The return between Periods 1 and 2 can be predicted based on the return between Periods 0
and 1 only. Since γ > 0, a high return between Periods 0 and 1 predicts a price rise in Period 2,
which means that returns exhibit momentum. Since the price in Period 2 is equal to the asset’s



                                                  18
payoﬀ, momentum in our model reﬂects price under-reaction to information. This under-reaction is
driven by the price response to the private signals. Because the price under-reacts to information,
the return between Periods 0 and 1 has lower variance than when traders are rational. Variance
averaged across the return between Periods 0 and 1 and that between Periods 1 and 2 is also lower.

Corollary 1 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are fully cursed. Com-
pared to the case where all traders are rational, the variance of the return between Periods 0 and 1
is lower, and so is the variance averaged across the return between Periods 0 and 1 and that between
Periods 1 and 2.

   We next explore the implications of cursedness for trading volume. Since fully cursed traders
do not learn others’ signals from the price, they trade with each other even without endowment
shocks. We deﬁne the trading volume generated by trader i as the absolute value of the quantity
xi that the trader trades in equilibrium. Proposition 6 computes expected trading volume in two
special cases, and examines how it depends on the precision of private signals.

Proposition 6 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are fully cursed.

  (i) When all traders have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient α and observe private signals with
     the same precision τη , the expected trading volume that each generates is
                  √
                τζ 2(N − 1)τη
                                √    .                                                                 (23)
           α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) πN
     Volume increases in the number of traders N . It is hump-shaped in the common precision τη
     of private signals, with the hump located at τη = τϵ + τζ + τθ .

 (ii) When all traders have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient α and the shock ζ has zero variance,
     the expected trading volume generated by trader i is
          √ [                                            [                   ]                      ]
            2 (τϵ + τθ )2 [τη + (N − 2)τηi ] + (τϵ + τθ ) N τη2 + (N − 2)τη2i + (N τη − τηi )τη τηi
                                                            √                                         , (24)
                                            α(τϵ + τη + τθ ) πN
     where τη denotes the average precision of private signals. Trader i generates more volume
     than trader j if and only if he observes a more precise private signal (τηi > τηj ).

                                                    19
   The intuition why trading volume is hump-shaped in the precision of private signals when
traders are symmetric (Case (i) of Proposition 6) is as follows. Under symmetry, the quantity that
a trader trades in equilibrium is equal to the diﬀerence between his conditional expectation of the
asset payoﬀ and the average conditional expectation of all traders, adjusted by his risk aversion and
conditional variance. The diﬀerence in conditional expectations is zero when private signals have
zero precision because traders then do not use them and share the same conditional expectation.
It is also zero when private signals have inﬁnite precision because they must then reveal the same
information. For intermediate values of precision the dispersion in conditional expectations is
positive, making volume hump-shaped in the common precision τη of private signals.
   Adjusting by risk aversion and conditional variance preserves the hump-shaped pattern. The
hump is located at a larger value of τη , and so the adjustment causes volume to be increasing in τη
over a larger interval. This is because an increase in signal precision reduces traders’ conditional
variances, hence making traders less uncertain and more eager to trade.
   Case (ii) of Proposition 6 allows signal precision to diﬀer across traders. Traders’ conditional
expectations can then diﬀer both because of the private signals and because each trader weights the
public signal diﬀerently when forming his expectation. For analytical simplicity we eliminate the
shock ζ about which traders cannot learn by setting its variance to zero. For σζ2 = 0, the hump in
trading volume in Case (i) occurs for τη = ∞, and so volume is always increasing in τη . Proposition
6 shows that the same comparison applies in the cross section: traders who observe more precise
signals generate more volume than those observing less precise signals.
   When traders are symmetric, the per-trader volume increases in market size as measured by
the number N of traders. This is because the weight that each trader’s private signal receives in
the trader’s conditional expectation is independent of N while the weight that it receives in the
price converges to zero when N becomes large. Hence, each trader’s beliefs become more discordant
with price as N increases. Since per-trader volume increases in N , aggregate volume converges to
inﬁnity when N becomes large: cursedness produces large volume in large markets.
   We ﬁnally compute traders’ expected utilities and examine how they depend on the precision
of private signals. We evaluate expected utility in the ex-ante sense, before signals appear (Period



                                                 20
0). We also focus on the true expected utilities, i.e., compute the expectation under the true joint
distribution of the signals and the price, rather than the distribution perceived by cursed traders.

Proposition 7 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks, all traders are fully cursed and have
the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient α, and the shock ζ has zero variance. The expected utility of
trader i is

                                                                 1
      −√                                                                                                                     ,   (25)
                   (τϵ +τθ )2 [N τηi −(2N −1)τη ]−(τϵ +τθ )[N (2N −1)τη2 −2N (N +1)τη τηi +(N −2)τη2i ]−(N τη −τηi )τη τηi
              1+                                       N (τϵ +τη +τθ )2 (τϵ +N τη +τθ )

where τη denotes the average precision of private signals. A trader i who observes a more precise
signal than a trader j (τηi > τηj ) has higher expected utility if

      (τϵ + τθ )2 + 2(N + 1)(τϵ + τθ )τη − τη2 > 0.                                                                              (26)

When (26) fails, there exist τηi > τηj such that trader i has lower expected utility than trader j.

   Proposition 7 shows that fully cursed traders who observe more precise signals can be worse
oﬀ relative to those observing less precise signals. This is not a manifestation of the standard
result that asymmetric information makes traders worse oﬀ by destroying trading opportunities
(Akerlof (1970), Hirshleifer (1971)). Indeed, the standard result compares expected utilities when
traders are uninformed to those when some traders become informed and equilibrium prices change.
Proposition 7 compares instead expected utilities of two traders who diﬀer in the precision of their
information, are present in the market at the same time, and face the same equilibrium price.
   To explain how signal precision aﬀects expected utility, we consider a trader who observes a
completely uninformative private signal. Because the trader does not learn from the price, he falls
victim to trading against others’ private signals, e.g., buys when others observe negative signals.
If the trader observes instead an informative signal, less of that trading occurs because his signal
is better aligned with others’ signals, e.g., is more likely to be negative when others’ signals are
negative. At the same time, a new eﬀect appears: because the trader does not learn from the price,
he trades overly aggressively on his signal and takes on excessive risk. When the second eﬀect
dominates, traders with more precise signals are worse oﬀ relative to those with less precise signals.

                                                                 21
   According to (26), the second eﬀect dominates when the average precision τη of private signals
is high, but the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates when the number N of traders is large. Intuitively, when
precision is high, signals are essentially identical and information is symmetric. As a consequence,
returns are not predictable (the regression coeﬃcients in Proposition 5 are zero) and trading against
others’ signals does not generate a loss. Hence, the ﬁrst eﬀect disappears. When instead the market
is large, returns remain predictable. Indeed, even though the price aggregates a large number of
signals and provides highly precise information, cursed traders neglect that information and rely
only on their own signals.


4.3     Intermediate Cases

We next analyze two intermediate cases between the polar extremes of rationality and full cursedness
studied in the previous sections.


4.3.1     Partially Cursed Traders

The ﬁrst intermediate case is when all traders are partially cursed with the same cursedness coeﬃ-
cient χ. For analytical simplicity, we assume that traders also have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient
α and observe private signals with the same precision τη . Thus, the price (14) takes the form

                  ∑
                  N
        p=d+A           si + Bs.                                                                 (27)
                  i=1

Proposition 9 shows that the coeﬃcients (A, B) are uniquely determined, and examines how these
coeﬃcients as well as trading volume depend on χ.

Proposition 8 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders are partially cursed
with the same cursedness coeﬃcient χ, risk aversion coeﬃcient α, and private signal precision τη .
The price (27) is an equilibrium price if and only if

           τη {[N − (N − 1)χ] (τϵ + τθ ) + N τη }
        A=                                        ,                                              (28)
              N (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
           τθ {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ }
        B=                                   .                                                   (29)
            (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )


                                                      22
The coeﬃcient A decreases in χ and the coeﬃcient B increases in χ. The expected trading volume
that each trader generates is
                                                     √
                                χτζ (τϵ + N τη + τθ ) 2(N − 1)τη
                                                                                   √           (30)
        α (τζ {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ } + (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ ))       πN

Volume increases in χ and N .

   As traders become more cursed (χ increases), the private signals enter the price with a smaller
coeﬃcient A, the public signal enters with a larger coeﬃcient B, and trading volume increases.
The results on (A, B) are consistent with the comparisons between rationality and full cursedness
derived in Proposition 4. Note that per-trader volume under partial cursedness increases in the
number N of traders. This result, which also holds under full cursedness, implies that aggregate
volume converges to inﬁnity when N becomes large.


4.3.2     Rational and Fully Cursed Traders

The second intermediate case is when some traders are rational and some are fully cursed. We
denote by Nr and Nc , respectively, the number of rational and fully cursed traders, and by R and
C the sets of these traders. For analytical simplicity we assume that traders within each group
have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient and private-signal precision. We denote by αr and τηr the
risk-aversion coeﬃcient and private-signal precision for a rational trader, and by αc and τηc the
same quantities for a fully cursed trader. The price (14) takes the form
                     ∑               ∑
        p = d + Ar         si + Ac         si + Bs.                                            (31)
                     i∈R             i∈C

Proposition 9 shows that the coeﬃcients (Ar , Ac , B) are uniquely determined.

Proposition 9 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks, and there are Nr rational traders
with risk-aversion coeﬃcient αr and private-signal precision τηr , and Nc fully cursed traders with
risk-aversion coeﬃcient αc and private-signal precision τηc . The price (31) is an equilibrium price




                                                      23
if and only if

        Ar = xAc ,                                                                                                            (32)
                                  Nr τξ                              τηc
                αr [(Nr −1)x+Nc ](τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ ) + αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
        Ac =             Nr (τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )       Nc (τϵ +τηc +τθ )
                                                                                ,                                             (33)
                        αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ ) + αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
                          Nr τθ                         Nc τθ
                αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ )   +   αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
        B=       Nr (τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )           Nc (τϵ +τηc +τθ )
                                                                        ,                                                     (34)
                αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ )   +   αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )

where

               [(Nr − 1)x + Nc ]2 τηr τηc
        τξ ≡                              ,                                                                                   (35)
                (Nr − 1)x2 τηc + Nc τηr
                τ
and x ∈ (0, τηr
             ηc
                ) is the unique solution of

                                   αc Nc τηr (τηr − xτηc )(τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
        x=           {                                                                              }.                        (36)
               αr τηc [(Nr − 1)x2 τηc + Nc τηr ] (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ ) + [(Nr − 1)x + Nc ]2 τηr τηc

   Since the fully cursed traders are symmetric, their private signals enter the price with the same
weight, and equal weighting is eﬃcient because the signals have the same precision. At the same
time, the price gives too much weight to the signals of the fully cursed traders relative to those
                                                                Ar          τηr                                         Ar
of the rational traders. Indeed, since x =                      Ac      <   τηc ,   the precision-adjusted coeﬃcient    τηr   with
                                                                                                           Ac
which the rational traders’ signals enter the price is smaller than its counterpart                        τηc   for fully cursed
traders. The intuition is that conditional expectations of rational traders give weight to both their
own signals and those of fully cursed traders, while conditional expectations of fully cursed traders
give weight to their own signals only.
   We next characterize the trading activity of rational and fully cursed traders, and do so by
regressing their signed volume on past return. A positive regression coeﬃcient means that a trader
buys following a price rise, and is hence a momentum trader. A negative coeﬃcient means instead
that a trader buys following a price decline. When traders are symmetric (all rational or all
fully cursed), the regression coeﬃcients are zero for all traders because of symmetry and because
aggregate signed volume is zero. When instead some traders are rational and some are fully cursed,
the regression coeﬃcients are non-zero. Recall from Proposition 5 that returns in a market with fully


                                                                     24
cursed traders exhibit momentum because the price under-reacts to the private signals. Rational
traders exploit this predictability, buying when the price goes up, hence acting as momentum
traders. Fully cursed traders, by contrast, do the opposite because they neglect that high prices
signal positive private information.

Proposition 10 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks, and there are Nr rational traders
with risk-aversion coeﬃcient αr and private-signal precision τηr , and Nc fully cursed traders with
risk-aversion coeﬃcient αc and private-signal precision τηc . The univariate regression

     xi = γi (p − d) + ν,                                                                      (37)

yields coeﬃcient γi > 0 for i ∈ R and γi < 0 for i ∈ C.

   Because momentum trading adds to trading volume, volume can be higher in a market where
some traders are rational and some are fully cursed than in an otherwise identical market where
all traders are fully cursed. To show this result, we hold constant the total number N of traders,
assume that they all have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient (αr = αc = α) and private-signal
precision (τηr = τηc = τη ), and change the relative numbers of rational and fully cursed traders.
We compute expected aggregate trading volume, deﬁned as the sum over all traders of the expected
trading volume that each generates.

Proposition 11 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks, and there are N traders with risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α and private-signal precision τηc . Expected aggregate trading volume is larger
when one trader is rational and N − 1 are fully cursed than when all N traders are fully cursed,
under the suﬃcient condition
       (                ) (                                )                  (                     )
  1      τϵ + N τ η + τθ 2     2(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )       τϵ + N τ η + τθ    τϵ + τζ + N τ η + τθ 2
                           +                             −1                  +                         < 0.
N −1      τϵ + τη + τθ       (N − 1)(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )      τϵ + τη + τθ       τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ
                                                                                                 (38)

When the shock ζ has zero variance, (38) is satisﬁed if N exceeds a threshold N̄ .

   When (38) is satisﬁed, volume is hump-shaped in the number of rational traders: it increases
when that number increases from zero to one, and it decreases to zero when rational traders make

                                                25
up all of the market. The increasing region can exist if the number N of traders is large: enough
cursed traders are needed so that return predictability is important and induces rational traders to
engage in a sizeable amount of momentum trading. Moreover, volume can increase in the number
of rational traders even when that number is well above one. Indeed, our numerical calculations
indicate that the hump of trading volume can occur at a point where rational traders make up
about half of the market.
    Taken together, Propositions 8 and 11 imply that a market with some rational and some fully
cursed traders is not equivalent in terms of volume to a market with partially cursed traders. Indeed,
volume in the latter market is smaller than volume with all traders fully cursed (Proposition 8),
which in turn can be smaller than volume in the former market (Proposition 11).


5    Endowment Shocks

In this section we introduce endowment shocks. With endowment shocks, the volume generated by
rational traders becomes non-zero and returns become predictable. We derive these properties and
compare with the case where traders are fully cursed. For analytical simplicity, we assume that
traders have the same risk aversion coeﬃcient α, private-signal precision τη , and endowment-shock
precision τz . Thus, the price (14) takes the form

                 ∑
                 N                    ∑
                                      N
      p=d+A             si + Bs − C         zi .                                                 (39)
                 i=1                  i=1

Proposition 12 determines the coeﬃcients (A, B, C) when all traders are rational and when they
are all fully cursed.

Proposition 12 Suppose that there are endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α, private-signal precision τη , and endowment-shock precision τz . When all




                                                   26
traders are rational, the price (39) is an equilibrium price if and only if
                              (N −1)τη τz
                      τη +             2
                              τz + C 2 τη
      A=       (                   A
                                                         ),                                     (40)
                                           (N −1)τη τz
           N       τϵ + τη + τθ +                   2
                                           τz + C 2 τη
                                                A
                         τθ
      B=                        (N −1)τη τz
                                                 ,                                              (41)
           τϵ + τη + τθ +               2
                                 τz + C 2 τη
                                      A

      C
and   A> 0 is the unique solution to the cubic equation
      (           )(                                 )
            C2        C
        τz + 2 τη       τζ τη − α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) − α(N − 1)τη τz = 0.                      (42)
            A         A
When all traders are fully cursed, (A, B, C) are derived from (40)-(42) by setting τz = 0.

   When all traders are fully cursed, the coeﬃcients A on the private signals and B on the public
signal do not depend on the precision τz of the endowment shocks. Indeed, because fully cursed
traders do not learn from the price, τz does not aﬀect the way that the signals and the price enter
into their demand function. The coeﬃcients (A, B) for rational traders coincide with those for
fully cursed traders when the endowment shocks have inﬁnite variance (τz = 0). This is because
for τz = 0 the price becomes uninformative, and hence rational traders have the same demand
function as fully cursed traders. When instead the endowment shocks have zero variance (τz = ∞),
the coeﬃcients (A, B) for rational traders coincide with their counterparts in Proposition 2.
   Endowment shocks do not change the result of Section 4 that the return between Periods 1 and
2 cannot be predicted using the public signal alone. That return, however, becomes predictable
using the return between Periods 0 and 1 even when traders are rational. Returns with rational
traders and endowment shocks exhibit reversals: a high return between Periods 0 and 1 predicts
a price decline in Period 2. If the variance of endowment shocks is large enough, returns with
fully cursed traders exhibit reversals as well, otherwise they exhibit momentum as in Section 4.
Endowment shocks tend to generate reversals because they cause prices to deviate temporarily from
traders’ expectations of the asset payoﬀ.

Proposition 13 Suppose that there are endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α, private-signal precision τη , and endowment-shock precision τz . When all

                                                              27
traders are rational, the univariate regression (22) yields coeﬃcient γ < 0. When all traders are
fully cursed, (22) yields coeﬃcient γ < 0 if and only if
      α2 (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2
                               > 1.                                                             (43)
          (N − 1)τζ2 τη τz

The univariate regression (21) yields coeﬃcient γ = 0 under both rationality and full cursedness.

    Endowment shocks generate trading volume even when traders are rational. Rational volume,
however, has diﬀerent qualitative properties than cursed volume. Volume with fully cursed traders
and no endowment shocks is hump-shaped in the precision of private signals, as shown in Section 4,
and this property extends to endowment shocks. Volume with rational traders, however, is inverse
hump-shaped in private-signal precision. The intuition in the rational case is as follows. Starting
from the case where precision is zero, an increase in precision reduces volume because it introduces
adverse selection (Akerlof (1970), Hirshleifer (1971)). Adverse selection disappears again when
precision is inﬁnite because traders’ signals are identical.

Proposition 14 Suppose that there are endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α, private-signal precision τη , and endowment-shock precision τz . The expected
volume that each trader generates increases in the number of traders N both when all traders are
rational and when they are fully cursed. Volume is inverse hump-shaped in the common precision
τη of private signals when all traders are rational, and is hump-shaped when they are fully cursed.

    When the shock ζ about which traders cannot learn has zero variance, the hump in volume
with rational traders occurs for τη = ∞, and so volume is always decreasing in τη . Intuitively, when
precision is inﬁnite, traders know the asset payoﬀ perfectly: while there is no adverse selection,
there are also no gains from risk-sharing. Notice that when ζ has zero variance, the corresponding
hump with fully cursed traders also occurs for τη = ∞, and so volume is always increasing in τη .


6    Overconfidence and Contemptuousness

In this section we examine the relationship between cursedness, overconﬁdence and contemptuous-
ness. We introduce overconﬁdence and contemptuousness into our model following Odean (1998),

                                                  28
like him specializing our model to no endowment shocks and to traders who are symmetric in terms
of their risk-aversion coeﬃcient α and private signal precision τη . Ruling out endowment shocks
allows us to focus on trading volume that is purely driven by traders’ cognitive errors.
   Following Odean, we capture overconﬁdence by assuming that each trader incorrectly perceives
the precision of his own signal to be κ × τη , for κ ≥ 1 (and κ = 1 embedding REE in our analysis
below), but correctly perceives the precision of all other traders’ signals to be τη . Moreover, this
belief system is common knowledge: it is common knowledge that each trader thinks he is better
informed than all other traders think he is. We also follow Odean by allowing traders to err in a
second, conceptually distinct way, namely by underestimating the information content in others’
private signals, which we term contemptuousness. Each trader incorrectly perceives the precision
of all other traders’ signals to be γ × τη , for γ ∈ [0, 1] (and γ = 1, together with κ = 1, embedding
REE in our analysis below). This too is common knowledge.
   Under the parameter values κ = 1 and γ = 0, i.e., no overconﬁdence and extreme contemptu-
ousness, behavior is the same as under full cursedness (χ = 1). This is because a trader who fails
to infer another’s signal from the price behaves identically to one who fully infers that signal but
erroneously assumes that it has zero precision. In the rest of this section we identify contemptu-
ousness with γ > 0, i.e., traders do not view others’ signals as completely worthless. We contrast
such non-extreme contemptuousness (γ ∈ (0, 1)) with full or partial cursedness (χ ∈ (0, 1]).
   Because of symmetry, the price takes the form

                ∑
                N
     p=d+A            si + Bs.                                                                   (44)
                i=1

Proposition 15 shows that the coeﬃcients (A, B) are uniquely determined, and examines how they
depend on the overconﬁdence parameter κ and the contemptuousness parameter γ.

Proposition 15 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α and private-signal precision τη . Suppose also that each trader misperceives
the precision of his private signal to be κ × τη for κ ≥ 1, and the precision of every other trader’s




                                                 29
signal to be γ × τη for γ ∈ (0, 1]. The price (44) is an equilibrium price if and only if

               [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη
      A=                                ,                                                        (45)
        N {τϵ + [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη + τθ }
                    τθ
     B=                            .                                                             (46)
        τϵ + [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη + τθ

The coeﬃcient A increases in κ and γ. The coeﬃcient B decreases in κ and γ.

   Fixing the contemptuousness parameter γ, more overconﬁdence (larger κ) causes traders to
attach larger weight to their own private signals and smaller weight to the public signal when
forming conditional expectations. This causes A to increase and B to decrease. Fixing instead the
overconﬁdence parameter κ, more contemptuousness (smaller γ) causes traders to attach smaller
weight to other traders’ private signals (as revealed by price) and larger weight to the public signal
when forming conditional expectations. This causes A to decrease and B to increase. Contemptu-
ousness thus moves A and B from their REE values in the same direction as cursedness does, while
overconﬁdence moves them in the opposite direction.
   Overconﬁdence and contemptuousness yield dramatically diﬀerent predictions than cursedness
about trading volume. Recall from Propositions 6 and 8 that under full or partial cursedness,
per-trader volume grows as the market becomes large and hence aggregate volume converges to
inﬁnity. Under overconﬁdence or contemptuousness instead, per-trader volume converges to zero,
and aggregate volume converges to a ﬁnite limit. Thus, overconﬁdence or contemptuousness on
their own are not suﬃcient to generate volume in large markets, while cursedness is.

Proposition 16 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α and private-signal precision τη . Suppose also that each trader misperceives
the precision of his private signal to be κ × τη for κ ≥ 1, and the precision of every other trader’s
signal to be γ × τη for γ ∈ (0, 1]. The expected volume that each trader generates is
                         √
                (κ − γ)τζ 2(N − 1)τη
                                          √     .                                                (47)
      α [τϵ + τζ + [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη + τθ ] πN

Volume declines to zero as the number N of traders grows large. Aggregate volume, summed across
traders, converges to a ﬁnite limit.

                                                  30
   The intuition why per-trader volume converges to zero goes as follows. Overconﬁdent or con-
temptuous traders trade for two reasons: ﬁrst, each thinks that the price overweights all other
traders’ signals; second, each thinks that the price underweights his own signal. Since each trader
inverts the price to perfectly infer the average signal of all other traders, the price would not change
if all private signals were made public. If all signals were public, then each trader’s expectation
of the asset payoﬀ d would be a weighted average of his own signal, the average signal of other
traders, and the public signal s. For any κ ≥ 1 and γ ∈ (0, 1], as N grows large, each trader puts
arbitrarily more weight on the average signal of other traders than on his own signal. Hence, the
diﬀerence between any two traders’ expectations of d converges to zero, and so does per-trader
volume.10 Only when γ = 0, which is observationally equivalent to full cursedness in our model,
does per-trader volume not vanish in large markets.
   Overconﬁdent per-trader volume disappears in our model because each trader, no matter how
overconﬁdent, believes that the information conveyed by price about all other traders’ signals
trumps his own private signal in a suﬃciently large market. This would not happen if traders
believed that their private information conveyed something non-negligible beyond the information
conveyed by a large-market price. Odean (1998) implicitly makes this assumption by assuming that
                                                                                N
the N traders in the market observe M < N signals in such a way that            M   > 1 observe each signal.
He computes volume when γ = 1 and N → ∞, but holding M ﬁxed. Whatever the value of M ,
each signal conveys non-negligible information beyond that conveyed by the set of other signals.
   We conclude with the observation that overconﬁdence does have substantial eﬀects when traders
are cursed. Proposition 17 expresses volume when traders are overconﬁdent and cursed. As when
traders are cursed but not overconﬁdent, per-trader volume grows as the market becomes large, and
hence aggregate volume goes to inﬁnity. Overconﬁdence produces an additional eﬀect that increases
volume even in the large-market limit. Yet it generates non-negligible per-trader volume only when
traders are cursed, in which case it ampliﬁes the eﬀect of cursedness. In this sense, overconﬁdence

  10
       The fact that equilibrium prices do not depend upon whether signals are public or private suggests that
per-trader volume would be negligible in large markets even in complete-information models of overconﬁdence
(e.g., Sheinkman and Xiong (2003)) if traders are risk averse.



                                                       31
and cursedness work as complements. Intuitively, when traders fail to infer information from
prices, overconﬁdence magniﬁes diﬀerences in their beliefs, producing even more trade. Although
Proposition 17 assumes full cursedness, the same results hold under partial cursedness.

Proposition 17 Suppose that there are no endowment shocks and all traders have the same risk-
aversion coeﬃcient α and private-signal precision τη . Suppose also that all traders are fully cursed,
and that each misperceives the precision of his private signal to be κ × τη for κ ≥ 1. The expected
volume that each trader generates is
              √
          κτζ 2(N − 1)τη
                           √    .                                                                (48)
     α(τϵ + τζ + κτη + τθ ) πN
Volume increases in the number of traders N and in the overconﬁdence parameter κ.


7    Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we propose a market-equilibrium deﬁnition, cursed expectations equilibrium (CEE),
for traders who fail to fully infer information from prices. We compare CEE to REE and ﬁnd
that although each cursed trader puts more weight on his private signal than a rational trader,
because traders neglect that the price encodes other traders’ information, CEE prices depend less
on private signals and more on public signals than REE prices. Markets comprised entirely of
cursed traders generate more trade than those comprised entirely of rationals; mixed markets can
generate more trade still, as rationals employ momentum-trading strategies to take advantage of
cursed traders. We contrast cursed trade to overconﬁdence- or contemptuousness-based trade,
showing that cursed volume per trader grows with the size of the market, whereas per-trader
volume under overconﬁdence or contemptuousness declines to zero. Cursedness, however, can
enhance overconﬁdence- or contemptuousness-based trade.
    How can we extend cursed-expectations equilibrium to dynamic settings? In a cursed equilib-
rium, agents understand the relationship between their opponents’ actions across periods. Con-
sequently, if the private signal that agent i receives in period t feeds into both pt and pt+1 , then
cursed agents will forecast pt+1 more accurately from pt than beﬁts the motivation behind cursed-
ness. Indeed, a shortcoming of cursed equilibrium emphasized by Eyster and Rabin (2005) in

                                                 32
their conclusion is that it captures failures of contingent thinking about the relationship between
private information and action, but not those about the relationship between action and action.
Extending the logic of CEE to multiple periods probably requires relaxing the assumption that
agents correctly perceive the correlation among actions. One approach might resemble that of
Eyster and Piccione (2013), who model a dynamic market where agents trade based on potentially
incomplete models of the relationship between next period’s price and current, publicly available
economic variables. Each trader uses a theory comprised of some subset of these variables and
forecasts next period’s expected price correctly conditional upon all included variables. One major
conceptual diﬀerence of their approach from CEE is that it oﬀers no guidance as to which theories
traders are likely to employ.11 Nevertheless, it might be marriageable to CEE by having a cursed
trader i forecast the next-period price pt+1 conditional upon the current price pt , his current (ac-
cumulated) private signal, si,t , and the current (accumulated) public signal st , excluding all lagged
prices, as E[pt+1 |{si,t , st }]. With only two periods, and p2 = d, this formulation delivers CEE in
our model. With more periods, it preserves the feature of our model that in every period traders
fully appreciate the relationship that next period’s price has to their signals.
   A dynamic model may also highlight the role of a second shortcoming in inference from market
prices that might aﬀect traders. Eyster and Rabin (2010) develop the concept of “best response
trailing naive inference”: to the extent that agents do infer some private information from earlier
actions (or prices), they may neglect how these earlier actions embed informational inferences.
Models uniting a tendency to underappreciate the information about others’ beliefs contained in
market prices, with a tendency to underappreciate how those beliefs reﬂect redundant information,
may provide ways of understanding the co-existence of under-inference as emphasized in this paper
with unwarranted swings in group beliefs that also appear to be a hallmark of ﬁnancial beliefs.
In a narrower sense, combining the two errors may help better understand price dynamics. In a

  11
       Rabin (2013) advocates the methodological advantages of “portable extensions of existing models” such
as cursed equilibrium. Just as CEE identiﬁes directional departures from REE in the static model of this
paper, a dynamic extension is likely to make directional predictions that are merely accommodated by the
framework of Eyster and Piccione (2013).



                                                      33
dynamic market, agents in period t + 2 may fail to appreciate how those in period t + 1 infer private
information from prices in period t. Suppose that the price is high in both periods t and t + 1. If
some agents in period t+2 neglect that some of the positive information contained in the period t+1
price is in fact information agents gleaned from the high period t price, then they will overestimate
the positive information in the high prices, and push the price up further. This additional type of
error in inference may then produce medium-run over-reaction to private information.
   In Section 6, we showed the necessity in some settings of cursedness to “enable” overconﬁdence
to explain appreciable per-trader volume of trade. We conclude by speculating how cursedness
may similarly enable the study of various other biases in asset markets. Researchers have recently
proposed that a number of statistical errors may be relevant for ﬁnancial decisions, including over-
inference from small samples (see Rabin (2002) and Rabin and Vayanos (2010)) and non-belief in the
law of large numbers (see Benjamin, Rabin, and Raymond (2013)). Predicting the consequences of
these and other biases for markets where traders extract information from prices requires additional
assumptions about traders’ theories of one another’s errors. Yet relatively little is known about
how people reason about others’ errors. In its extreme, cursedness provides a simple assumption
about what people think of others’ errors: they don’t think about them at all. If models of errors
are instead closed by assuming that people do agree to disagree about the meaning of private
signals, then, much like with overconﬁdence in Section 6, we suspect that the per-trader volume of
trade will be small in information-rich settings where each trader values the sum total of others’
private information far more heavily than his own private signal. Finally, whereas we have assumed
throughout the paper that private signals convey true information about the value of the risky asset,
it might instead be the case that traders share a common misperception of the meaningfulness of
signals. Indeed, much of “private information”, especially that held by unsophisticated investors,
may in fact be irrelevant. Otherwise rational traders who agree to agree on the information content
of such private signals would, of course, not generate high volume of trade. Asymmetries in beliefs
created by these false private signals would, however, produce cursed trade.




                                                 34
References

 [1] Akerlof, G. 1970,“The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism”,
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3): 488-500.

 [2] Banerjee, S. 2011, “Learning from Prices and the Dispersion in Beliefs”, Review of Financial
    Studies 24(9): 3025-3068.

 [3] Banerjee, S., Kaniel, R. and I. Kremer 2009. “Price Drift as an Outcome of Diﬀerences in
    Higher Order Beliefs”, Review of Financial Studies 22(9): 3707-3734.

 [4] Banerjee, S. and I. Kremer 2010, “Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns of Trade”,
    Journal of Finance 65(4): 1269-1302.

 [5] Benjamin, D., Rabin, M. and C. Raymond 2013, “A Model of Non-Belief in the Law of Large
    Numbers”, Mimeo.

 [6] Bernard, V. and J. Thomas 1989, “Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed Price Re-
    sponse or Risk Premium?”, Journal of Accounting Research 27(Suppl):1-36.

 [7] Carrillo, J. and T. Palfrey 2011, “No Trade”, Games and Economic Behavior 71(1): 66-87.

 [8] Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D. and A. Subrahmanyam 1998, “Investor Psychology and Security
    Market under- and Overreactions”, Journal of Finance 53(6): 1839-1885.

 [9] Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D. and A. Subrahmanyam 2001, “Overconﬁdence, Arbitrage, and Equi-
    librium Asset Pricing”, Journal of Finance 56(3): 921-965.

[10] DeLong, J., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. and R. Waldmann 1990, “Noise Trader Risk in Financial
    Markets”, Journal of Political Economy 98: 703-738.

[11] Diamond D. and R. Verrecchia 1981, “Information Aggregation in a Noisy Rational Expecta-
    tions Equilibrium”, Journal of Financial Economics 9: 221-235.

[12] Esponda, I. and E. Vespa 2013, “Hypothetical Thinking and Information Extraction: Strategic
    Voting in the Laboratory”, Mimeo, NYU Stern.

                                               35
[13] Eyster, E. and M. Piccione 2013, “An Approach to Asset-Pricing Under Incomplete and Diverse
    Perceptions”, Econometrica 81(4): 1483-1506.

[14] Eyster, E. and M. Rabin 2005, “Cursed Equilibrium”, Econometrica 73(5): 1623-1672.

[15] Eyster, E. and M. Rabin 2010, “Naı̈ve Herding in Rich-Information Settings”, American Eco-
    nomic Journal: Microeconomics 2: 221-43.

[16] French, K. 2008, “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing”, Journal of Finance
    63(4): 1537-1573.

[17] Griﬃn, D. and A. Tversky 1992, “The Weighing of Evidence and the Determinants of Conﬁ-
    dence”, Cognitive Psychology 24(3): 411-435. r

[18] Grossman, S. 1976, “On the Eﬃciency of Competitive Stock Markets when Traders Have
    Diverse Information”, Journal of Finance 31: 573-585.

[19] Harris, M. and A. Raviv 1993, “Diﬀerence of Opinion Make a Horse Race”, Review of Financial
    Studies 6: 473-506.

[20] Harrison, J. M. and D. Kreps 1978, “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock Market with
    Heterogenous Expectations”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(2): 323-336.

[21] Hellwig, M. 1980, “On the Aggregation of Information in Competitive Markets”, Journal of
    Economic Theory 22: 477-498.

[22] Hirshleifer, J. 1971, “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
    Activity”, American Economic Review 61(4): 561-574.

[23] Holt, C. and R. Sherman 1994, “The Loser’s Curse”, American Economic Review 84(3): 642-
    652.

[24] Hong, H. J. Scheinkman and W. Xiong 2006. “Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles”, Journal
    of Finance, American Finance Association 61: 1073-1117.



                                                36
[25] Hong, H. and J. Stein 1999, “A Uniﬁed Theory of Underreaction, Momentum Trading and
    Overreaction in Asset Markets”, Journal of Finance 54(6): 2143-2184.

[26] Hong, H. and J. Stein 2007, “Disagreement and the Stock Market”, Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 21(2): 109-128.

[27] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman 1993, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implica-
    tions for Stock Market Eﬃciency”, Journal of Finance 48: 65-91.

[28] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman 2011, “Momentum”, Annual Review of Financial Economics 3:
    493-509.

[29] Kagel, J. and D. Levin 2002, Common Value Auctions and the Winner’s Curse, Princeton
    University Press.

[30] Kandel, E. and N. Pearson 1995, “Diﬀerential Interpretation of Public Signals and Trade in
    Speculative Markets”, Journal of Political Economy 103: 83172.

[31] Malmendier, U. and G. Tate 2008, “Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconﬁdence and the
    Market’s Reaction”, Journal of Financial Economics 89(1): 20-43.

[32] Milgrom, P. and N. Stokey 1982, “Information, Trade and Common Knowledge”, Journal of
    Economic Theory 26(1): 17-27.

[33] Morris, S. 1996, “Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 111: 1111-1133.

[34] Odean, T. 1998, “Volume, Volatility, and Price when all Traders Are Above Average”, Journal
    of Finance 53(6): 1887-1934.

[35] Rabin, M. 2002,“Inference by Believers in the Law of Small Numbers”, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 117(3): 775-816.

[36] Rabin, M. 2013, “An Approach to Incorporating Psychology into Economics”, American Eco-
    nomic Review (Papers & Proceedings) 103(3): 617-22.

                                              37
[37] Rabin, M. and D. Vayanos 2010, “The Gambler’s and Hot-Hand Fallacies: Theory and Appli-
    cations”, Review of Economic Studies 77: 730-778.

[38] Samuelson, W. and Bazerman, M. 1985, “The Winner’s Curse in Bilateral Negotiations.” In
    Research in Experimental Economics, vol. 3, Vernon L. Smith, ed., Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

[39] Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong 2003, “Overconﬁdence and Speculative Bubbles”, Journal of
    Political Economy 111(6): 1183-1219.

[40] Varian, H. 1989, “Divergence of Opinion in Complete Markets: A Note”, Journal of Finance
    40: 309-317.

[41] Weizsäcker, G. 2010, “Do We Follow Others when We Should? A Simple Test of Rational
    Expectations”, American Economic Review 100: 2340-2360.




                                              38
                                                        APPENDIX


A      Cursed Equilibrium

Cursed equilibrium is deﬁned in ﬁnite Bayesian games of the form

       ({Ai }i=1,...,N , {Ti }i=0,...,N , p, {ui }i=1,...,N ) .

For each player i = 1, . . . , N , Ai is a ﬁnite set of available actions and Ti is a ﬁnite set of types,
including one, T0 , for nature. We denote the set of action proﬁles by A ≡                   ×        Ai and the set
                                                                                          i=1,...,N
of type proﬁles by T ≡                ×      Ti . We assume that all players share the common prior probability
                                 i=0,...,N
distribution p over T . Player i’s utility function is ui : A × T → R.
    A strategy for player i, σi : Ti → △Ai , speciﬁes a probability distribution over actions for each
type. We denote by σi (ai |ti ) the probability that type ti plays action ai when he follows strategy
σi . We denote the set of action proﬁles for players other than i by A−i ≡ × Aj , and the set of
                                                                                         j̸=0,i
type proﬁles for nature and players other than i by T−i ≡ × Tj . We denote by a−i and t−i generic
                                                                         j̸=i
elements of these sets. We denote by σ−i (a−i |t−i ) the probability that types t−i play action proﬁle
a−i when they follow strategy σ−i ≡ {σj }j̸=0,i . Finally, we denote by p(t−i |ti ) the distribution of
player i’s beliefs about other players’ types conditional on his own type ti . The standard solution
concept for these games is Bayesian Nash equilibrium.

Definition 2 A strategy proﬁle σ is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium if for each player i, each type
ti ∈ Ti , and each a∗i such that σi (a∗i |ti ) > 0:
                                                                                  
                      ∑                ∑
      a∗i ∈ arg max      p(t−i |ti )      σ−i (a−i |t−i )ui (ai , a−i ; ti , t−i ) .                        (A.1)
                  ai ∈Ai
                           t−i                  a−i


    To deﬁne cursed equilibrium, we compute for each type of each player the average strategy of
other players, averaged over the other players’ types. For type ti of player i we deﬁne
                             ∑
       σ −i (a−i |ti ) ≡              pi (t−i |ti ) · σ−i (a−i |t−i ).
                           t−i ∈T−i




                                                                   39
This is the marginal probability that other players play action proﬁle a−i , and is derived by aver-
aging over type proﬁles t−i the probabilities σ−i (a−i |t−i ) that other players play a−i conditional on
t−i . We associate to each player i a cursedness parameter χi ∈ [0, 1].

Definition 3 A strategy proﬁle σ is a cursed equilibrium if for each player i, each type ti ∈ Ti ,
and each a∗i such that σi (a∗i |ti ) > 0:
                                     
                    ∑                  ∑
     a∗i ∈ arg max      p(t−i |ti )  (1 − χi )σ−i (a−i |t−i )ui (ai , a−i ; ti , t−i )
                ai ∈Ai
                         t−i            a−i
                                                                                     

                                          + χi σ −i (a−i |ti )ui (ai , a−i ; ti , t−i ) .           (A.2)


    Player i best-responds to beliefs that with probability 1 − χi the other players’ actions depend
on their types (the probability of action proﬁle a−i in (A.2) is conditional on type proﬁle t−i ) and
with probability χi actions do not depend on types (the probability of a−i in (A.2) is the marginal).
When χi = 0, player i is rational, and his objective is as in Bayesian Nash equilibrium (Eq. (A.1)).
When χi = 1, player i is fully cursed, and neglects entirely the relationship between the other
players’ actions and their types. Note that while cursed players fail to map actions to types, they
assess correctly the probability distribution of other players’ actions.
    Applying the deﬁnition (A.2) to the trading game considered in Section 2, we ﬁnd that the
buyer’s objective is F (p) × ((1 − χ)E[s|s ≤ p] + χE[s] − p): the buyer believes that with probability
1 − χ the seller’s decision to sell conveys information about the asset, and with probability χ it
does not.


B     Proofs

We ﬁrst prove the following lemma, which we use for proving Proposition 1.

Lemma A.1 Suppose that the variables (x, {yi }i=1,..,K ) are normal, independent, with mean zero
and precisions (τx , {τyi }i=1,..,K ). Then, the distribution of x conditional on {x+yi }i=1,..,K is normal



                                                           40
with mean
                                              ∑
                                              K
                                                           τy i
        E (x |{x + yi }i=1,..,K ) =                        ∑K            (x + yi )             (A.1)
                                              i=1   τx +       j=1 τyj

and precision

                                                     ∑
                                                     K
        τ (x |{x + yi }i=1,..,K ) = τx +                   τyi .                               (A.2)
                                                     i=1

Proof. The conditional mean and variance can be computed from the regression

              ∑
              K
        x=           βi (x + yi ) + e,
               i=1

where {βi }i=1,..,K are the regression coeﬃcients and e is the error term. Taking covariances of both
sides with x + yi and noting that (x, {yi }i=1,..,K , e) are independent, we ﬁnd

                                ∑
                                K
        Cov(x, x + yi ) =               βj Cov(x + yj , x + yi )
                                j=1
                         (
                         ) ∑
              1   1    1              1
        ⇒        = βi
                    +       +      βj
              τx  τx τyi              τx
                              j̸=i
                           
              τy      ∑
                      K
        ⇒ βi = i 1 −    βj  .                                                                (A.3)
              τx
                                 j=1

                                                              ∑K
Summing (A.3) across i and solving for                             j=1 βj ,   we ﬁnd
                         ∑K
        ∑
        K
                          j=1 τyj
              βj =        ∑               .                                                    (A.4)
        j=1           τx + Kj=1 τyj

                 ∑K
Substituting           j=1 βj   from (A.4) into (A.3), we ﬁnd

                       τyi
        βi =           ∑K           .                                                          (A.5)
               τx +       j=1 τyj

Since
                                              ∑
                                              K
        E (x |{x + yi }i=1,..,K ) =                 βi (x + yi ),
                                              i=1



                                                                         41
(A.5) implies (A.1). Taking variances of both sides and noting that (x, {yi }i=1,..,K , e) are indepen-
dent, we ﬁnd
                  (K           )2
                   ∑                           ∑
                                               K
      Var(x) =            βi        Var(x) +         βj2 Var(yi ) + Var(e)
                    i=1                        i=1
                              (                   )2          (                )2
                                     ∑K                  ∑K
          1    1                      i=1 τyi        −     1        τ y
      ⇒      =    1−                   ∑                              ∑
                                                                          i

          τe   τx                  τx + K i=1 iτ y          τ
                                                         i=1 yi   τx + K j=1 τyj
          1         1
      ⇒      =     ∑K       ,                                                                        (A.6)
          τe   τx + i=1 τyi
where the second step follows from (A.4) and (A.5). Since

      τ (x |{x + yi }i=1,..,K ) = τe ,

(A.6) implies (A.2).

Proof of Proposition 1. We ﬁrst determine traders’ demand functions using (8). Since d =
d + ϵ + ζ and ζ is independent of traders’ information Ii ,

      E(d|Ii ) = d + E(ϵ|Ii ),                                                                       (A.7)
                                                        1      1
      Var(d|Ii ) = Var(ϵ|Ii ) + Var(ζ) =                      + .                                    (A.8)
                                                     τ (ϵ|Ii ) τζ
Using Lemma A.1 with x = ϵ, K = 3 and {yj }j=1,2,3 = (ηi , η, ξi ), we ﬁnd
                               τ ηi                     τθ                    τξi
      E(d|Iir ) = d +                     si +                     s+                     (ϵ + ξi ), (A.9)
                      τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi      τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi    τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi
                             1              1
      Var(d|Iir ) =                     + .                                                          (A.10)
                    τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi    τζ
Using Lemma A.1 with x = ϵ, K = 2 and {yj }j=1,2 = (ηi , η), we ﬁnd
                             τ ηi                 τθ
      E(d|Iic ) = d +                  si +                  s,                                    (A.11)
                      τ ϵ + τ ηi + τ θ      τ ϵ + τ ηi + τ θ
                           1             1
      Var(d|Iic ) =                 + .                                                            (A.12)
                    τϵ + τηi + τθ       τζ
Substituting (A.9), (A.10), (A.11) and (A.12) into (8), we can write the demand of trader i as
                               τη si +τ s+τ (ϵ+ξi )        τ s +τ s
           d + (1 − χi ) iτϵ +τηθ +τθξ+τ
                                      i
                                              + χi τϵη+τ
                                                       i i   θ
                                                         ηi +τθ
                                                                  −p
      xi =     [                 i       ξi
                                                                   ] − zi .                        (A.13)
            αi (1 − χi ) τϵ +τη +τ
                                 1
                                   θ +τξ
                                           + χi
                                                     1
                                                τϵ +τη +τθ  +    1
                                                                τζ
                                      i        i            i



                                                                42
We next substitute (A.13) into the market-clearing condition (5), use (6) to write p in terms of
({si }i=1,..,N , s, {zi }i=1,..,N ), and use (9) to write ϵ + ξi in terms of ({si }j̸=i , {zi }j̸=i ). This yields an
equation that is linear in ({si }i=1,..,N , s, {zi }i=1,..,N ). Identifying terms in si yields (11). Identifying
terms of s yields (12). Identifying terms in zi yields
                                   (1 − χi )τζ τξi ∑   Ci
                                                            Ak (τϵ   + τ ηi + τ θ )
      1−                                            k̸=i

            αi [(τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ + τξi ) + τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ + χi τξi )]
                ∑N (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ ) − (1 − χj )τξ ∑ 1                        (τϵ + τηj + τθ )
                                                                                        k̸=j Ak
                             j                   j            j                     j
       = Ci τ ζ          [                                                                                       ] .         (A.14)
                j=1
                     α j   (τ ϵ + τ η j + τ θ )(τ ϵ + τη j + τ θ + τ ξ j
                                                                         ) + τ ζ (τ ϵ + τ η j + τ θ + χ j τ ξj
                                                                                                               )

Combining (A.14) with (11) yields (13).

Proof of Proposition 2. Setting χi = 0 for all i, we can simplify (11) to
             τηi − τξi ∑      Ai
                                   Ak
                                                    N τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ − τξ ∑ 1
                                                    ∑                         k̸=j Ak
                                                             j         j    j
                           k̸=i
                                             = Ai                                                     ≡ Ai Z.                (A.15)
       αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ + τξi )                         αj (τϵ + τζ + τηj + τθ + τξj )
                                                    j=1

Since {σzi }i=1,..,N = 0, (10) implies that
             (∑           )2
                      A
                  j̸=i j
      τξi = ∑          A2j
                             .                                                                                               (A.16)
                   j̸=i τηj

Substituting τξi from (A.16) into the left-hand side of (A.15), we can write (A.15) as
                                                                        
                        τ ηi                    ∑ A2j       A    ∑
                                                         −
                                                               i
                                                                      Aj  = Ai Z
                                    ∑     A2j        τ ηj   τ ηi
      αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ + τξi ) j̸=i τη    j̸=i             j̸=i
                                                       j
                                                                                      ∑    A2j
         ∑
         N
           A2j    Ai ∑
                       N      αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ + τξi )Ai                        j̸=i τηj
       ⇒        −        Aj =                                                                    Z.                          (A.17)
           τ ηj   τ ηi                           τ ηi
            j=1               j=1

Multiplying (A.17) by Ai and summing over i, we ﬁnd
                                                           ∑                                                         
                                                          2                                                     A2j
         ∑ ∑ A2 ∑ ∑ A2 ∑  αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ + τξi )Ai j̸=i
          N     N          N    N        N
                                                                                                                τηj   
     0=      Ai        i
                         −   Ai      i
                                       =                                                                              Z,
                    τ ηi          τ ηi              τ ηi
            i=1     i=1              i=1    i=1             i=1


which implies that Z = 0. Eq. (A.17) then implies that
      ∑
      N
        A2j    Ai ∑
                    N
             −        Aj = 0,
        τ ηj   τ ηi
      j=1               j=1


                                                                     43
which in turn implies that

      Ai = λτηi ,                                                                                     (A.18)

for a constant λ that does not depend on i. Substituting Ai from (A.18) into (A.16), we ﬁnd
              ∑
      τξi =          τ ηj .                                                                           (A.19)
              j̸=i

Substituting (Ai , τξi ) from (A.18) and (A.19) into the deﬁnition of Z in (15), and recalling that
Z = 0, we ﬁnd
     (N      )                       ∑N                      (N     )
       ∑ 1                    τϵ +                            ∑ 1
                         i=1 τηi + τθ   1                                    1
                         ∑  N
                                      −                                     ∑N            =0
            α τϵ + τζ + i=1 τηi + τθ    λ                        α τϵ + τζ + i=1 τηi + τθ
         i=1 i                                                i=1 i
                     1
        ⇒λ=       ∑N            .                                                                     (A.20)
              τϵ + i=1 τηi + τθ

Eqs. (A.18) and (A.20) imply (15). Eq. (16) follows similarly by substituting τξi from (A.19) into
(12). Substituting (ϵ + ξi , p, {Aj }j=1,..,N , B, τξi ) from (9), (14), (15), (16) and (A.19) into (A.13) for
χi = 0, we ﬁnd that the numerator in (A.13) is zero. Since, in addition zi = 0, trader i’s demand
is zero for the equilibrium price. Therefore, there is no trade.

Proof of Proposition 3. Setting χi = 1 for all i, we can simplify (11) to

                   τ ηi               ∑
                                      N
                                             τ ϵ + τ ηj + τ θ
                                 = Ai                            .                                    (A.21)
        αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )        αj (τϵ + τζ + τηj + τθ )
                                               j=1

Solving for Ai using (A.21) yields (17). Eq. (18) follows similarly from (12).

Proof of Proposition 4. Eqs. (16) and (18) imply that (i) holds if
                                     ∑N        τϵ +τηi +τθ
             ∑
             N
                                      i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )       ∑
                                                                      N
      τϵ +         τ ηi + τ η >      ∑N             1
                                                                  =         wi (τϵ + τηi + τθ ),      (A.22)
             i=1                      i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )       i=1

where
                          1
                αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )
      wi ≡    ∑N              1
                                              .
               i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )




                                                                  44
Since the weights {wi }i=1,..,N are positive and sum to one, the right-hand side of (A.22) is smaller
than
                                             ∑
                                             N
       τϵ + max τηi + τθ < τϵ +                      τ ηi + τ θ ,
               i=1,..,N
                                             i=1

and so (A.22) holds.
   Eqs. (15) and (17) imply that the ﬁrst statement in (ii) holds if
               ∑N                      ∑N        τϵ +τηi +τθ
        τθ +                                                             ∑
                                                                         N
                  i=1 τηi + τθ          i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )                   τ ϵ + τ ηi + τ θ
               ∑N                  <   ∑N            τηi             =         wi                    ,   (A.23)
                  i=1 τηi               i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )
                                                                                          τ ηi
                                                                         i=1

where
                           τηi
                  αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )
       wi ≡     ∑N             τηi           .
                 i=1 αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )

Since the weights {wi }i=1,..,N are positive and sum to one, the right-hand side of (A.22) is larger
than
                                    ∑
                τϵ + τηi + τθ   τθ + N    τηi + τθ
         min                  >     ∑i=1
                                      N
                                                   ,
       i=1,..,N      τ ηi             i=1 τηi

and so (A.23) holds. When traders are symmetric, the ﬁrst statement in (ii) implies that Ai is
smaller in the fully cursed than in the rational case for all i. To show the second statement in (ii),
it suﬃces to show an example where Ai is larger in the fully cursed than in the rational case for
some i. Suppose that trader i is much less risk averse than the other traders. Eq. (17) then implies
that

                      τ ηi
       Ai ≈
                τ ϵ + τ ηi + τ θ

in the fully cursed case. This is larger than Ai in the rational case, given by (15).
   Eqs. (15), (16), (17) and (18) imply that (iii) holds if
                            1
        τ ηi   αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )             τ ηi
             ∑                               <        ,
        τθ N  i=1
                             1                   τθ
                     αi (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ )

which obviously holds.

                                                                    45
Proof of Proposition 5. The results for the rational case follow because Proposition 2 implies
that

        p = E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) ,                                                         (A.24)

which in turn implies that

        E(d − p|I) = E [d − E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) |I ] = E(d|I) − E(d|I) = 0,

for any information set I consisting of information revealed in Period 1. Since the expectation of
d − p conditional on I is zero, the coeﬃcients (γ1 , γ2 , γ) in the regressions (20), (21) and (22) are
zero.
   We next turn to the fully cursed case. To show the result for regression (21), we follow the
argument sketched after the proposition. Taking expectations of both sides of (19) for χi = 1 for
all i, and noting that Var(d|Iic ) is a constant, we ﬁnd
                    ∑N   E[E(d|Iic )|s]         ∑N      E(d|s)
                     i=1 αi Var(d|Iic )          i=1 αi Var(d|Iic )
        E(p|s) =    ∑N         1
                                          =     ∑N         1
                                                                      = E(d|s),                 (A.25)
                     i=1 αi Var(d|Iic )          i=1 αi Var(d|Iic )

where the second step follows from the law of iterative expectations because Iic includes s. Eq.
(A.25) implies that

        E(d − p|s) = E(d|s) − E(p|s) = 0.                                                       (A.26)

The coeﬃcient γ in the regression (21) is proportional to

        Cov(d − p, s) = E((d − p)s) − E(d − p)E(s) = E(E(d − p|s)s) − E(E(d − p|s))E(s) = 0,

where the second step follows from the law of iterative expectations and last step follows from
(A.26).
   To show the result for regression (22), we note that γ is proportional to
                         (                 )( N          )
                               ∑N             ∑                  ∑
                                                                 N
     Cov(d − p, p − d) = 1 −       Ai − B         Ai + B σϵ −2
                                                                     A2i ση2i − B 2 σθ2 ,
                                          i=1                 i=1                 i=1




                                                                46
where the equality follows from (1), (2) and (14). Substituting ({Ai }i=1,..,N , B) from Proposition
3, we ﬁnd that Cov(d − p, p − d) has the same sign as

      ∑
      N
                       τϵ            ∑
                                     N
                                               τ ηi + τ θ            ∑
                                                                     N
                                                                             τη2i ση2i + τθ2 σθ2
                                                                σϵ −
                                                                 2

      i=1
            αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )   αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )
                                     i=1
                                                                       αi2 (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )2
                                                                              i=1
          ∑
          N
                            1              ∑
                                           N
                                                         τ ηi + τ θ           ∑N
                                                                                          τ ηi + τ θ
      =                                                                   −                                 ,
          i=1
                αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )
                                           i=1
                                                 αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )        α2 (τ
                                                                              i=1 i ϵ
                                                                                         + τζ + τηi + τθ )2

which is positive.
   To show the result for regression (20), we compute (γ1 , γ2 ). Taking covariances of both sides of
(20) with p − d and with s, yields respectively

      Cov(d − p, p − d) = γ1 Var(p − d) + γ2 Cov(s, p − d),                                                     (A.27)

      Cov(d − p, s) = γ1 Cov(p − d, s) + γ2 Var(s).                                                             (A.28)

Eqs. (A.27) and (A.28) form a linear system in (γ1 , γ2 ). Its solution is

             Cov(d − p, p − d)Var(s) − Cov(d − p, s)Cov(s, p − d)
      γ1 =                                                        ,                                             (A.29)
                     Var(p − d)Var(s) − Cov(s, p − d)2
                Cov(d − p, p − d)Cov(p − d, s) − Cov(d − p, s)Var(p − d)
      γ2 = −                                                             .                                      (A.30)
                           Var(p − d)Var(s) − Cov(s, p − d)2

Since Cov(d − p, s) = 0 and V (s) > 0, (A.29) implies that γ1 > 0. Since Cov(d − p, s) = 0 and
Cov(p − d, s) > 0, (A.30) implies that γ2 > 0.

Proof of Corollary 1. The variance of the return p − d between Periods 0 and 1 is equal to the
variance of p. The comparison between Var(p) in the rational and fully cursed cases will follow
from the identities


Var [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s )] = Var [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) − p]+2Cov [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) − p, p]+Var(p)

                                                                                                                (A.31)




                                                           47
and

      Cov [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) − p, p] = E [(E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) − p) p] − E [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s ) − p] E(p)

                                            = E [(E (d |p ) − p) p] − [E(d) − E(p)] E(p)
                                                [            ]
                                            = E γ(p − d)p

                                            = γVar(p),                                                         (A.32)

where the second step in (A.32) follows from applying the law of iterative expectations, and the
third step follows from (22) and E(d) = E(p) = d. When traders are fully cursed, (A.32) and
Proposition 5 imply that the second term in the right-hand side of (A.31) is positive. Since the
ﬁrst term is also positive, (A.31) implies that

      Var [E (d |{si }i=1,..,N , s )] > Var(p).                                                                (A.33)

When traders are rational, (A.33) holds as an equality because of (A.24). Therefore, Var(p) is
smaller when traders are fully cursed.
   The comparison between Var(p) + Var(d − p) in the rational and fully cursed cases will follow
similarly from the identities

      Var(d) = Var(d − p) + 2Cov(d − p, p) + Var(p)                                                            (A.34)

and
                       [         ]
      Cov(d − p, p) = E γ(p − d)p = γVar(p),                                                                   (A.35)

where the ﬁrst step in (A.35) follows from (22). Eq. (A.35) and Proposition 5 imply that the second
term in the right-hand side of (A.34) is positive when traders are fully cursed and zero when they
are rational. Since the left-hand side of (A.34) is the same when traders are fully cursed and when
they are rational, Var(p) + Var(d − p) is smaller when they are fully cursed.

Proof of Proposition 6. Substituting p from (14) into (A.13) for χi = 1, and using zi = 0, we
can write the quantity that trader i trades in equilibrium as
                                                    
              τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ ) ∑
                                      N
     xi =                               aij sj + bi s ,                                                       (A.36)
           αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )
                                         j=1


                                                         48
where
                     τ ηi
        aii ≡                 − Ai ,                                                            (A.37)
                τϵ + τηi + τθ
      aij ≡ −Aj        for j ̸= i,                                                              (A.38)
                     τθ
        bi ≡                  − B.                                                              (A.39)
                τϵ + τηi + τθ
Using (1) and (2), we can write (A.36) as
                                                                    
              τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ ) ∑                   ∑
                                       N                N
     xi =                                aij + bi  ϵ +   aij ηj + bi θ .                      (A.40)
           αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )
                                             j=1                  j=1

Since xi is normal,
                  √
                    2Var(xi )
      E (|xi |) =
                       π                    v 
                                            u                2                            
                                            u     ∑
                                                  N                  ∑
                                                                     N
                       τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ ) u 2 
                  =                         t       aij + bi  σϵ2 +   a2ij ση2j + b2i σθ2 ,   (A.41)
                    αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ ) π
                                                          j=1           j=1

where the second step follows from (A.40).
   When αi = α and τηi = τη for all i, Proposition 3 implies that
                   τη
      Ai =                           for all i,
           N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                τθ
        B=              .
           τϵ + τη + τθ
Substituting into (A.37)-(A.39), we ﬁnd
                           (N − 1)τη
                  aii =                   ,
                        N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                                 τη
                  aij = −                          for j ̸= i,
                          N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                   bi = 0,
      ∑
      N
            aij + bi = 0.
      j=1

Substituting into (A.41), we ﬁnd (23). The comparative statics follow by diﬀerentiating (23) with
respect to N and τη .

                                                             49
    When αi = α for all i and σζ2 = 0, Proposition 3 implies that

                 τ ηi
      Ai =                           for all i,                                                                           (A.42)
          N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
               τθ
       B=              .                                                                                                  (A.43)
          τϵ + τη + τθ

(These values can be derived as a limit when τζ goes to ∞.) Substituting into (A.37)-(A.39), we
ﬁnd

                       [(N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) + N τη − τηi ] τηi
                  aii =                                      ,                                                            (A.44)
                         N (τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τη + τθ )
                                τ ηj
                 aij = −                      for j ̸= i,                                                                 (A.45)
                         N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                                (τη − τηi )τθ
                  bi =                                 ,                                                                  (A.46)
                       (τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τη + τθ )
      ∑
      N
                                   (τηi − τη )τϵ
            aij + bi =                                    .                                                               (A.47)
                          (τϵ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + τη + τθ )
      j=1

Substituting into (A.41), and using again αi = α for all i and σζ2 = 0, we ﬁnd
              √ [                                                                                                                          ]
                                                                    2
                                        [(N −1)(τϵ +τθ )+N τη −τηi ] τη2i 2   ∑       (τϵ +τηi +τθ )2 τη2j
               2 (τηi − τη )2 τϵ2 σϵ2 +               N2
                                                                         σηi + j̸=i           N2
                                                                                                             ση2j + (τη − τηi )2 τθ2 σθ2
E (|xi |) =                                                                   √                                                                .
                                                              α(τϵ + τη + τθ ) π
                                                                                                                          (A.48)

Since the variance is the inverse of the precision, we can write (A.48) as
                √ [                                                                                               ]
                                      [(N −1)(τϵ +τθ )+N τη −τηi ] τηi ∑
                                                                  2
                                                                             (τϵ +τηi +τθ )2 τηj
                   2 (τηi − τη ) τϵ +
                                2
                                                    N2
                                                                      + j̸=i        N2
                                                                                                 + (τη − τηi ) τθ
                                                                                                              2

      E (|xi |) =                                                             √
                                                              α(τϵ + τη + τθ ) π
                     √ [                                                                                              ]
                                                                              2
                                                  [(N −1)(τϵ +τθ )+N τη −τηi ] τηi     (τϵ +τηi +τθ )2 (N τη −τηi )
                      2 (τηi − τη )2 (τϵ + τθ ) +               N2
                                                                                   +              N2
                 =                                                     √                                                  ,
                                                       α(τϵ + τη + τθ ) π
                                                                                                                          (A.49)

where the second step follows from the deﬁnition of τη . Eq. (24) follows from (A.49) by separating
quadratic, linear and constant terms in τϵ + τη . Trader i generates more volume than trader j if

                                                              50
and only if the diﬀerence between the term inside the squared root in (24) and the corresponding
term for j is positive. The diﬀerence is
        [                                                                             ]
            (N − 2)(τϵ + τθ )2 + (N − 2)(τϵ + τθ )(τηi + τηj ) + (N τη − τηi − τηj )τη (τηi − τηj ).

Since
                                ∑
                                N                         ∑
        N τ η − τ ηi − τ ηj =         τηk − τηi − τηj =            τηk > 0,
                                k=1                       k̸=i,j

the diﬀerence is positive if and only if τηi > τηj .

   We next prove two lemmas, which we then use to prove Proposition 7.

Lemma A.2 Let x be an n × 1 normal vector with mean zero and covariance matrix Σ, ZA a
scalar, ZB an n × 1 vector, ZC an n × n symmetric matrix, I the n × n identity matrix, v ′ the
transpose of a vector v, and |M | the determinant of a matrix M . Then,
       {     [                     ]}        {    [                               ]}
                      ′    1                            1                                  1
Ex exp −α ZA + ZB       x + x′ ZC x    = exp −α ZA − αZB      ′
                                                                Σ(I + αZC Σ)−1 ZB    √             .
                           2                            2                              |I + αZC Σ|
                                                                                           (A.50)

Proof. When ZC = 0, (A.50) gives the moment-generating function of the normal distribution. We
can always assume ZC = 0 by also assuming that x is a normal vector with mean 0 and covariance
matrix Σ(I + αZC Σ)−1 .

                                                            ′
Lemma A.3 Suppose that the n × n matrix ZC is equal to ZC1 ZC2 for n × 1 vectors (ZC1 , ZC2 ),
and the symmetric n × n matrix Σ is positive deﬁnite. Then,

                            ′
        |I + αZC Σ| = 1 + αZC1 ΣZC2 .                                                                  (A.51)

Proof. Since Σ is positive deﬁnite, it has a positive-deﬁnite square root. We denote that matrix
by Σ 2 and its inverse by Σ− 2 . We can write the determinant in (A.51) as
     1                                 1


                      ( 1              ) 1
      |I + αZC Σ| = Σ− 2 + αZC Σ 2 Σ 2
                                     1


                          ( 1             )
                  = Σ 2 Σ− 2 + αZC Σ 2
                        1               1



                                      1     1
                        = I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2 ,                                                            (A.52)


                                                              51
where the second step follows because the determinant is commutative. We next compute

           1      1
                    (      1      1
                                    )
     ∆ ≡ Σ 2 ZC Σ 2 I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2

in two diﬀerent ways. First,

             1       1               1       1
     ∆ = Σ 2 ZC Σ 2 I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2
             1
                   ′         1           1       1
        = Σ 2 ZC1 ZC2 Σ 2 I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2
           ′     1       1               1       1
        = ZC2 Σ 2 Σ 2 ZC1 I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2
           ′                     1       1
        = ZC2 ΣZC1 I + αΣ 2 ZC Σ 2 ,                                                         (A.53)

where the ﬁrst step follows because the determinant of a product is the product of the determinants,
and the third step because the determinant is commutative. Second,
                         (                    )
           1
                   ′   1        1
                                        ′   1
     ∆ = Σ 2 ZC1 ZC2 Σ 2 I + αΣ 2 ZC1 ZC2 Σ2
                  (                    ) 1
          ′     1          1
                                ′    1
       = ZC2  Σ 2 I + αΣ 2 ZC1 ZC2 Σ 2 Σ 2 ZC1
             ′
                    (       ′
                                   )
        = ZC2  ΣZC1 1 + αZC2  ΣZC1
           ′
                   (      ′
                                  )
        = ZC2  ΣZC1 1 + αZC2  ΣZC1 .                                                         (A.54)

Comparing (A.53) to (A.54), and using (A.52), we ﬁnd (A.51).

Proof of Proposition 7. We ﬁrst derive a general expression for the expected utility of a fully
cursed trader who receives no endowment shock. This derivation does not assume that all other
traders are fully cursed, or that they have the same risk-aversion coeﬃcient, or that σζ2 = 0. We
can write the expected utility of trader i in the ex-ante sense as

     −E exp {−αi [xi (d − p) + zi d]} .                                                      (A.55)




                                                     52
Using the law of iterative expectations, and denoting by I ≡ ({sj }j=1,..,N , s) the information set
consisting of all the signals, we can write (A.55) as

      − E [E (exp {−αi [xi (d − p) + zi d]} |I)]
              {     [                                                        ]}
                                                      1
      − E exp −αi xi (E(d|I) − p) + zi E(d|I) − αi (xi + zi ) Var(d|I)
                                                                    2
                                                      2
              {     [                (                                       )       ]}
                      E(d|Iic ) − p                  1 E(d|Iic ) − p
      − E exp −αi                      E(d|I) − p −                  Var(d|I) + zi p
                      αi Var(d|Iic )                 2 Var(d|Iic )
              {                 (                                        )}
                  E(d|Iic ) − p                  1 E(d|Iic ) − p
      − E exp −                   E(d|I) − p −                   Var(d|I)                                       (A.56)
                   Var(d|Iic )                   2 Var(d|Iic )

where the second step follows because of normality, the third from (8) and χi = 1, and the fourth
because zi = 0. Using Lemma A.1 with x = ϵ, K = N + 1 and {yj }j=1,..,N +1 = ({ηj }j=1,..,N , η), we
ﬁnd
                       ∑
                       N
                                      τ ηj                             τθ
        E(d|I) = d +                ∑N                 sj +          ∑N                s
                       j=1   τϵ +     k=1 τηk   + τθ          τϵ +    k=1 τηk   + τθ
                       ∑
                       N
                                τ ηj               τθ
               =d+                      sj +                 s,                                                 (A.57)
                         τ + N τ η + τθ      τϵ + N τ η + τθ
                      j=1 ϵ
                            ∑
                 τϵ + τζ + N  j=1 τηj + τθ
      Var(d|I) =        ∑N
                  (τϵ + j=1 τηj + τθ )τζ
                 τϵ + τζ + N τ η + τθ
               =                      .                                                                         (A.58)
                  (τϵ + N τη + τθ )τζ

Substituting conditional means and variances from (A.11), (A.12), (A.57) and (A.58), we can write
the expected utility (A.56) as
                                                                         
              1 τ (τ + τ + τ )          ∑
                                         N                 ∑N                 
      −E exp −
                      ζ ϵ    ηi  θ        aij sj + bi s    âij sj + b̂i s ,                                (A.59)
              2 (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )                                        
                                                 j=1                     j=1


where ({aij }j=1,..,N , bi ) are deﬁned in (A.37)-(A.39), and

                  2τηj              (τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ )
      âij ≡                − 2Aj −                                        aij             for j = 1, .., N ,   (A.60)
             τϵ + N τη + τθ         (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
                  2τθ              (τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )(τϵ + τηi + τθ )
       b̂i ≡                − 2B −                                        bi .                                  (A.61)
             τϵ + N τη + τθ        (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )



                                                          53
Using (1) and (2), we can write (A.59) as
                                                                                                    
       1 τ (τ + τ + τ )           ∑
                                   N                ∑
                                                    N                  ∑N                  ∑
                                                                                           N                 
−E exp −
             ζ ϵ    ηi    θ        aij + bi  ϵ +   aij ηj + bi θ    âij + b̂i  ϵ +   âij ηj + b̂i θ .
       2 (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )                                                                              
                                                 j=1                        j=1                j=1   j=1

                                                                                                      (A.62)

To compute the expectation in (A.62), we use Lemma A.2, and set

      ZA ≡ 0,

      ZB ≡ 0,
                τζ (τϵ + τηi + τθ )
      ZC ≡                            vv̂ ′ ,
             αi (τϵ + τζ + τηi + τθ )
       Si ≡ Diag(σϵ2 , {ση2j }j=1,..,N , σθ2 ),
                                               ′
              ∑
              N
        v≡      aij + bi , {aij }j=1,..,N , bi  ,
                 j=1
                                                      ′
                 ∑
                 N
        v̂ ≡          âij + b̂i , {âij }j=1,..,N , b̂i  .
                 j=1


Lemma A.2 implies that (A.62) is equal to

                          1                                             1
      −√                                       = −√                                        ,          (A.63)
                   τζ (τϵ +τηi +τθ )    ′                        τζ (τϵ +τηi +τθ ) ′
            I+    (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ ) vv̂ Σ              1+      (τϵ +τζ +τηi +τθ ) v Σv̂


where the second step follows from Lemma A.3.
   We next use (A.63) to compute the expected utility of a fully cursed trader under the as-
sumptions in the proposition. When αi = α for all i and σζ2 = 0, ({aij }j=1,..,N , bi ) are given
by (A.44)-(A.46). Moreover, substituting ({Aj }j=1,..,N , A, {aij }j=1,..,N , bi ) from (A.42)-(A.46) into




                                                                   54
(A.60) and (A.61), and using αi = α for all i and σζ2 = 0, we ﬁnd

                         [(N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) − N τη + τηi ] τηi
                 âii =                                        ,                                     (A.64)
                           N (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
                           [(2N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) + τηi ] τηj
                 âij =                                        for j ̸= i,                           (A.65)
                         N (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
                             [−(2N − 1)τη + τηi ] τθ
                   b̂i =                                   ,                                         (A.66)
                         (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
      ∑
      N
                                [(2N − 1)τη − τηi ] τϵ
            âij + b̂i =                                    .                                        (A.67)
                           (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
      j=1

Substituting into (A.63), and using again σζ2 = 0, we can write the term inside the squared root as

          (τηi − τη ) [(2N − 1)τη − τηi ] τϵ2 2
      1+                                     σ
          (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 (τϵ + N τη + τθ ) ϵ
        [(N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) + N τη − τηi ] [(N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) − N τη + τηi ] τη2i 2
      +                                                                          σ ηi
                          N 2 (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 (τϵ + N τη + τθ )
        ∑ (τϵ + τηi + τθ ) [(2N − 1)(τϵ + τθ ) + τηi ] τη2j        (τη − τηi ) [−(2N − 1)τη + τηi ] τθ2 2
      −                                                     σ 2
                                                              ηj +                                     σ .
                  N 2 (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 (τϵ + N τη + τθ )            (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 (τϵ + N τη + τθ ) θ
         j̸=i

                                                                                                     (A.68)

Eq. (25) can be derived from (A.68) by following the same steps as when deriving (24) from
(A.48). Trader i has higher expected utility than trader j if and only if the diﬀerence between
the numerator inside the squared root in (25) and the corresponding term for j is positive. The
diﬀerence is Z(τηi − τηj ), where

                                   [                                  ]
     Z ≡ N (τϵ + τθ )2 + (τϵ + τθ ) 2N (N + 1)τη − (N − 2)(τηi + τηj ) − (N τη − τηi − τηj )τη . (A.69)

Since Z is linear in τηi +τηj ∈ (0, N τη ), it is positive if this is the case at the boundaries τηi +τηj = 0
and τηi + τηj = N τη . For τηi + τηj = N τη ,

      Z = N (τϵ + τθ )2 + N (N + 4)(τϵ + τθ )τη > 0.

For τηi + τηj = 0,

      Z = N (τϵ + τθ )2 + 2N (N + 1)(τϵ + τθ )τη − N τη2 ,


                                                           55
and is positive if (26) holds. Therefore, if (26) holds, trader i has higher expected utility than
trader j if and only if τηi > τηj . If instead (26) does not hold, Z < 0 for τηi + τηj = 0, and there
exist τηi > τηj such that trader i has lower expected utility than trader j.

Proof of Proposition 8. Setting (τηi , Ai ) = (τη , A) in (A.16), we ﬁnd τξi = (N − 1)τη . Set-
ting (χi , αi , τηi , τξi , Ai ) = (χ, α, τη , (N − 1)τη , A) for all i in (11) and (12), we ﬁnd (28) and (29),
respectively. The comparative statics of (A, B) follow from (28) and (29).
    Substituting p from (27) into (A.13), and using symmetry and zi = 0, we can write the quantity
that trader i trades in equilibrium as
                                                                                                              
                                   τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )                       ∑
                                                                                             N
      xi =                                                                                        aij sj + bi s ,
                α (τζ {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ } + (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ ))
                                                                                             j=1

                                                                                                             (A.70)

where

            τη {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ }
        aii ≡                                 − A,                                                           (A.71)
             (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
               (1 − χ)τη
      aij ≡                 − A, for j ̸= i,                                                                 (A.72)
            τϵ + N τη + τθ
            τθ {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ }
       bi ≡                                   − B.                                                           (A.73)
             (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 6, we ﬁnd

                                        τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ )
      E (|xi |) =
                    α (τζ {τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ } + (τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + N τη + τθ ))
                    v                   2                               
                    u
                    u        ∑N                    ∑N
                    u2
                  × t          aij + bi  σϵ2 +      a2ij ση2j + b2i σθ2 .                                (A.74)
                      π
                              j=1                  j=1




                                                         56
Substituting (A, B) from (28) and (29) into (A.71)-(A.73), we ﬁnd
                        χ(N − 1)τη
                 aii =                  ,
                      N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                              χτη
                aij = −                   ,     for j ̸= i,
                        N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                 bi = 0,
      ∑
      N
            aij + bi = 0.
      j=1

Substituting into (A.74), we ﬁnd (30). The comparative statics with respect to χ follow from (30).
The comparative statics with respect to N also follow from (30) by writing the term multiplying
the squared root as
                             χτζ
        (                                           )
            τϵ +[1+χ(N −1)]τη +τθ
       α τζ       τϵ +N τη +τθ    + τ ϵ + τ η + τ θ

and noting that
       τϵ + [1 + χ(N − 1)] τη + τθ
              τϵ + N τ η + τθ
decreases in N .

Proof of Proposition 9. Setting (τηi , Ai ) = (τηr , Ar ) for i ∈ R and (τηi , Ai ) = (τηc , Ac ) for i ∈ C
in (A.16), we ﬁnd
              [(Nr − 1)Ar + Nc Ac ]2 τηr τηc
      τξi =                                  ≡ τξ .                                                        (A.75)
                (Nr − 1)A2r τηc + Nc A2c τηr
for i ∈ R. We next set (χi , αi , τηi , τξi , Ai ) = (0, αr , τηr , τξ , Ar ) for i ∈ R and (χi , αi , τηi , Ai ) =
(1, αc , τηc , Ac ) for i ∈ C in (11) and (12). Equation (11) written for a rational trader becomes
                                        (                                                 )                            
  τηr − τξ (Nr −1)Ar +Nc Ac
                      Ar                N r  τ ϵ + τ ηr + τ θ + τ ξ − τ          1
                                                                        ξ (Nr −1)Ar +Nc Ac       N   (τ +  τ    + τ   )
                                 = Ar                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                    c ϵ      ηc     θ
                                                                                             +
αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )                     αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )                αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                                                                                                           (A.76)

and written for a fully cursed trader becomes
                               (                                           )                            
          τηc                   Nr τϵ + τηr + τθ + τξ − τξ (Nr −1)Ar +Nc Ac
                                                                  1
                                                                                  N   (τ +  τ    + τ   )
                         = Ac                                                                           .
                                                                                     c ϵ      ηc     θ
                                                                              +
αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )               αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )            αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )


                                                        57
                                                                                                    (A.77)

Equation (12) becomes

                   Nr τ θ                    N c τθ
                                    +
      αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ ) αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
            [                                                        ]
                Nr (τϵ + τηr + τθ + τξ )      Nc (τϵ + τηc + τθ )
      =B                                   +                           .                            (A.78)
              αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ ) αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )

   Equations (A.76) and (A.77) form a system of two equations in the two unknowns (Ar , Ac ). We
can reduce this system to one equation by setting x ≡            Ar
                                                                 Ac .   Equation (A.75) then becomes (35),
and (A.77) and (A.78) yield (33) and (34), respectively. Moreover, dividing (32) by (33), we ﬁnd

            τηr − τξ (Nr −1)x+N
                          x
                                c    αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                                                               =x
      αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )             τηc
                  {                             }
                         x[(Nr −1)x+Nc ]τηr τηc
               αc τηr − (Nr −1)x   2 τ +N τ        (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                      {                                               } ,
                                      ηc   c ηr
      ⇒x=                                                                                           (A.79)
                                                 [(N −1)x+N ]2 τ τηc
                αr τηc τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + (Nrr −1)x2 τηcc+Nηr c τηr


where the second step follows by (35). Equation (A.79) yields (36).
   For x ≤ 0, the left-hand side of (36) is non-positive and the right-hand side is positive. For
     τηr
x≥   τηc   the left-hand side of (36) is positive and the right-hand side is non-positive. Therefore, a
                                          τ                 τ
solution of (36) must belong to (0, τηr
                                     ηc
                                        ). For x ∈ (0, τηr
                                                        ηc
                                                           ), the left-hand side of (36) is increasing in
x and the right-hand side is decreasing in x (because the numerator is decreasing, the denominator
is increasing, and both are positive). Since the left-hand side is zero at x = 0, and the right-hand
                      τηr
side is zero at x =   τηc ,   a solution of (36) exists and is unique.

Proof of Proposition 10. Because of symmetry, the coeﬃcient γi is equal to a common value γr
for all rational traders and to a common value γc for all fully cursed traders. Market clearing (5)
implies that Nr γr + Nc γc = 0. Hence, to prove the proposition it suﬃces to show that γc < 0.
   The coeﬃcient γc is proportional to Cov(xi , p − d). Substituting p from (31) into (A.13), and
setting (χi , τηi , zi ) = (1, τηc , 0), we ﬁnd that Cov(xi , p − d) has the same sign as
          (                                     )
                      τηc si + τθ s
      Cov d +                         − p.p − d                                                     (A.80)
                     τϵ + τηc + τθ



                                                       58
Using (1), (2) and (31), we ﬁnd that Cov(xi , p − d) has the same sign as
      (                                   )
           τηc + τθ
                      − Nr Ar − Nc Ac − B (Nr Ar + Nc Ac + B)σϵ2
        τϵ + τηc + τθ
        (                       )                     (                  )
                τηc                                           τθ
      +                  − Nc Ac Ac σηc − Nr Ar σηr +
                                     2         2 2
                                                                      − B Bσθ2 ,                                                  (A.81)
           τϵ + τηc + τθ                                τϵ + τηc + τθ
        2 , σ 2 ) ≡ ( 1 , 1 ). To determine the sign of (A.81), we compute some of the terms in
where (σηr   ηc      τηr τηc

that equation.
   Multiplying (A.76) by Nr , (A.77) by Nc , and adding the sum of the resulting equations to
(A.78), we ﬁnd
                                                             (Nr −1)Ar +Nc Ac
                                      Nr (τηr + τθ ) + Nr τξ (N r −1)Ar +Nc Ac  Nc (τηc + τθ )
     (Nr Ar + Nc Ac + B)D =                                                                 +
                                         αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )     αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                                         Nr (τηr + τθ + τξ )           Nc (τηc + τθ )
                                  =                              +                         ,
                                    αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ ) αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )

where

               Nr (τϵ + τηr + τθ + τξ )      Nc (τϵ + τηc + τθ )
     D≡                                   +                         .
             αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ ) αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )

Therefore,
                                                                                      Nr (τηr +τθ +τξ )               Nc (τηc +τθ )
           τηc + τθ                            τηc + τθ                           αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ )   +   αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
                      − Nr Ar − Nc Ac − B =               −
        τϵ + τηc + τθ                       τϵ + τηc + τθ                                                D
                                                      Nr (τηc +τθ )(τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )
                                                               τϵ +τηc +τθ                  − Nr (τηr + τθ + τξ )
                                                =
                                                          αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )D
                                                               Nr τϵ (τηc − τηr − τξ )
                                                =                                                .                                (A.82)
                                                  αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(τϵ + τηc + τθ )D
                                 Nr Ar                 Nc A c
   Multiplying (A.76) by          τηr ,   (A.77) by     τηc ,   and adding the resulting equations, we ﬁnd

                                                                A2       Nc A2
     (                      )                         (Nr −1) τ  r   +    τηc
                                                                              c
                                                                ηr
         Nr A2r    Nc A2c            Nr Ar + Nr τξ    (Nr −1)Ar +Nc Ac        Nc Ac
                +               D=                                                +
          τηr     τηc               αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )    αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                                   Nr Ar + Nr [(Nr − 1)Ar + Nc Ac ]               Nc Ac
                                 =                                    +
                                       αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )     αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )
                                        Nr (Nr Ar + Nc Ac )                 Nc Ac
                                 =                               +                        ,
                                   αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ ) αc (τϵ + τζ + τηc + τθ )


                                                            59
where the second step follows from (A.75). Therefore,
      (                        )                                                                 Nr (Nr Ar +Nc Ac )
                                                                                                                          +           Nc Ac
               τηc                                         Ac                                 αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ )       αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
                        − Nc Ac Ac σηc
                                    2
                                       − Nr A2r σηr
                                                 2
                                                    =               −
          τϵ + τηc + τθ                               τϵ + τηc + τθ                                                  D
                                                                        Nr (τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )Ac
                                                                              τϵ +τηc +τθ         − Nr (Nr Ar + Nc Ac )
                                                                   =                                                            . (A.83)
                                                                              αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )D

    Using (34), we ﬁnd
                                                                    Nr τθ                         Nc τθ
            τθ                 τθ                         αr (τϵ +τζ +τηr +τθ +τξ )   +   αc (τϵ +τζ +τηc +τθ )
                    −B =               −
      τϵ + τηc + τθ      τϵ + τηc + τθ                                            D
                                      Nr τθ (τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )
                                            τϵ +τηc +τθ          − N r τθ
                              =
                                αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )D
                                            Nr τθ (τηr + τξ − τηc )
                              =                                                .                                                   (A.84)
                                αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(τϵ + τηc + τθ )D

    Equations (A.82), (A.83) and (A.84) imply that (A.81) is equal to

        Nr (τηc − τηr − τξ )(Nr Ar + Nc Ac + B)
      αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(τϵ + τηc + τθ )D
           Nr (τϵ +τηr +τθ +τξ )Ac
                 τϵ +τηc +τθ         − Nr (Nr Ar + Nc Ac )         Nr (τηr + τξ − τηc )B
       +                                                           +
               αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )D          αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(τϵ + τηc + τθ )D
         Nr (τϵ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(Ac − Nr Ar − Nc Ac )
       =                                                .
         αr (τϵ + τζ + τηr + τθ + τξ )(τϵ + τηc + τθ )D

This is negative because Nc ≥ 1, Ar > 0 and Ac > 0.

Proof of Proposition 11. Expected aggregate trading volume when all N traders are fully cursed
is N times the expected volume that each trader generates, given by (23). To compute expected
aggregate trading volume when one trader is rational and N − 1 traders are fully cursed, we start
by computing the expected trading volume that one fully cursed trader generates. Substituting p
from (31) into (A.13), setting (χi , αi , τηi , zi ) = (1, α, τη , 0), and denoting the rational trader by ir ,
we can write the quantity that trader i ̸= ir trades in equilibrium as
                                                
             τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ ) ∑
                                  N
     xi =                           aij sj + bi s ,
          α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                                             j=1




                                                                   60
where

                        τη
        aii ≡                   − Ac ,                                                            (A.85)
                   τϵ + τη + τθ
      aiir ≡ −Ar ,                                                                                (A.86)

        aij ≡ −Ac              for j ̸= i, ir ,                                                   (A.87)
                        τθ
        bi ≡                    − B.                                                              (A.88)
                   τϵ + τη + τθ

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 6, and using τηi = τη for all i, we ﬁnd
                                      v                2                            
                                      u
                                      u      ∑
                                             N                   ∑
                                                                 N
                   τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ ) u 2 
     E (|xi |) =                      t         aij + bi  σϵ2 +    a2ij ση2 + b2i σθ2 ,         (A.89)
                 α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) π
                                                              j=1             j=1


where ση2 ≡         1
                   τη .   Equations (A.85)-(A.88) imply that

      ∑
      N
                                     τη
            aij + bi =                       − Ar − (N − 1)Ac − B.
                                τϵ + τη + τθ
      j=1

Using (A.82) and setting τηr = τηc = τη , Nr = 1, Nc = N − 1, and τξ = (N − 1)τη (which is implied
by (35) for Nr = 1 and Nc = N − 1), we ﬁnd

      ∑
      N
                                  (N − 1)τϵ τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
            aij + bi = −                                            ,                             (A.90)
                                         (τϵ + τη + τθ )G
      j=1

where

      G ≡ (N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ ) + (τϵ + N τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ).

Using (A.84) and (A.88), and setting τηr = τηc = τη , Nr = 1, Nc = N − 1 and τξ = (N − 1)τη , we
likewise ﬁnd

              (N − 1)τθ τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
      bi =                                      ,                                                 (A.91)
                     (τϵ + τη + τθ )G

Equations (A.85)-(A.87) imply that

      ∑
      N                   (                       )2
                                   τη
            a2ij   =                       − Ac        + A2r + (N − 2)A2c .
                              τϵ + τη + τθ
      j=1


                                                                    61
To compute this quantity, we note that for τηr = τηc = τη , Nr = 1, Nc = N − 1 and τξ = (N − 1)τη ,
(36) implies that

                     τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ
      x=                                    ,
               2(τϵ + τζ + τθ ) + (N + 1)τη

and (32) and (33) become

           τη [2(τϵ + τζ + τθ ) + (N + 1)τη ]
      Ar =                                    ,                                                         (A.92)
                            G
           τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
      Ac =                         ,                                                                    (A.93)
                      G

respectively. Using (A.92) and (A.93), we ﬁnd

                 τη [(N − 2)(τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ ) + (N − 1)τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )]
      aii =                                                                                         ,   (A.94)
                                                  (τϵ + τη + τθ )G

and
        ∑
        N
                        τη [
               a2ij =       (N − 1)(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2
                        G
        j̸=i
                                                                                            ]
        +2(N − 2)(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ ) + (N − 2)(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )2 .          (A.95)

Using (A.90), (A.91), (A.94) and (A.95), we can write (A.89) as
                   √
                 τζ 2τη (τϵ + τη + τθ )Nc
     E (|xi |) =                       √ ,                                                              (A.96)
                 α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )G π

where

      Nc ≡(τϵ + N τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) [(N − 1)(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) + 2(N − 2)(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )]

                + (N − 2)(N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ )(τϵ + τζ + N τη + τθ )2 .

   We next compute the expected trading volume that the rational trader ir generates. The
market-clearing equation (5) implies that
                                                                                
                   ∑                  τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )     ∑N ∑          ∑
      xir = −              xj = −                                ajk sk +   bj s ,
                                    α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                   j̸=ir                                     k=1 j̸=ir     j̸=ir




                                                              62
and hence
                                  v                   2               2          2 
                                  u
                                  u     ∑N ∑       ∑            ∑
                                                                N   ∑             ∑
               τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ ) u 2 
E (|xir |) =                      t          ajk +   bj  σϵ2 +      ajk  σηc
                                                                             2 +   bj  σθ2 .
             α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) π
                                                       k=1 j̸=ir        j̸=ir            k=1       j̸=ir    j̸=ir

                                                                                                            (A.97)

Equations (A.85)-(A.88) imply that

     ∑
     N ∑                    ∑                      (                                               )
                                                            τη
                 ajk +              bj = (N − 1)                    − (N − 1)Ac − Ar − B
                                                       τϵ + τη + τθ
     k=1 j̸=ir              j̸=ir
                                           (N − 1)2 τϵ τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                                      =−                                       ,                            (A.98)
                                                  (τϵ + τη + τθ )G

where the second step follows from (A.90). Equation (A.88) implies that
     ∑                (                 )
                             τθ
         bj = (N − 1)                −B
                        τϵ + τη + τθ
     j̸=ir
                     (N − 1)2 τθ τη (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                 =                                       ,                                                  (A.99)
                            (τϵ + τη + τθ )G

where the second step follows from (A.91). Equations (A.86) and (A.87) imply that
                        2
     ∑
     N           ∑                                                 (                    )2
                                                                    τη
                     ajk  = (N − 1)2 A2r + (N − 1)                         − (N − 1)Ac
                                                               τϵ + τη + τθ
     k=1     j̸=ir
                                                                      [                                                   ]
                                     (N − 1)τη2 (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2 (N − 1)(τθ + τη + τθ )2 + [τη − (N − 2)(τϵ + τθ )]2
                                =                                                                                             ,
                                                                            (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 G 2
                                                                                                           (A.100)

where the second step follows from (A.92) and (A.93). Using (A.98), (A.99) and (A.100), we can
write (A.97) as
                            √
                       τζ       2(N − 1)τη (τϵ + N τη + τθ )Nr
     E (|xir |) =                           √                  ,                                           (A.101)
                                        αG π

where

     Nr ≡ (N − 1)2 (τϵ + τη + τθ ) − (N − 2)(τϵ + N τη + τθ ).


                                                                   63
    Combining (23) with (A.96) and (A.101), we ﬁnd that expected aggregate trading volume is
larger when one trader is rational and N − 1 traders are fully cursed than when all N traders are
fully cursed if
                   √                        √                      √
                   N −1                        (τϵ + τη + τθ )Nc     (N − 1)(τϵ + N τη + τθ )Nr
       N                     √ < (N − 1)                         +
         (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) N            (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )G                G
                  √                                                √
          √         (N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ )Nc (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) (τϵ + N τη + τθ )Nr
       ⇔ N<                                  +                                         .     (A.102)
                              G                                    G
Equation (A.102) holds under the suﬃcient condition
               (N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ )Nc (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2 (τϵ + N τη + τθ )Nr
       N<                              +                                          .              (A.103)
                         G2                                G2
Multiplying both sides by G 2 , using the deﬁnitions of (G, Nc , Nr ), and rearranging, we can write
(A.103) as (38).
    When τζ = ∞, (38) becomes
            (                )    (        )
       1      τϵ + N τ η + τθ 2       2      τϵ + N τ η + τθ
                                +        −1                  + 1 < 0.                            (A.104)
     N −1      τϵ + τη + τθ         N −1      τϵ + τη + τθ
                  τη
Setting y ≡     τϵ +τθ ,
                  we can write (A.104) as
            (        )
         1    1 + N y 2 (N − 3)(1 + N y)
                        −                 +1<0
       N −1    1+y         (N − 1)(1 + y)
       3 − (N 2 − 6N − 1)y + (4N − 1)y 2 < 0.                                                    (A.105)

The left-hand side of (A.105) converges to −∞ when N goes to ∞. Hence, (A.105) is satisﬁed for
N large enough.

Proof of Proposition 12. To derive the results for the rational case, we use (10)-(13) and set
(χi , αi , τηi , τzi , Ai , Ci ) = (0, α, τη , τz , A, C) for all i. Equations (10)-(13) yield
               (N − 1)τη τz
       τξi =           C2
                              ≡ τξ    for all i,                                                 (A.106)
                τz +      τ
                       A2 η
                  τη + τξ
        A=                       ,                                                               (A.107)
          N (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                  τθ
       B=                   ,                                                                    (A.108)
          τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ
       C    τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ
         =α                        ,                                                             (A.109)
       A             τζ τη


                                                          64
respectively. Substituting τξ from (A.106) to (A.107)-(A.109), we ﬁnd (40)-(42), respectively. Eq.
                   C
(42) is cubic in   A,   and hence has at least one solution. Any of its solutions satisﬁes

       C
         τζ τη − α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) > 0,                                                                         (A.110)
       A
                                                                                                          C
and hence is positive. The derivative of the left-hand side of (42) with respect to                       A   is
           (                                ) (             )
      C      C                                        C2
     2 τη      τζ τη − α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) + τz + 2 τη τζ τη ,
      A      A                                        A

and is positive at any solution of (42) because of (A.110). Therefore, (42) has a unique solution.
     To derive the results for the fully cursed case, we use (11)-(13) and set (χi , αi , τηi , τzi , Ai , Ci ) =
(1, α, τη , τz , A, C) for all i. Equations (11)-(13) yield

                   τη
       A=                    ,
           N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                τθ
       B=                ,
           τϵ + τη + τθ
              τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ
       C = Aα                   ,
                      τζ τη

respectively. The coeﬃcients (A, B, C) coincide with those in (40)-(42) for τζ = 0.

Proof of Proposition 13. To show the result for regression (21), we note that γ is proportional
to

       Cov(d − p, s) = (1 − N A − B)σϵ2 − Bσθ2 ,

where the equality follows from (1), (2) and (39). Substituting (A, B) from Proposition 12, we ﬁnd
that
                                         (N −1)τη τz
                                                                  
                                   τη +          2      + τθ
                                         τz + C 2 τη              2                τθ
       Cov(d − p, s) = 1 −                    A
                                                   (N −1)τη τz     σϵ −                    (N −1)τη τz
                                                                                                          σθ2 = 0
                                 τϵ + τη + τθ +              2             τϵ + τη + τθ +            2
                                                    τz + C 2 τη                             τz + C 2 τη
                                                         A                                       A


when all traders are rational, and
                      (                  )
                               τη + τθ                τθ
     Cov(d − p, s) = 1 −                   σϵ2 −             σ2 = 0
                            τϵ + τη + τθ         τϵ + τη + τθ θ

when they are fully cursed.

                                                             65
   To show the result for regression (22), we likewise note that γ is proportional to

     Cov(d − p, p − d) = (1 − N A − B)(N A + B)σϵ2 − N A2 ση2 − B 2 σθ2 − N C 2 σz2
                                                          (              )
                                                                   C2
                       = (1 − N A − B)(N A + B)σϵ2 − N A2 ση2 + 2 σz2 − B 2 σθ2 ,
                                                                   A

where σz2 ≡    1
              τz .   Substituting (A, B, C) from Proposition 12, we ﬁnd that
                                                                        (                     )2 (             )
                                              (N −1)τη τz                       (N −1)τη τz       2 + C 2 σ2
                                       τη +          2              τη +           2           σ η       A z
                                                                                                          2
                                              τz + C 2 τη                   τz + C 2 τη
     Cov(d − p, p − d) = (                         A
                                                            )2 −      (
                                                                                 A
                                                                                                            )2
                                             (N −1)τη τz                                      (N −1)τη τz
                           τϵ + τη + τθ +             2             N τϵ + τη + τθ +                   2
                                              τz + C 2 τη                                      τz + C 2 τη
                                                    A
                                                                     (                       )(    A
                                                                                                                 )
                                       (N −1)τη τz                              (N −1)τη τz                 C2
                                 τη +                                   τ   +                      τ    +      τ
                                               2
                                        τz + C 2 τη                      η              2
                                                                                 τz + C 2 τη
                                                                                                     z      A2 η 
                       =(                    A
                                                            )2  1 −                  A                          
                                                                                         N τ η τz                 
                                             (N −1)τη τz
                           τϵ + τη + τθ +             2
                                              τz + C 2 τη
                              (                    )A
                                     (N −1)τη τz        C 2 τη
                                τη +       C2          N A2 τz
                                      τz + 2 τη
                       = −(                A
                                                               )2 < 0
                                                      (N −1)τη τz
                                  τϵ + τη + τθ +                2
                                                       τz + C 2 τη
                                                            A


when all traders are rational, and
                                                        (                   )
                                                                     C2 2
                                     τη              τη2 ση2 +         σ
                                                                     A2 z
     Cov(d − p, p − d) =                       −
                              (τϵ + τη + τθ )2 N (τϵ + τη + τθ )2
                                                       (                )
                                                                 C2
                                     τη             τ η  τ z +   A 2 τ η
                            =                  1 −                       
                              (τϵ + τη + τθ )2             N τ η τz
                                                 (                               )
                                  (N − 1)τη             α2 (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2
                            =                      1−                                                          (A.111)
                              N (τϵ + τη + τθ )2            (N − 1)τζ2 τη τz

when they are fully cursed. The last step in the derivation of (A.111) follows from (42). Equation
(A.111) yields (43).

Proof of Proposition 14. We ﬁrst determine expected trading volume when all traders are
rational. When (Ai , Ci ) = (A, C) for all i, the signal ϵ + ξi deﬁned by (9) takes the form
               ∑           C ∑
                j̸=i sj − A    j̸=i zj
      ϵ + ξi =                         .                                                     (A.112)
                       N −1

                                                            66
Substituting p from (39) into (A.13), and using symmetry, χi = 0 and (A.112), we can write the
quantity that trader i trades in equilibrium as
                                                                   
             τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )   ∑
                                        N                  ∑
                                                           N
     xi =                                  aij sj + bi s +   cij zj  ,                            (A.113)
           α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                                             j=1               j=1

where
                        τη
        aii ≡                      − A,                                                            (A.114)
                τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ
                              τξ
      aij     ≡                               − A for j ̸= i,                                      (A.115)
                (N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                        τθ
         bi   ≡                    − B,                                                            (A.116)
                τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ
                     α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ )
        cii   ≡C−                               ,                                                  (A.117)
                       τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                                   Cτξ
        cij   ≡C−                                   for j ̸= i.                                    (A.118)
                     (N − 1)A(τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition (6), we ﬁnd
                                            v              2                                        
                                            u
                                            u
                    τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ ) u 2 ∑                  ∑                      ∑
                                                  N                  N                      N
      E (|xi |) =                           t       aij + bi  σϵ2 +   a2ij ση2 + b2i σθ2 +   c2ij σz2 .
                  α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ ) π
                                                         j=1                  j=1            j=1

                                                                                                   (A.119)

Substituting (A, B, C) from (A.107)-(A.109) into (A.114)-(A.118), we ﬁnd
                            (N − 1)τη − τξ
                   aii =                        ,
                         N (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                                  (N − 1)τη − τξ
                   aij = −                                  for j ̸= i,
                           N (N − 1)(τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                    bi = 0,
                          α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ ) [(N − 1)τη − τξ ]
                   cii = −                                             ,
                                   N τζ τη (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
                         α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ ) [(N − 1)τη − τξ ]
                   cij =                                                      ̸ i,
                                                                        for j =
                             N (N − 1)τζ τη (τϵ + τη + τθ + τξ )
      ∑
      N
              aij + bi = 0.
      j=1



                                                       67
Substituting into (A.119), we ﬁnd
                 v                       (                                      )
                 u
                 u 2 [(N − 1)τη − τξ ]2                    τζ2              1
     E (|xi |) = t                                                       +
                       πN (N − 1)τη         α2 (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ + τξ )2 τη τz
                 √                       ( 2               )
                   2 [(N − 1)τη − τξ ]2      A          1
               =                                    +
                      πN (N − 1)τη          C 2 τη2 τη τz
                 v
                 u              (                   )2
                 u
                 u 2(N − 1)2 τ 2 1 −        τz
                                                       ( 2             )
                 u            η                2
                                        τz + C 2 τη
               =t                            A
                                                          A        1
                                                                +
                           πN (N − 1)τη                  C 2 τη2 τη τz
                 v
                 u              2
                 u 2(N − 1) C     τ
                               A2 η )
               =t        (
                                  2
                                        ,                                                            (A.120)
                   πN τz τz + C A2 η
                                    τ

where the second step follows from (A.109) and the third from (A.106).
                                                                        C
   Equation (A.120) implies that volume is increasing in N if           A   is increasing in N . In the proof
                                                                                                        C
of Proposition 12 we show that the derivative of the left-hand side of (42) with respect to             A   is
                                 C
positive at the solution Since the derivative with respect to N is negative, C
                                 A.                                          A is increasing in N .
                                                                    √
   To show that volume is inverse hump-shaped in τη , we set ω ≡ CA τη and write (42) as
      (              )(      √                          )
          τz + w 2        ωτζ τη − α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) − α(N − 1)τη τz = 0                         (A.121)

and (A.120) as
                      √
                            2(N − 1)ω 2
      E (|xi |) =                            .                                                       (A.122)
                           πN τz (τz + ω 2 )
Eq. (A.122) implies that the eﬀects of τη on volume and ω have the same sign. The derivative
                                                              √
of the left-hand side of (A.121) with respect to ω is equal to τη times the same derivative with
              C
respect to    A. Therefore, it is positive at the solution ω. The derivative with respect to τη is
                  (            )
      (          ) ωτζ
                     √ − α − α(N − 1)τz ,
               2
        τz + w
                    2 τη
and is equal to
         [            (               )                ]
       1 (           ) 1     √
            τz + w 2
                          ωτζ τη − ατη − α(N − 1)τη τz
      τη                2
             [           (               )                                              ]
          1 (           ) 1     √          (         )(    √                          )
      =        τz + w 2
                             ωτζ τη − ατη − τz + w 2
                                                        ωτζ τη − α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
         τη                2


                                                        68
at the solution w. It is negative if and only if

              2α(τϵ + τζ + τθ )
      ω>             √          .
                   τζ τη
                                                                                                 2α(τϵ +τζ +τθ )
This condition is equivalent to the left-hand side of (A.121) being negative for ω =                   √         .
                                                                                                    τζ τη

We can write the latter condition as
      [                                   ]
          τζ2 τη τz + 4α2 (τϵ + τζ + τθ )2 (τϵ + τζ + τθ − τη ) − (N − 1)τζ2 τη2 τz < 0.               (A.123)

The left-hand side of (A.123) is a quadratic function of τη that is positive for τη = 0 and goes to
−∞ when τη goes to ∞. Therefore, there exists a unique τη∗ > 0 such that (A.123) holds for τη > τη∗
and the opposite inequality holds for τη < τη∗ . Volume and ω are thus decreasing in τη for τη < τη∗
and increasing in τη for τη > τη∗ , i.e., are inverse hump-shaped in τη .
   We next determine expected trading volume when all traders are fully cursed. Substituting p
from (39) into (A.13), and using symmetry and χi = 1, we can write the quantity that trader i
trades in equilibrium as
                                                                    
                  τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )     ∑N                 ∑
                                                            N
      xi =                                 aij sj + bi s +   cij zj  ,                               (A.124)
                α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                                          j=1               j=1

where

                     τη
        aii ≡                − A,                                                                      (A.125)
                τϵ + τη + τθ
      aij ≡ −A      for j ̸= i,                                                                        (A.126)
                   τθ
         bi ≡                − B,                                                                      (A.127)
              τϵ + τη + τθ
                   α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
        cii ≡ C −                        ,                                                             (A.128)
                      τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )
        cij ≡ C     for j ̸= i.                                                                        (A.129)

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition (6), we ﬁnd
                                  v                2                                        
                                  u
                                  u
               τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ ) u 2 ∑                    ∑                      ∑
                                         N                   N                      N
 E (|xi |) =                      t         aij + bi  σϵ2 +   a2ij ση2 + b2i σθ2 +   c2ij σz2 . (A.130)
             α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ ) π
                                                  j=1                  j=1                 j=1


                                                         69
Substituting (A, B, C) from (A.107)-(A.109) for τz = 0 into (A.125)-(A.129), we ﬁnd

                          (N − 1)τη
                 aii =                   ,
                       N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                                τη
                 aij = −                              for j ̸= i,
                         N (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                   bi = 0,
                         (N − 1)α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                  cii = −                                ,
                                N τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )
                        α(τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )
                  cij =                          for j ̸= i,
                         N τζ (τϵ + τη + τθ )
      ∑
      N
            aij + bi = 0.
      j=1

Substituting into (A.130), we ﬁnd
                 v          (                             )
                 u
                 u 2(N − 1)             τζ2 τη          1
     E (|xi |) = t                                    +     .                                                               (A.131)
                     πN       α2 (τϵ + τζ + τη + τθ )2 τz

The square of the right-hand side of (A.131) is equal to its counterpart without endowment shocks
(the square of the right-hand side of (23)) plus a constant. Therefore, (A.131) is increasing in N
and is hump-shaped in τη .

Proof of Proposition 15. We ﬁrst determine traders’ demand functions assuming that the price
takes the form (44). The information Ii of trader i consists of his private signal si , the public signal
s, and the signal ϵ + ξi that is revealed from the price. Since all private signals enter the price with
the same coeﬃcient, (9) implies that
               ∑               ∑
                j̸=i sj          j̸=i ηj
      ϵ + ξi =          ⇒ ξi =           .                                                                                  (A.132)
               N −1            N −1

To compute the distribution of ϵ conditional on Ii , we use Lemma A.1 with x = ϵ, K = 3,
{yj }j=1,2,3 = (ηi , η, ξi ), and trader i’s assessments of precision. Combining with (A.7) and (A.8),
and setting (χi , Iir ) = (0, Ii ) in (8), we can write the demand of trader i as
                           κτη                                                          (N −1)γτη
            d+   τϵ +κτη +τθ +(N −1)γτη si   +             τθ
                                                 τϵ +κτη +τθ +(N −1)γτη s     +   τϵ +κτη +τθ +(N −1)γτη (ϵ   + ξi ) − p
    xi =                                         (                                     )                                   . (A.133)
                                                                1                  1
                                             α       τϵ +κτη +τθ +(N −1)γτη   +   τζ


                                                                70
We next substitute (A.133) into the market-clearing condition (5), substituting also p from (44)
                                                                   (∑            )
                                                                     N
and ϵ + ξi from (A.132). This yields an equation that is linear in   i=1 s i , s   . Identifying terms in
∑N
  i=1 si and s yields (45) and (46), respectively. The comparative statics of A and B follow from

(45) and (46).

Proof of Proposition 16. Substituting p from (44) into (A.133) and using (45), (46) and (A.132),
we can write the quantity that trader i trades in equilibrium as

                                 τζ                  ∑N
      xi =                                             aij sj ,                                 (A.134)
                α [τϵ + τζ + [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη + τθ ]
                                                     j=1

where

            N −1
        aii ≡    (κ − γ)τη ,                                                                    (A.135)
             N
              1
      aij ≡ − (κ − γ)τη for j ̸= i.                                                             (A.136)
             N

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition (6), we ﬁnd
                                                     v        2                 
                                                     u
                                                     u   ∑N             ∑
                                                                        N
                                  τζ                 u2
     E (|xi |) =                                     t    aij  σϵ2 +   a2ij ση2 .           (A.137)
                 α [τϵ + τζ + [(N − 1)γ + κ]τη + τθ ] π
                                                                  j=1         j=1


Substituting {aij }j=1,..,N from (A.135) and (A.136) into (A.137), we ﬁnd (47). The asymptotic
behavior of E (|xi |) and of aggregate volume N E (|xi |) follows from (A.137).

Proof of Proposition 17. The proposition follows by setting γ = 0 in (47) since full cursedness
is equivalent to extreme contemptuousness.




                                                          71
