                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NATURAL EXPERIMENTS IN MACROECONOMICS

                                       Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln
                                       Tarek Alexander Hassan

                                         Working Paper 21228
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21228


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015




Chapter prepared for the Handbook of Macroeconomics. The chapter has benefitted from helpful discussions
and comments from Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan Dingel, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Chang-Tai Hsieh,
Nathan Nunn, Elias Papaioannou, Matthias Schündeln, Rob Vishny, Mirko Wiederholt, and seminar
participants of the Handbook of Macroeconomics Conference at Stanford and at the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Leonhard Czerny, Denis Gorea, and Philip Xu provided excellent research assistance. Fuchs-Schündeln
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Cluster of Excellence “Formation of Normative
Orders” and the European Research Council under Starting Grant No. 262116. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln and Tarek Alexander Hassan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics
Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln and Tarek Alexander Hassan
NBER Working Paper No. 21228
June 2015, Revised January 2016
JEL No. C1,C9,E21,E62,H31,O11,O14,O43,O50

                                              ABSTRACT

A growing literature relies on natural experiments to establish causal effects in macroeconomics. In
diverse applications, natural experiments have been used to verify underlying assumptions of conventional
models, quantify specific model parameters, and identify mechanisms that have major effects on macroeconomic
quantities but are absent from conventional models. We discuss and compare the use of natural experiments
across these different applications and summarize what they have taught us about such diverse subjects
as the validity of the Permanent Income Hypothesis, the size of the fiscal multiplier, and about the
effects of institutions, social structure, and culture on economic growth. We also outline challenges
for future work in each of these fields, give guidance for identifying useful natural experiments, and
discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the approach.


Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln
Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance
60323 Frankfurt
Germany
fuchs@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de

Tarek Alexander Hassan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tarek.hassan@chicagobooth.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                          4

2 Verification: The Permanent Income Hypothesis                                                         8
  2.1 Reaction of Consumption to Unexpected Income Shocks                . . . . . . . . . .            9
         2.1.1Unexpected Temporary Income Shocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         2.1.2An Unexpected Permanent Income Shock: the Natural Experiment
              of German Reunification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.2 Reaction of Consumption to Expected Income Changes . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         2.2.1    Random Treatment: Determining an Appropriate Control Group                       . 16
         2.2.2    The Presence of Liquidity Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              . 21
         2.2.3    Overview of Natural Experiment Studies of the Permanent Income
                  Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         . 24
         2.2.4    Violation of Rational Expectations or Need for Model Extension?                  . 25

3 Quantification: The Fiscal Multiplier                                                                30
  3.1 Permanent Income Hypothesis Studies and the Fiscal Multiplier . . . . . .                        31
  3.2 Military News Shocks as Natural Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      33
  3.3 Local Fiscal Multipliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               35

4 Identification: Causal Factors in Economic Growth                                                    40
  4.1 The Fundamental Causes of Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   40
  4.2 Institutions and Political Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   44
      4.2.1 The Effect of Institutions on Growth . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   45
      4.2.2 The Effect of Institutions on Business Cycles and Conflict             .   .   .   .   .   49
      4.2.3 Persistent Effects of Historical Institutions . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   50
       4.2.4 Determinants and Dynamics of Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
   4.3 Social Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
         4.3.1    The Effect of Social Ties on Growth . . . . . . . . . .    . . . . . . .         . 58
         4.3.2    The Effect of Social Ties on Trade and FDI . . . . .       . . . . . . .         . 61
         4.3.3    The Effect of Internal Social Structure on Institutions    and Growth              66
   4.4   Trust   and Civic Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . .         . 68
         4.4.1    The Effect of Trust on Growth . . . . . . . . . . . .      . . . . . . .         . 69
         4.4.2    Effect of Trust on Financial Development and Other Aggregates . . 71
         4.4.3    Determinants and Dynamics of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72


                                                2
  4.5   Multiple Equilibria and Path Dependence   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

5 Critical Assessment and Outlook                                                    79




                                        3
1    Introduction
Establishing causality is a major challenge in economics, especially in macroeconomics,
where the direction of various important causal relationships is widely discussed, as il-
lustrated, for example, by large-scale debates about the causal effects of monetary and
fiscal policies. Most empirical applications of macroeconomic models focus on matching
conditional correlations and improving the fit of models to a set of data moments. Despite
substantial advances in this area in recent years, these conditional correlations often can-
not identify causal chains. For example, New Keynesian models and real business cycle
models can match similar sets of conditional correlations but have very different predic-
tions about the causal effects of fiscal or monetary policies. This lack of identification of
clear causal channels is especially troubling regarding providing policy advice.
    In applied microeconomic fields, causality is often established by designing laboratory
or field experiments. In these types of experiments, the researcher consciously influences
the economic environment in a way that allows the establishment of causality. The most
prevalent and clearest method in this spirit is to randomly allocate agents into a treatment
group and a control group, and then analyze the effect of the treatment by directly com-
paring the relevant outcome variables between both groups, or the change in the outcome
variables of both groups coinciding with the introduction of the treatment in a difference-
in-differences approach. Field experiments randomize treatment in a real-world economic
environment, whereas laboratory experiments do so in a controlled environment. Both
methods are mostly unavailable to macroeconomists for fairly obvious reasons. Because
macroeconomics deals with phenomena that affect the economy at large (e.g., economic
growth, unemployment, monetary policy, fiscal policy), any field interventions would be
very expensive and would have far-reaching consequences because they cannot easily be
targeted at a specific small group, making it unlikely that anyone would agree to carry
them out. Bringing key features of the economic environment into the laboratory is also
complicated in macroeconomics, where the interplay of different agents and markets often
plays a key role (see Duffy (2008) for a survey of laboratory experiments in macroeco-
nomics).
   Natural experiments are an alternative to field and laboratory experiments. For the
purposes of our discussion, we define natural experiments as historical episodes that pro-
vide observable, quasi-random variation in treatment subject to a plausible identifying
assumption. The “natural” in natural experiments indicates a researcher did not con-
sciously design the episode to be analyzed, but can nevertheless use it to learn about


                                              4
causal relationships. The episode under consideration can be a policy intervention carried
out by policy makers (e.g., changes in the tax law), historical episodes that go beyond
simple policy measures (e.g., the fall of Communism), or a so-called “natural natural”
experiment that arises from natural circumstances (rainfall, earth quakes, etc.). Maybe
the most widely exploited natural experiment in the macroeconomics literature is the
German separation in 1949 and subsequent reunification in 1989. This episode split a
homogeneous population into two parts that lived under vastly different economic and
political systems with minimal contact between them, only to be reunited 40 years later.
Importantly, one can argue this split was exogenous to preferences, economic conditions,
and other factors that would directly predict different economic outcomes after reunifi-
cation. Thus, the assignment of an individual to East or West Germany at the date of
separation can be considered random, as in a field experiment. At the same time, vast mi-
cro and macro data are available to analyze the episode. Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln
(2005) first used this experiment to study the self-selection into occupations according
to risk aversion and its effect on precautionary savings. Later applications have studied
diverse subjects ranging from endogenous preferences for economic policies ( Alesina and
Fuchs-Schündeln, 2007) and the importance of market access (Redding and Sturm, 2008)
to the economic impact of social ties (Burchardi and Hassan, 2013).
    Whereas the main task of a researcher carrying out a laboratory or field experiment lies
in designing it in a way that allows causal inference, the main task of a researcher analyzing
a natural experiment lies in arguing that in fact the historical episode under consideration
resembles an experiment, and in dealing with weaknesses of the ex-post experimental setup
that one would have avoided a priori in a designed experiment. To show the episode
under consideration resembles an experiment, identifying valid treatment and control
groups, that is, arguing the treatment is in fact randomly assigned, is crucial. Establishing
such quasi-random treatment requires showing that two groups are comparable along all
dimensions relevant for the outcome variable except the one involving the treatment. The
methods used to do this are often adapted from the micro-econometric literature on field
and laboratory experiments.
   The goal of this chapter is to acquaint the reader with the use of natural experiments
in macroeconomics, summarize what we have learned from them so far, and distill what
makes a successful application of a natural experiment to answer a macroeconomic ques-
tion. We provide in the conclusion of this chapter a summary of common features that
distinguish successful papers that rely on the use of natural experiments. Although every
natural experiment is different and thus leads to different challenges, these features can

                                              5
serve as guidelines for future papers. Moreover, we discuss the embedding of natural
experiments into structural models as a promising general avenue for future research, and
point out limitations in the use of natural experiments.
   Rather than attempt to cover all papers in macroeconomics that feature natural ex-
periments (which would be a formidable task), we instead select three specific lines of
enquiry that use natural experiments for three different purposes: to verify underlying
model premises (“verification”), to quantify specific policy parameters (“quantification”),
and to identify causal mechanisms that operate outside conventional models (“identifica-
tion”).
    The first line is the literature on the Permanent Income Hypothesis. In contrast to the
simple Keynesian consumption theory, the Permanent Income Hypothesis assumes agents
are rational and forward-looking when making their consumption decisions. Therefore, in
addition to current income and current assets, the expected value of future income plays
a role in the optimal consumption choice today. This forward-looking behavior can be
subjected to a simple test using a preannounced income change: the household should
adjust consumption as soon as information about the future income change arrives. By
contrast, consumption growth should be unaffected at the time of the implementation
of the income change, given that the household knew about it in advance. In this lit-
erature, natural experiments serve to identify such preannounced income changes. A
finding that households adjust their consumption at the time of implementation of the
preannounced income change casts doubts on the fundamental assumption of most micro-
founded macroeconomic models that agents are forward-looking in their decision making.
    The second line is the literature striving to quantify the fiscal multiplier. The fis-
cal multiplier is one of the most important policy parameters in the macroeconomics
literature. Can the government stimulate the economy via government spending or tax
policies? If yes, how large is the effect of a given fiscal policy on GDP per capita? The
main challenge in the estimation of the fiscal multiplier lies in identifying changes in
fiscal policies that are not motivated by business-cycle considerations. In this context,
researchers specifically use natural experiments to identify such exogenous changes in
government spending.
    These first two lines of literature rely not only on natural experiments, but also on
other approaches, for example, instrumental variables approaches in which the instru-
ments are not historical episodes, or vector autoregression (VAR) models with exclusion
restrictions. By contrast, the third line of the literature relies almost exclusively on natu-
ral experiments to identify the fundamental causes of growth. The goal of this literature

                                              6
is to identify mechanisms that are absent from standard macroeconomic models. What
can explain the vastly different GDP per-capita levels across poor and rich countries?
Standard growth models point to human or physical capital accumulation or R&D invest-
ment as explanations, but these factors are proximate rather than fundamental causes
of growth: why have some countries invested much more than others? The literature on
the fundamental causes of growth identifies institutions, social structure, and culture as
such fundamental causes. All three of these concepts are largely absent from conventional
models of economic growth. Moreover, multiple equilibria can lead to different growth
paths despite common initial conditions. Empirically analyzing the fundamental causes
of growth is intimately linked to using natural experiments: the “historic episodes” are
truly historic here in the sense that they typically come from the distant past and are
used to establish causal links by providing quasi-random variation in institutions, social
structure, or culture across countries, regions, or time.
    Within each of the three lines of literature, we again do not attempt to survey the
entire literature on the topic but instead focus on showing how the authors use natu-
ral experiments to address research questions arising within each of the three specific
contexts, by verifying, quantifying, or identifying causal mechanisms. A common theme
across almost all of these applications is that the econometric methods used are fairly
simple applications of standard methods, such as OLS, instrumental variables, regression
discontinuity, or fixed-effects estimators. Instead, the complexity of many of these papers
lies in identifying the episode that generates quasi-random variation, and appropriately
dealing with any flaws in nature’s experimental design. In this sense, the most crucial
ingredient of many papers using natural experiments is the appropriate statement and
defense of an identifying assumption, which is the focus of our discussion.
    This chapter has two target audiences: the first is researchers with a solid background
in applied econometrics who are considering studying a natural experiment in any area of
macroeconomics. We hope the juxtaposition of natural experiments used in different areas
will generate ideas for intellectual arbitrage for this group. In each of the areas that we
cover, we also attempt to point out the research frontier in terms of method and substance,
and often explicitly point out important avenues for future research. The second target
audience is researchers in mainstream macroeconomics. With this group in mind, we
attempt to summarize what natural experiments have taught us about the permanent
income hypothesis, the fiscal multiplier, and the fundamental causes of macroeconomic
growth, in the hope that this summary will help direct future theoretical research.
   A set of slides that develops the material covered in this chapter in two 90-minute

                                             7
lectures is available on the authors’ websites.


2    Verification: The Permanent Income Hypothesis
Natural experiments can be used in macroeconomics to test the validity of major un-
derlying model assumptions. This is done in the use of natural experiments to test the
validity of the Permanent Income Hypothesis. The Permanent Income Hypothesis, as
developed by Friedman (1957), contrasts with the simple Keynesian consumption the-
ory, which postulates that consumption depends on current income only and is equal
to a non-increasing fraction of current income. To the present day, the Permanent In-
come Hypothesis is the major building block of modern consumption theory, for example,
the life cycle theory, the precautionary savings theory, and also behavioral consumption
models involving hyperbolic discounting. The most important insight of the Permanent
Income Hypothesis is that individuals are rational and forward looking when making their
consumption decisions over the life cycle.
   According to the Permanent Income Hypothesis, individual i solves a utility maxi-
mization problem of the form
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                    max∞ Et           β j u (Ci,t+j )                    (1)
                                 {Ci,t+j }j=0
                                                j=0


subject to the intertemporal budget constraint

                     X∞        j                 X∞        j
                            1                             1
                                   Ci,t+j = Ai,t +               Yi,t+j ,                (2)
                     j=0
                          1 + r                    j=0
                                                        1 + r

where Ci,t is consumption of individual i in period t, β is the discount factor, r is the
interest rate, Ai,t are initial assets in period t, Yi,t is income in period t, and Et is the
expectations operator conditional on information available at time t. For simplicity, let
us assume β(1 + r) = 1. Also for simplicity, let’s assume for now that the utility function
takes the quadratic form, such that certainty equivalence holds:

                                                   α 2
                               u (Ci,t+j ) = Ci,t+j −C     .                          (3)
                                                   2 i,t+j
    This simple model has several powerful implications. Most importantly, consumption
is not a function only of current income. Instead, it also depends on current assets and


                                                8
expected future income, and is in fact equal to permanent income. Permanent income is
defined as the annuity value of total net worth, which is the sum of current assets and
the expected discounted net present value of all future income streams:
                              "               ∞        j          !#
                           r                 X      1
                     Ci =       Ai,t + Et                  Yi,t+j        .                (4)
                          1+r                j=0
                                                  1 + r

    Because the expected discounted net present value of future income enters the optimal
consumption decision of an individual, optimal consumption will change whenever new
relevant information arrives. Conversely, any anticipated change in income will not affect
optimal consumption. Consumption growth depends only on changes in the information
set between periods t and t + 1. Thus, we have

                   "         ∞      j            !           ∞      j            !#
                r           X     1                           X     1
   ΔCi,t+1   =       Et+1               Yi,t+j+1       − Et               Yi,t+j+1        (5)
               1+r          j=0
                                 1+r                          j=0
                                                                   1+r

and specifically

                                ΔCi,t+1 = 0 if Et+1 = Et .                                (6)

    Equation (6) holds independent of the form of the utility function used in (1), as long
as the desired consumption path is flat. The predictions from equations ( 5) and (6) can be
tested by analyzing the reaction of consumption to anticipated and unanticipated income
changes in the data. The empirical challenge lies in identifying in the data whether the
individual anticipated any observed income change, and natural experiments are used to
identify clearly unexpected or clearly anticipated income changes.
    We start out describing the few papers analyzing the reaction of consumption to
unexpected income shocks. The literature on the reaction of consumption to anticipated
income changes is much larger, for reasons described below, and we will use this literature
to gain more insights into the specifics of the use of natural experiments.


2.1    Reaction of Consumption to Unexpected Income Shocks
Only a few papers test whether consumption responds to unanticipated income shocks as
predicted by equation (5). The reason is that the specific optimal reaction of consumption
to an income shock depends among other things on the nature of the shock (whether it


                                             9
is temporary or permanent), on the age of the recipient (if we deviate from an infinite
horizon assumption and instead employ a life-cycle set up), and on the functional form of
the utility function, which in a more realistic set up might involve prudence from part of
the household, such that households build a buffer stock of savings to partly self-insure
against future income fluctuations.

2.1.1    Unexpected Temporary Income Shocks

If we maintain the assumption of a quadratic utility function, and if an unexpected income
change, that is, an income shock, is a strict one-time temporary income change, equation
(5) reduces to

                                        r
                              ΔCi,t+1 =     [Yi,t+1 − Et (Yi,t+1 )] ;                  (7)
                                      1+r
that is, the predicted consumption change is equal to the annuity value of the unexpected
income change. Thus, as a generalization of this prediction, the predicted consumption
change after a temporary income shock clearly should be small. One therefore needs large
temporary income changes in the data in order to identify the response of consumption.
    A very early paper testing this prediction is Kreinin (1961), whose analysis was later
supported by further evidence by Landsberger (1966). Kreinin (1961) uses the 1957/58
Israeli Survey of Family Savings to analyze how Israeli households spent one-time restitu-
tion payments from Germany, which around 4 percent of urban Israeli households received
during the year of the survey. He finds that Israeli households saved approximately 85
percent of the restitution payments, which on average amounted to close to one annual
disposable income.1 This behavior seems roughly in line with a small response of con-
sumption to the temporary income change.
   Imbens et al. (2001) and Kuhn et al. (2011) analyze the consumption of lottery winners.
Lottery wins are historical episodes that clearly identify random large temporary income
shocks, and can as such be seen as natural experiments. Kuhn et al. (2011) compare
consumption of Dutch lottery winners and non-winners. 2 The lottery wins in their episode
amount to 12,500 Euros, which is equal to eight monthly average household incomes in
the Netherlands. In line with the Permanent Income Hypothesis, Kuhn et al. (2011) find
that nondurable consumption does not increase significantly through a lottery win, but
   1
     By contrast, Bodkin (1959) finds that windfall incomes of National Service Life Insurance dividends
paid out to US veterans were largely consumed. However, these windfalls amounted to, on average, only
around five percent of annual disposable income.
   2
     They also analyze social effects in a partial population design.


                                                  10
durable expenditures increase somewhat. Imbens et al. (2001) analyze significantly larger
lottery wins, which are reimbursed over 20 years, and find that the increase in savings
after a win is in line with the life cycle hypothesis. The authors of both studies collect
their own data by sending out questionnaires to lottery winners and a sample of non-
winners. The final sample sizes are then comparatively small, with 220 lottery winners in
Kuhn et al. (2011), and 340 in Imbens et al. (2001).
   Brueckner and Gradstein (2013) take a macroeconomic approach to analyze the re-
sponse of consumption to unexpected temporary income shocks. Exploiting the fact that
rainfall is a significant driver of annual aggregate output in sub-Saharan African coun-
tries, and that annual variations in rainfall are random and unexpected, they use rainfall
as an instrument for aggregate output in a regression that analyzes the reaction of aggre-
gate private consumption to aggregate output. They estimate a marginal propensity to
consume out of temporary output shocks that is not significantly different from 0, with
a point estimate of 0.2. Thus, similar to the studies relying on micro data, they find
evidence of significant consumption smoothing of temporary income shocks.

2.1.2   An Unexpected Permanent Income Shock: the Natural Experiment of
        German Reunification

Germany’s separation and subsequent reunification constitute in many ways a perfect
natural experiment. A country with a common history is split into two parts and lives
under very different economic and political systems for 40 years before being reunified.
Importantly, it can confidently be argued that the separation of Germany was exogenous
to the preferences of the underlying populations and the economic conditions in East
and West at the time. The exact location of the border was largely determined by the
position of the allied forces at the end of the war, which in turn was partly determined
by the geographic location of the allies vis-a-vis Germany. To put it bluntly: if the Soviet
Union would have been located to the West of Germany, some western part would have
been socialist for 40 years. That the location of the East-West border can be considered
random is best documented in the paper by Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007), who
provide an overview of the economic and political situation in Germany before World
War II, and show that no marked differences existed between East and West prior to
separation. Based on this evidence, West Germans can be taken as a control group
for East Germans, and economic conditions of East Germans at reunification, resulting
from living under the socialist system of the former German Democratic Republic for


                                            11
40 years, can be considered exogenous with respect to the new economic system after
reunification, since German Reunification was an unexpected surprise event. This is a
large-scale experiment, affecting close to 20 million people in a multitude of dimensions.
    German Reunification has thus been used in a number of studies in the last two
decades to analyze different questions. The first paper using German Reunification as a
natural experiment is Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln (2005), who analyze self-selection
in occupational choice according to risk preferences and its effects on estimates of precau-
tionary savings. Redding and Sturm (2008) study the role of market access, and Redding
et al. (2011) and Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) focus on industrial location choices. Gebhardt
(2013) uses German reunification as a natural experiment to analyze the effect of owner-
ship on relationship specific investment in the housing market, and Bursztyn and Cantoni
(2015) to investigate the effect of television advertisement on consumption. The studies
by Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007), analyzing endogenous preferences for redistribu-
tion, and Burchardi and Hassan (2013), studying the effect of social ties on growth, are
described below and also rely on the natural experiment of German reunification.
    In the context of the Permanent Income Hypothesis, Fuchs-Schündeln (2008) exploits
German Reunification as a large positive permanent income shock for East Germans. This
permanent income shock is embedded into a structural life cycle model of consumption.
This is one of the very few papers which combine a structural model in macroeconomics
with a natural experiment. 3 As in any structural model, this implies making assumptions
about functional forms and calibrating the model carefully. Yet, it has the advantage that
one can talk about the match between quantitative model implications and the data, and
can distill the relative importance of different model components.
    The life cycle model in Fuchs-Schündeln (2008) incorporates a retirement saving mo-
tive, a precautionary saving motive due to income risk and an exogenous liquidity con-
straint, and deterministically changing household size over the life cycle. West German
life cycles play out in this model context from start to end, but East German households
enter the new economic model environment in 1990 at a certain age. At this point in time,
they are endowed with an exogenous wealth level, which is taken as the cohort-specific
East-West wealth ratio in 1990 from the data. Importantly for the predictions of the
model, the East-West wealth ratio at reunification was very low (lower than the East-
West income ratio), which is especially true for older cohorts closer to retirement. From
that point on, East Germans also live in this new economic model environment. Life-cycle
  3
      This approach is more common in other fields, see e.g. the paper by Ahlfeldt et al. (2015).



                                                    12
income growth, income risk, and changing household sizes are calibrated separately for
East and West Germans.
   The calibrated model is able to qualitatively and quantitatively match three stylized
features of East and West German saving rates after reunification: (i) East Germans have
higher saving rates than West Germans; (ii) this East-West saving rate difference is in-
creasing in age at reunification; that is, it is larger for older birth cohorts than for younger
birth cohorts; and (iii) for every birth cohort, this difference is declining over time, with
full convergence of saving rates within roughly ten years. The higher East German saving
rates after reunification are a result of their low initial wealth levels, which leave them
unprepared for the new economic environment in terms of both precautionary and retire-
ment savings. The East-West difference in saving rates is especially large for older cohorts,
because older cohorts of East Germans are least prepared for the new environment: their
wealth position relative to their West German counterparts is especially low, and they
have less time left over their working life to accumulate more wealth through higher saving
rates. The rapid convergence of East German saving rates toward West German levels
is the stylized feature that allows for differentiation between the different components of
the life cycle model. A precautionary savings motive is essential to replicate this feature,
because precautionary savings imply that saving rates decrease as wealth levels approach
the target level of wealth from below.
    The demographic developments after reunification alone would actually predict rising
East German saving rates for younger cohorts, running counter to the empirical evidence.
Disentangling a precautionary saving motive from a demographic saving motive based on
changing household size over the life cycle is difficult in a standard setting, since both
saving motives predict a hump-shaped consumption path over the life cycle. In the context
of the natural experiment of German reunification, however, both saving motives lead to
opposite predictions for the saving behavior of East Germans relative to West Germans.
The paper concludes that East Germans react according to the predictions of the life
cycle model after the large shock of German Reunification, despite being confronted with
entirely new economic conditions, and that a precautionary saving motive is essential
for replicating the data. The first conclusion is in line with the conclusions of the other
studies analyzing large temporary income shocks. The second conclusion is only possible
in a structural model, pointing to the advantages of the approach used in this paper.
Relying on a structural model, one can go beyond analyzing main model predictions to
analyzing the importance of different specific model components.



                                              13
2.2    Reaction of Consumption to Expected Income Changes
In this section, we describe the literature using natural experiments to test the prediction
of the Permanent Income Hypothesis that consumption growth should be insensitive to
preannounced income changes, as specified in equation (6). This is a very large literature:
Appendix table 1 discussed in section 2.2.3 below lists 24 published studies directly testing
this prediction, and six further studies related to it in some way. We first focus on
the methodological side by describing the use of natural experiments, then discussing in
section 2.2.1 different ways to support the random treatment assumption in these studies,
and next analyzing how the presence of liquidity constraints modifies the predictions of
the theory, and how the papers deal with liquidity constraints. Section 2.2.3 then turns
away from the methodolgy to focus on the findings of the studies, and section 2.2.4 tries
to reconcile these sometimes contradictory findings by organizing them along two lines:
the size of the income change and the repetitiveness of the episode under study.
    The second implication of the Permanent Income Hypothesis - that an anticipated
income change should not lead to a change in consumption - has the advantage of holding
independently of the concrete set up of the problem. In particular, it holds also under
functional forms of the utility function other than the quadratic one (e.g. under constant
relative risk aversion), independent of the age of the individual in a life-cycle set up, and
independent of the permanency of the income change at hand. This prediction can be
tested if the econometrician knows that an observed income change was anticipated; that
is, Yt+1 6= Yt , but Et+1 = Et . The null hypothesis would then be that ΔCt+1 = 0 and can
be tested against the alternative ΔCt+1 6= 0 in a simple reduced-form regression of the
form

                                       expected
                     ΔCi,t+1 = α + βΔYi,t+1     + γ 0 ΔXi,t+1 + i,t+1 ,                  (8)

where X is a vector containing any characteristics that are relevant for consumption and
might have changed over time, for example, age and household size. The identifying
assumption is that the error term is uncorrelated with the expected income change, that
            expected
is, Cov[ΔYi,t+1      , i,t+1 ] = 0, meaning no unobserved variables are correlated with the
expected income change and the consumption change. The Permanent Income Hypothesis
states that β = 0. If the underlying assumption of rational expectations and forward
looking behavior is violated, we would expect that β 6= 0, and specifically that β > 0
under the Keynesian consumption theory.
   Running this regression is easy if an expected income change can be directly observed

                                             14
in the data, that is, if we know the underlying assumption Et+1 = Et holds. However, in
general, whether any observed income change in the data was expected or unexpected by
the individual is unclear. A common way to run this regression in the macro literature
relying on aggregate consumption data involves the use of instruments. For example,
Ludvigson and Michaelides (2001) regress quarterly consumption changes on quarterly
income changes, instrumenting income changes with their own lags. Carroll and Summers
(1991) run similar regressions on international data, again instrumenting with lags of
income growth. However, at the micro level, to which the theory applies, finding a suitable
instrument is much harder.
    A more elegant and convincing way to run this regression on the micro level is to exploit
a natural experiment. Natural experiments in this context are clear historical episodes
in which we know that an income change occurred, and that it was preannounced and
thus anticipated by the households. Typical income changes of this kind analyzed in the
literature are associated with taxation (tax rebates, tax refunds, changes in tax laws, etc.),
wages (wage payment schedule, wage changes, social security receipts), and committed
consumption (college cost, mortgage payments, etc.). All these changes have in common
that they are clearly announced some time in advance, and thus the recipient anticipates
them. The Permanent Income Hypothesis predicts that households should adjust their
consumption at announcement of the income change. The size of the optimal consumption
adjustment at announcement depends among other things on the expectations about
the exact nature of the income change and is therefore hard to gauge, as in the papers
described in section 2.1. By contrast, testing the prediction that consumption should not
react when the preannounced income change actually happens is easy.
    In a more general sense, one can think of the test for whether β = 0 in equation (8)
as a general test of the validity of the rational expectation assumption in consumption
decisions. We might not care from either a macro or micro point of view whether house-
holds adjust their consumption at the announcement or the implementation of an income
change, because both typically happen within a short period of time in the natural ex-
periments analyzed in the literature. However, for welfare purposes, whether households
build rational expectations and are forward-looking when deciding how much to consume
and how much to save matters tremendously. For example, to save appropriately for re-
tirement, households have to understand the income process over their life cycle early on
and act accordingly.




                                             15
2.2.1   Random Treatment: Determining an Appropriate Control Group

The estimation of equation (8) using a natural experiment to establish that an income
change was anticipated still faces some challenges. Importantly, equation ( 8) can only
be estimated consistently if the error term is uncorrelated with the preannounced income
                         expected
change; that is, Cov[ΔYt+1        , t+1 ] = 0. Otherwise, the preannounced income change
and the consumption change would be spuriously correlated due to omitted variables.
   One important feature that could lead to correlation between the error term and the
preannounced income change could be seasonality effects. For example, workers in many
countries receive a 13th salary in the month of December, leading to a preannounced
change in monthly income between November and December. At the same time, ex-
penditures increase in December because of holiday shopping. This leads to a spurious
correlation between the preannounced income change and the consumption change. The
income change is endogenous because the 13th salary in December was established pre-
cisely because firms recognized the higher average household expenditure in December.
     In the spirit of an experimental set up, a valid control group can overcome this problem.
If the above-mentioned preannounced income change exhibits temporal variation, that is,
if it does not occur in the same month for all households, then variation is present in the
timing of the treatment, and one can include monthly dummies to account for seasonality
in expenditures directly. The same applies if the preannounced income change happens in
different months in different years, though in that case, one has to argue that expenditure
seasonality should be the same year by year, for example by analyzing whether major
events usually causing increases in expenditure, like public holidays or vacations, happen
in the same months every year. Variation in the individual amount of the preannounced
income change relative to permanent income could help, but only if one could reasonably
argue that this variation is exogenous to any desired seasonality in expenditure.
   In the ideal experiment, one group does not receive any preannounced income change,
and another one does, and both should be comparable along all other observable and
unobservable characteristics, including preferences that lead to consumption seasonality.
In that case, one can think of the first group as the “control” group and of the second group
as the “treatment” group. Here, the natural experiment is very close to a designed field or
laboratory experiment: two groups exist, one of which is quasi-randomly treated and the
other one not, and the behavior of both groups is compared. The analysis of consumption
changes then corresponds to a difference-in-differences set-up. Whereas laboratory or
field experiments would be designed to make the assignment into the treatment group


                                             16
explicitly random, the main challenge of a natural experiment is to convincingly argue
the randomness of the assignment and thus the appropriateness of the control group.
Arguing this point is generally easiest if both groups receive the same treatment, but at
randomly different points in time. This distinguishes natural experiments from field or
laboratory experiments, which typically leave a control group untreated. 4
    In this section, we describe different methods to determine randomness in treatment.
In passing, we also discuss some findings of the papers, which are, however, the focus of
section 2.2.3.

Clearly Established Randomness in Treatment A set of studies that are particu-
larly successful in establishing randomness in the treatment assignment are the papers by
Johnson et al. (2006) and Agarwal et al. (2007), who exploit the 2001 Federal Income Tax
Rebates as a natural experiment, and the studies by Parker et al. (2013) and others, who
analyze the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments as a natural experiment. 5 In both cases,
households received one-time tax rebates in the form of checks sent to them. The media
extensively discussed the rebates in advance, and as such, households should have known
about them. In addition, for the 2001 Bush tax rebates, households received an individual
letter several months in advance stating the specific amount of the rebate. 6 Although the
amount received varied little between households, mostly driven by household size and
thus not exogenous, nice and clearly exogenous variation exists in the timing of the pay-
ments: because sending out all rebate checks on the same day was logistically impossible,
the IRS spread out the payments over ten weeks in 2001 and nine weeks in 2008, and
determined the exact date on which each household would receive the check by the sec-
ond to last digit of the Social Security Number of the main tax payer, which is randomly
assigned. Thus, in these two cases the randomness in the timing of treatment is as clearly
established as in any field or laboratory experiment in which the researcher consciously
   4
     A valid reason for this approach for field or laboratory experiments is the fact that treatment is
typically costly for the researcher.
   5
     Johnson et al. (2006) and Parker et al. (2013) analyze consumption responses, whereas Agarwal et al.
(2007) analyze the response of credit card spending and debt repayment to the 2001 federal income tax
rebates. The 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments have been exploited by a number of studies, including
Broda and Parker (2014) and Parker (2014) analyzing consumption responses, Gross et al. (2014) and
Bertrand and Morse (2009) analyzing bankruptcy filing and repayment of payday loans, respectively, and
Evans and Moore (2011) and Gross and Tobacman (2014) analyzing mortality and morbidity outcomes.
Shapiro and Slemrod (2003) and a series of papers by Sahm et al. (2009, 2010, 2012) analyze self-
reported propensities to consume and to save out of both rebate episodes. Misra and Surico (2014)
analyze heterogeneity in consumption responses to both the 2001 and 2008 stimulus programs.
   6
     For the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payment, the letter came only one week in advance.



                                                   17
establishes randomness through a lottery. Exploiting this situation, the “treated” group
in the above-mentioned studies is the one that randomly receives the rebate in the period
under consideration, whereas the “control” group encompasses all other households, which
receive the rebate in a different period. 7 The week of rebate receipt is clearly exogenously
determined. All of these studies find that household consumption adjusts at receipt of
the rebates, in violation of the Permanent Income Hypothesis.

The “Narrative Approach” In the absence of such a clear random treatment assign-
ment, different strategies can be used. For example, Browning and Collado (2001) analyze
quarterly consumption growth of Spanish workers who are part of one of two different pay-
ment schemes: the standard scheme used in the control group encompasses monthly wage
payments of twelve equal amounts over the year, whereas the second payment scheme in
the treatment group involves higher payments in the months of June (or July) and De-
cember. The payment scheme varies on the plant level, and because workers know which
payment scheme their plant follows, workers in the treatment group should perfectly an-
ticipate the unusually high monthly income growth between the months of May and June
(or June and July, if the extra payment is in July rather than June) as well as Novem-
ber and December, each followed by a month of unusually low income growth. To test
the prediction of the Permanent Income Hypothesis that consumption growth should not
react to preannounced income changes, the authors then simply compare seasonal con-
sumption patterns of the treatment group (called “bonus group”) and the control group
(called “non-bonus group”). 8 Figure 1 shows quarterly income growth per calendar week
of both groups on the left, and quarterly expenditure growth on the right. 9 Despite strong
differences in the income growth patterns between both groups, the expenditure growth
patterns are very similar. Thus, the evidence in Browning and Collado (2001) is in line
with the predictions from the Permanent Income Hypothesis. The major challenge here is
to argue about the random assignment of the payment scheme. For example, plants might
use the second payment scheme because they know their workers have unusually strong
   7
     In the case of the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments, part of the households received not a check but
a direct deposit, for which the timing was somewhat different. Thus, the studies using the 2008 Economic
Stimulus Payments suffer from larger measurement error than the studies using the 2001 federal income
tax rebates, if they cannot determine whether a household received a check by mail or a direct deposit,
which most cannot.
   8
     Similarly, Hsieh (2003) compares the seasonal consumption patterns of Alaskans to the seasonal
consumption patterns in other US states, and Paxson (1993) compares seasonal consumption patterns of
farmers and non-farmers in Thailand.
   9
     Income is measured as average income in the three quarters preceding the interview. While the extra
payments are called “bonus”, there is no performance component involved.


                                                  18
Figure 1: Quarterly earnings growth (left) and quarterly total expenditure growth (right)
in Browning and Collado (2001)




preferences for seasonally high expenditures in June/July and December, for example,
due to certain holiday traditions in their region. The authors explicitly discuss this as-
sumption and give some historical account of how the two payment schemes arose. They
also show that being part of either payment scheme is not significantly correlated with
any observable household characteristics. We call this the “narrative approach”, because
it relies purely on carefully arguing about exogeneity of the treatment, and ruling out po-
tential alternative stories of endogeneity. Placebo exercises, described below, are useful in
this regard. Since Browning and Collado (2001) find that expenditure growth patterns of
both groups over the year resemble each other, the argument about exogenous treatment
becomes somewhat less important; any endogeneity should have led to the observation of
stronger seasonal expenditure patterns correlated with the preannounced income changes
for the treatment group.

Using Different Control Groups and the Matching Approach Sometimes doubts
about exogeneity of the treatment remain even after a detailed description and careful


                                             19
analysis of the circumstances leading to treatment versus non-treatment in the “narrative
approach”. In this case, one can follow different strategies to still establish some confidence
into a causal effect. The most basic strategy, followed by many papers, is to establish
robustness of the results to the use of different control groups. Consider, for example, the
study by Agarwal and Qian (2014a), who analyze the response of consumption and debt
repayment to a unique cash pay-out by the government to each adult Singaporean. The
pay-out happened at the same time for all eligible individuals, such that no randomness
in the timing was present. Although amounts varied across individuals, this variation was
not random, because the amount was a function of income and home values. Agarwal and
Qian (2014a) use foreigners living in Singapore as a control group: foreigners make up
almost 40 percent of the population living in Singapore and were not eligible to receive the
pay-out. They show results of their analysis using this control group, as well as restricting
the analysis to Singaporeans and exploiting only the (non-random) variation in amounts.
    Both approaches clearly have their disadvantages. Specifically, foreigners only consti-
tute a valid control group if their spending patterns are similar to those of Singaporeans
in the absence of treatment. In a first step, the authors compare Singaporeans and for-
eigners along observable characteristics and find some significant differences. To control
for these observable differences, they use propensity score matching methods (going back
to Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983)) to construct two subsamples of matched treatment and
control groups that are comparable across most observable characteristics. Researchers
frequently use propensity score matching methods in microeconometric set ups in which
random treatment cannot be assumed. The basic idea behind a variety of sub-methods is
that one constructs a subsample of the treatment group and a subsample of the control
group, which are as comparable as possible along a long list of observable characteristics.
Importantly, Agarwal and Qian (2014a) also show that both subsamples have comparable
seasonal spending patterns prior to the treatment, though this information is not used
to construct the subsamples. Agarwal and Qian (2014a) find that Singaporeans increase
their consumption already at announcement of the pay-out, and spread the consumption
increase over the following 10-month period.
    Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012) use a similar approach, analyzing the effect of a pre-
announced relaxation in the borrowing constraint among Texan home owners in 1997 on
Texan retail spending. They start out using two control groups, the first consisting of all
other US states except Texas, and the second consisting of all other US states that did not
change sales tax rates during the estimation period. They allow for state-specific linear
time trends, in order to ensure that a different general time trend in Texan retail spend-

                                              20
ing is not mistakenly attributed to the policy change. In a next step, they also employ a
form of matching methodology, specifically, the synthetic control method of Abadie and
Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie et al. (2010), which assigns optimally selected weights to
each control group observation in order to minimize the distance between predicted sales
in Texas and the control group during the pretreatment period. This study falls into the
group of studies analyzing liquidity constraint relaxations (see the discussion in section
2.2.3 below), and like all these studies, finds evidence for binding liquidity constraints.

The Use of Placebo Exercises              A formal way to gauge the validity of the control group
is the use of placebo exercises. The idea of this approach is to define virtual “placebo
treatments” and to compare the average effects of these “placebo treatments” to the one
of the actual treatment. Consider again the study by Abdallah and Lastrapes (2012). In
this study, the “placebo treatment” can be defined as dropping Texas from the analysis
and assuming a state other than Texas introduced a similar relaxation of the borrowing
constraint at the same point in time when Texas actually did. If one includes all US
states in the analysis, one ends up with 49 different “placebo treatments.” 10 For each of
them, the baseline regression is run, and the baseline estimate on the true treatment is
compared to the distribution of the estimated coefficients β from the placebo treatments.
The treatment effect from the baseline regression should be well above the median placebo
treatment effect in order to confirm a true effect. This approach can also be applied to
control groups built based on a matching method. Gross et al. (2014), Mastrobuoni and
Weinberg (2009), and Scholnick (2013) perform similar placebo exercises.

2.2.2    The Presence of Liquidity Constraints

As stated above, equation (6) holds under different concrete setups, for example, in an
infinite or a finite life-time setting, under different assumptions of the functional form of
the utility function, and so on. However, one important assumption has to be maintained:
the consumer problem laid out in equations (1) and (2) does not contain a liquidity
constraint. If liquidity constraints are present and binding, the household will not be able
to adjust consumption optimally at the announcement of a future income increase, but
only at the implementation of the income increase.
   We can deal with this complication in two ways. First, and most convincingly, one
can analyze the consumption reaction to a preannounced income decrease rather than an
  10
    In addition, one could specify “placebo treatments” taking place in Texas, but at a different point in
time, or even taking place in other states at a different point in time.


                                                   21
increase. The presence of a liquidity constraint does not affect the optimal consumption
change triggered by the announcement of a future income decrease: decreasing consump-
tion is always a possibility. Unfortunately, the vast majority of the “natural” situations
that researchers can analyze involve income increases rather than decreases. Here, the
limitation of natural experiments, which cannot be designed to prevent certain limitations
a priori, becomes clear in contrast to self-designed field or laboratory experiments. One
paper that does analyze a decrease in income is the study by Souleles (2000). The paper
analyzes the change in consumption upon an increase in college expenditure due to a
child in the household starting college. Because the college entrance can be foreseen for
some time, and college costs are also usually determined in the spring before the start of
college, one can think of the increase in college expenditure as a perfectly anticipated in-
crease in committed consumption and therefore as a decrease in net disposable income. 11
Souleles (2000) finds that expenditure on strictly nondurable goods and food does not
fall significantly upon the anticipated decrease in net disposable income, or if anything,
it falls by a very small amount, depending on the specification. This study thus finds
behavior in line with the Permanent Income Hypothesis if households face an anticipated
income decrease.
    Apart from focusing on income decreases, one can explicitly analyze the importance of
liquidity constraints by splitting the sample into potentially constrained and most likely
unconstrained households. Because binding liquidity constraints are typically unobserv-
able, this analysis is approximate rather than exact. Consider, for example, the paper by
Johnson et al. (2006) cited above. They rely on three different measures that can proxy for
liquidity constraints: age, income, and liquid assets, where the assumption is that young
households, households with low income and/or a low levels of liquid assets are more likely
to be liquidity constrained. Splitting the sample into “high,” “medium,” and “low” values
of the respective variable, they then analyze whether the consumption change of the “low”
and thus potentially liquidity constrained group is larger than that of the other groups. 12
Moreover, the coefficient β should be equal to zero for the unconstrained “high” group
in the absence of measurement error in measuring liquidity constraints. The evidence
points towards liquidity constraints: the “low” group increases consumption more upon
  11
     This decrease in net disposable income is of course endogenous, because parents can choose whether
and how much to spend on a child’s college education. The paper includes robustness checks instrumenting
for college expenditure.
  12
     Part of the literature relying on credit card data can apply more direct measures of liquidity con-
straints, for example, whether individuals regularly pay interest on their credit card, or how close they
are to the credit limits (see Agarwal et al. (2007), Agarwal and Qian (2014a), and Scholnick (2013)).


                                                   22
receipt of the rebate check than the “high” group, though the difference is not always
statistically significant. Moreover, even the “high” group shows a positive consumption
response under some measures. These are two common findings in the literature: poten-
tially liquidity constrained groups react stronger upon payment receipt, but groups that
are likely not liquidity constrained still react significantly. 13 Misra and Surico (2014) point
out that traditional measures of liquidity constraints might miss wealthy hand-to-mouth
consumers (Kaplan and Violante (2014a)), who hold most of their assets in illiquid form,
and provide evidence that indeed these consumers also react strongly to preannounced
income changes. They argue that imposing homogeneous consumption responses not only
misses interesting and systematic variation in the data that is potentially linked to liquid-
ity constraints, but can also lead to biased estimates of the average consumption response.
Indeed, analyzing measures of liquidity constraints that also incorporate wealthy hand-
to-mouth consumers might allow reconciling some of the conflicting evidence on liquidity
constraints found so far.
    Another set of studies analyzes consumption during the payment cycle. Because in-
come increases from zero to a positive value on the day of wage payment receipt, and then
falls to zero again the day after payment receipt, these studies also encompass regular in-
come decreases. These studies typically involve frequencies higher than the monthly one
and analyze whether consumption is stable or decreases over the payment cycle (see Gel-
man et al. (2014), Mastrobuoni and Weinberg (2009), Shapiro (2005), Stephens (2006),
and Stephens (2003)). In principle, if one assumes the first payment comes at the end
of a “consumption cycle,” liquidity constraints could matter. However, if these regular
payments have already been received for some time, arguing that households could not
build up a buffer to smooth variations over the pay cycle is hard. Still, some of these
studies employ explicit tests for liquidity constraints as described above and find evidence
in favor of liquidity constraints (Gelman et al. (2014), Mastrobuoni and Weinberg (2009),
and Stephens (2006)). Because, in principle, liquidity constraints should not matter in
this setup, the evidence in favor of liquidity constraints might indicate that the proxies
for liquidity constraints are correlated with other behavioral traits that could drive the
excess sensitivity of consumption to preannounced income changes.
  13
    Unfortunately, not all studies analyzing liquidity constraints show results testing the latter hypothesis
that non-liquidity constrained groups should not react significantly.




                                                     23
2.2.3    Overview of Natural Experiment Studies of the Permanent Income
         Hypothesis

More than two dozen papers test equation (8) in various ways. Describing these papers
in detail is beyond the scope of this chapter. Nevertheless, appendix table 1 at the end
of the chapter provides a brief overview listing papers in alphabetical order. The table
lists the nature of the specific episode that is analyzed and whether it involves an income
increase or decrease, the data source (including country and specific data set used) and
sample selection, the main dependent variable and its frequency, whether the paper finds
significant evidence against the Permanent Income Hypothesis and what the main result
is quantitatively, and finally whether any tests of liquidity constraints are carried out and
what their results are. Unfortunately, because the concrete estimations run in each paper
are different, one cannot indicate a comparable estimated coefficient β for each study, but
we provide the main quantitative result as stated in the respective paper. All but two of
the papers involve the use of household or individual data.
    Appendix table 1 distinguishes between three different sets of studies. The first set
includes 25 studies that analyze an experiment involving an anticipated change in dis-
posable income, most often because of a direct gross or net income change, sometimes
because of a change in payment commitments from mortgages or college expenditures.
The dependent variable in these studies is some measure of consumption, which varies
from standard measures of non-durable or durable consumption over caloric intake to
credit card spending or retail sales. Most of these studies find evidence against the Per-
manent Income Hypothesis: consumption growth reacts to the implementation of the
preannounced income change. Notable exceptions are the studies by Agarwal and Qian
(2014a), Browning and Collado (2001), Coulibaly and Li (2006), Hsieh (2003), Paxson
(1993), and Souleles (2000).
    The second set includes four studies that analyze the reaction to preannounced relax-
ations of borrowing constraints. These studies can be seen as direct tests of the presence
of binding liquidity constraints: if liquidity constraints are not binding, then any prean-
nounced relaxation of a constraint might lead to consumption reactions at announcement,
but not at implementation. 14 If liquidity constraints are, however, currently binding, then
any relaxation of the constraint should lead to increased consumption at implementation.
The studies either involve an experiment directly relaxing the borrowing constraint and
   Consumption might still react at announcement, because the possibility of liquidity constraints be-
  14

coming potentially binding in the future affects consumption today.



                                                 24
then use a measure of consumption as the dependent variable, or they involve an ex-
periment relying on an expected income change as in the first set of studies but use a
measure of loan take-up or bankruptcy filing as the dependent variable. Some of these
studies still analyze whether potentially liquidity constrained households react stronger
upon implementation than households who are less likely to be liquidity constrained. All
of these studies find that liquidity constraints do matter. 15
    The third set includes two studies that deal with experiments that involve temporary
price cuts. Under the assumption of forward-looking behavior, expenditures on goods
subject to a temporary price cut increase during the period of the price cut, but at the
same time, expenditures on these goods decrease before or after the period of the price
cut if goods exhibit some degree of durability and the period of the price cut is relatively
short.16 These two studies find different results: Sales tax holidays seem to have long-
lasting effects on purchases of some affected goods (Agarwal et al. (2013)), whereas the
2009 “Cash for Clunkers” program merely shifted the purchases of new cars in time ( Mian
and Sufi (2012)).

2.2.4    Violation of Rational Expectations or Need for Model Extension?

A vast majority of the natural experiments investigating the Permanent Income Hypoth-
esis find evidence against it by rejecting the null that β = 0. This seems to indicate that
households are in fact not forward looking when making their consumption decisions,
even if they have to take into account only income changes that will occur a few months
ahead. How can one then assume that households look many years ahead, as required
for retirement planning, saving for childrens’ college expenditures, and so on? Thus, one
of the major assumptions of the Permanent Income Hypothesis seems to be undermined.
The evidence summarized in section 2.2.2 suggests liquidity constraints can help recon-
cile theory and evidence, but often a significant consumption response to preannounced
income changes can be found even among likely unconstrained households. Apart from
analyzing liquidity constraints, the data are rarely rich enough to provide further insights
into the sources of the failure of the Permanent Income Hypothesis. 17


  15
      DeFusco (2014) and Agarwal and Qian (2014b) are two recent papers analyzing similar experiments
that involve a relaxation of borrowing constraints for home owners in the first case, and an unexpected
tightening in the second case.
   16
      Expenditures on other goods might also change, depending on the degree of substitutability or com-



                                                  25
            Table 1: Studies of the Permanent Income Hypothesis Sorted by Size and Regularity of the Income Change

                                                 Small                                                        Large
                   Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012) 0.03%                            Browning and Collado (2001) 2.61%
                   Parker (1999)a 0.00038 %                                              Hsieh (2003) 4.79%
      Regular
                   Parker (1999)b 0.82%                                                  Paxson (1993) -
                   Shea (1995) 0.0009%                                                   Souleles (1999) 1.24%
                   Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles (2007) 0.22%                               Souleles (2000)c 5.24%
                   Agarwal and Qian (2014) 0.04%
                   Broda and Parker (2014) 0.31%
                   Coulibaly and Li (2006) 0.56%
      Irregular    Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006) 0.10%




26
                   Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McClelland (2013) 0.46%
                   Scholnick (2013) 0.45%
                   Souleles (2002) 0.01%
                   Stephens (2008) 0.35%
     Note: Papers written in bold fail to reject the Permanent Income Hypothesis. The number after each study indicates the
     equivalent variation associated with the respective experiment. The equivalent variation is calculated as described in the
     text. The online appendix provides details on the calculation of the equivalent variation for each paper.
       a
         Change in social security tax rate
       b
         Cap in social security withholding
       c
         Because of the absence of suitable expenditure and income data, the equivalent variation is calculated with
      price-adjusted average quarterly spending from Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006).
    Table 1 distinguishes the existing natural experiment studies along two lines: how
large the analyzed income change is, and whether it happens regularly over the life cycle.
We consider an income change as regular if it is a repeated phenomenon that occurs to an
individual several times over the life cycle, for example, tax refunds or payment schemes
that double the income every year in July and December. On the other hand, unique
government interventions such as tax rebates due to a fiscal stimulus program, or the
running out of mortgage or college payments are considered irregular events. To classify
an episode as large or small, we resort to the equivalent variation as a measure of the
welfare loss associated with a certain behavior. 18 Specifically, we compare two hypothet-
ical consumers over the course of one year only, considering monthly consumption, 19 and
assuming additive separability of monthly utility and no discounting: the first “rational”
consumer smoothes a pre-announced income change x over the course of one year. This
behavior is obviously not optimal, because optimality would call for smoothing the income
change over the entire life cycle, but it is a good approximation for those regular income
changes that occur once a year, and otherwise provides a lower bound of the welfare losses.
                                                                                     x
We calculate the utility of this consumer over a year as U rational (c) = 12 ∗ u(y + 12 ), where
y is regular monthly consumption and x is the extra amount received in the experiment.
The second “hand-to-mouth” consumer has the same baseline income as the “rational”
consumer, but consumes the extra amount x analyzed in the specific episode entirely in
the month of receipt rather than spreading it evenly over 12 months; that is, her utility
is U hand−to−mouth (c) = 11 ∗ u(y) + 1 ∗ u(y + x). We then calculate the equivalent variation
as the monthly consumption amount z we would have to add to the consumption of the
“hand-to-mouth” consumer to make her as well off as the “rational” consumer, expressed
as a percentage of regular monthly consumption. 20 In these calculations, we assume a
constant relative risk aversion utility function with a risk aversion parameter of 2. We
consider an experiment as large if the equivalent variation amounts to more than 1 per-
plementarity between goods.
   17
      The recent study by Parker (2014) is a step in the right direction. It analyzes the spending response to
the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments using data from the Nielsen Consumer Panel, and augments these
data with questionnaires that allow the author to draw conclusions about certain personal characteristics
such as lack of planning, impatience, and inattention.
   18
      The distinction in small and large shocks has already been suggested by, among others, Browning
and Collado (2001), Hsieh (2003), and Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010).
   19
      The time unit is a month rather than a year because most experiments use monthly data and involve
an episode of a predicted income change in a specific month, that is, most papers in the literature follow
this timing logic.
   20
      In other words, z solves 11 ∗ u[y + z] + 1 ∗ u[y + x + z] = 12 ∗ u[y + 12
                                                                              x
                                                                                ], and the equivalent variation
is calculated as EV = z/y.


                                                      27
cent. The spirit of this exercise and the specific threshold of 1 percent are in line with the
study done by Chetty (2012), who analyzes bounds on labor supply elasticities, allowing
for adjustment costs or inattention resulting in households not reacting to tax changes,
as long as the associated utility loss amounts to less than 1 percent in a life-cycle setup.
The online appendix explains in detail which values are used to calculate the equivalent
variation for each study.
    In table 1, papers that fail to reject the Permanent Income Hypothesis are written in
bold. As the table shows, four of the six studies that do not reject the Permanent In-
come Hypothesis analyze large income changes, three of these analyzing income changes
that occur repeatedly over the life cycle, and one analyzing an irregular income change. 21
Among the studies analyzing large income changes, only one (Souleles (1999), who an-
alyzes tax refunds) rejects the Permanent Income Hypothesis. This study involves an
experiment associated with an equivalent variation barely exceeding 1 percent, being the
smallest among the “large” studies.
    The remaining two studies that find support for the Permanent Income Hypothesis
analyze small, irregular changes. Coulibaly and Li (2006) find that home owners smooth
consumption over their last mortgage payment, after which disposable income increases.
The episode is characterized as small, because the last mortgage payment is typically not
high and these households are relatively well off; from a life-cycle perspective, mortgage
payments, however, constitute substantial consumption commitments and thus reductions
in disposable income. The last study, by Agarwal and Qian (2014a), analyzes the 2011
Singaporean Growth Dividends, which amounted to around 500 USD per individual. This
study is different from the others in that it explicitly analyzes the consumption reaction
at implementation and announcement, and finds that consumption increases already at
announcement, but remains higher for almost one year.
    Taken together, the evidence appears to imply that households tend to behave con-
sistently with the Permanent Income Hypothesis when the stakes are high, that is, when
dealing with large or repeated changes in their income. A simple way to rationalize the
different results of the papers may be to consider models that allow for monetary or
psychological adjustment costs of reoptimization. Moreover, learning on the part of the
consumer might play a role. Monetary or psychological adjustment costs would point to
near-rationality, as defined, for example, by Cochrane (1989). The evidence in favor of the
  21
    Paxson (1993) does not provide enough information to calculate the equivalent variation as in the
other studies. Still, it is clear that the utility loss for farmers not smoothing income fluctuations over the
year would be large in the sense of an equivalent variation exceeding 1 percent.


                                                     28
Permanent Income Hypothesis coming from the studies analyzing large income changes is
in line with the natural experiment studies analyzing income shocks in section 2.1, which
all look at large shocks to income and do not find evidence against the Permanent Income
Hypothesis. Moreover, in the two studies that analyze temporary price cuts, the study
analyzing large price cuts (Mian and Sufi (2012)) finds evidence in favor of rational behav-
ior, whereas the paper analyzing relatively small price cuts (Agarwal et al. (2013)) finds
evidence against rationality. Near-rationality is in the spirit of the concept of inattentive
consumers as in Reis (2006) or of inaction inertia as discussed in, for example, Anderson
(2003).22 In Reis (2006), households with high planning costs become inattentive savers,
which live according to a saving plan and let consumption absorb all income changes that
are not large enough to trigger a reoptimization. Small income changes might fall into
this category, and thus an inattentive saver would not adjust his or her consumption at
arrival of new information on a future small income change, but rather consume the ex-
tra income at arrival. The announcement of a large future income change would instead
trigger reoptimization. 23
     Perhaps the most convincing evidence in favor of adjustment costs or near rational-
ity comes from Hsieh (2003). Hsieh (2003) uses data on Alaskan households from the
consumer expenditure survey in order to analyze two natural experiments on the same
set of households. The first experiment involves tax refunds also analyzed by Souleles
(1999). These refunds are anticipated, because the taxpayer has to calculate them when
filing the tax return. Around three quarters of all taxpayers receive refunds, and the
average refund on the household level amounts to 700 USD to 850 USD (in 1982-1984
USD, see Souleles (1999)). Hsieh (2003) finds that Alaskan households receiving a tax
refund consume 28 percent of it in the quarter of receipt. He then runs a regression
on the same set of households, in which he analyzes a different preannounced income
change, namely, payments from Alaska’s Permanent Fund. The Alaska Permanent Fund
redistributes receipts from oil royalties as dividend payments to residents of Alaska. The
amount of the payment has been increasing over time and varies between around 300 USD
per person in 1984 and almost 2000 USD per person in 2000. Because every resident of
  22
     Early studies of near-rationality include Akerlof and Yellen (1985) and Mankiw (1985). For a recent
study, see Hassan and Mertens (2014).
  23
     The survey responses analyzed by Shapiro and Slemrod (2003) do not, however, support the impli-
cations of models of inattentive savers or inattentive consumers: in contrast to the model’s prediction,
individuals who report to target spending are more likely to spend the 2001 tax rebates than individuals
who don’t target spending, whereas individuals who report to target saving show the same propensity to
save the rebate as those who don’t. Also, the survey evidence by Parker (2014) does not point towards
inattentiveness.


                                                  29
Alaska, regardless of income and age, is entitled to this payment, the average household
payment is quite high, substantially higher than the average tax refund. Hsieh (2003)
finds that the same households that show significant excess sensitivity of consumption to
the preannounced income changes caused by tax refunds do not show such excess sensitiv-
ity to the preannounced income changes caused by dividends from the Alaska Permanent
Fund. This is strong evidence that the size of the welfare cost associated with failing to
smooth the income change in question matters, because it comes from exactly the same
set of households. Scholnick (2013) also reports direct evidence that the magnitude of
the analyzed income change matters. He analyzes the reaction of credit card spending to
the predictable changes in disposable income resulting from a household’s final mortgage
payment. Because the mortgage payment amounts vary by households, also relative to
their income, he can analyze whether the size of the income change matters. 24 Indeed,
he finds a positive reaction of credit card spending to the income increase after the final
mortgage payment, in violation to the prediction of the Permanent Income Hypothesis,
but the larger the preannounced income change is, the smaller the reaction.
    Summarizing, the literature on the Permanent Income Hypothesis finds that liquidity
constraints clearly matter for some households. For households that are not constrained,
near-rationality is a likely candidate to explain their excess sensitivity to small anticipated
income changes. Faced with large income changes, households seem to react in line
with the Permanent Income Hypothesis and are thus forward-looking when making their
consumption decisions.


3      Quantification: The Fiscal Multiplier
The size of the fiscal multiplier is a highly controversial topic in macroeconomics. The
fiscal multiplier measures the size of the output change associated with a change in a fiscal
instrument; that is,
                          ΔYt+1 = α + βΔFt+1 + γ 0 ΔXt+1 + t+1 ,                         (9)

where β is the fiscal multiplier, Y is a measure of output, F is a measure of the fiscal
instrument, and X is a vector of potential control variables, typically including lagged
growth measures.
  24
    One might, however, be worried whether the variation in size is endogenous, and how this endogeneity
would affect the estimates. In a recent working paper, Kueng (2015) similarly finds evidence for near-
rationality by exploiting variation in the relative size of the income change across households relying on
the same experiment as Hsieh (2003).


                                                   30
   Although, in principle, running this regression with a time series of macroeconomic
data is easy, the macroeconomic literature on fiscal multipliers faces one serious chal-
lenge: the change in government spending must be exogenous to economic growth. A
standard measure of total government spending is certainly subject to reverse causality,
such that the assumption Cov[ΔFt+1 , t+1 ] = 0 does not hold. For example, automatic
stabilizers such as medicaid and unemployment insurance lead to an increase in fiscal
spending precisely when output growth is low, such that Cov[ΔFt+1 , t+1 ] < 0, biasing
the estimate of β towards zero. On the other hand, procyclical government spending
components might exist if governments have limited ability to accumulate debt, in which
case Cov[ΔFt+1 , t+1 ] > 0, and the estimate of β would be biased upwards.
    The macroeconomic literature typically addresses the issue of endogeneity using vector
auto regression (VAR) methods imposing identifying restrictions (see, e.g., Blanchard and
Perotti (2002) and Mountford and Uhlig (2009)), for example, that government spending
does not react to current economic conditions at the quarterly frequency, or relying on
the so-called narrative approach, which establishes exogeneity of fiscal policies to current
economic conditions based on government records (Romer and Romer (2010)). Relying on
natural experiments provides an alternative way of establishing exogeneity: for example,
a war initiated by another country may create a natural experiment that causes increased
government spending not motivated by current economic conditions in the home country.
Although the absence of reverse causality might be easier to argue, the approach still faces
some important challenges. First, one needs a critical number of these events over time
or geographical variation in order to carry out an empirical analysis. A further hurdle
lies in controlling for effects of the “natural experiment” on economic growth that do
not play out via government spending. For example, a war might affect patriotism in
the home country, potentially increasing the demand for home-produced goods, or a war
taking place in the home country likely affects the capital stock. We review two lines of
this literature: the first one relies on exogenous variation in military spending, and the
second one estimates local fiscal multipliers, relying on different natural experiments.


3.1    Permanent Income Hypothesis Studies and the Fiscal Mul-
       tiplier
Before analyzing the use of natural experiments in establishing exogeneity of fiscal spend-
ing, we want to point out the intimate link between the literature on the Permanent
Income Hypothesis and the question of the size of the fiscal multiplier. Some of the

                                            31
Permanent Income Hypothesis papers involving natural experiments mentioned above
lend themselves naturally to answering questions about the effectiveness of fiscal policy.
Are tax rebates an effective means to stimulate the economy? The answer depends on
whether households save or spend the tax rebates that they receive. However, answering
this question with the studies above has four important caveats: the Permanent Income
Hypothesis would predict that households adjust their consumption at announcement of
the stimulus, whereas the papers cited above analyze consumption reaction at the im-
plementation of the stimulus. In that sense, using them to test the Permanent Income
Hypothesis and to at the same time analyze the response of household consumption to
an economic stimulus is inconsistent. On the other hand, one can consider the estimates
found in these papers as a lower bound of spending, because households could have ad-
justed their consumption already partly at the announcement or during the time between
announcement and implementation. Agarwal and Qian (2014a), which is the only paper
that explicitly analyzes consumption reactions to a temporary income increase both at
announcement and at implementation, find a significant consumption response already at
announcement, which carries over to the time period after receipt of the payment. Sec-
ond, although the receipt of a rebate check can be considered exogenous for an individual
household, for the economy as a whole, it is certainly not exogenous. For example, the
2008 Economic Stimulus Payments were explicitly designed to stimulate the economy.
Third, the papers analyze only a partial equilibrium response of households, not taking
into account any general equilibrium effects. Fourth, most of the cited studies analyze
expenditure on non-durables, whereas for the fiscal multiplier, total spending matters.
    That said, the studies that analyze fiscal policy measures find evidence for a large
spending response by households. Parker et al. (2013) find that households spent be-
tween 50 percent and 90 percent of the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payment on durable and
non-durable goods in the quarter following receipt, indicating that the majority of the
payments were consumed, not saved. Johnson et al. (2006) find that non-durable con-
sumption increased by 20 percent to 40 percent of the payments in the quarter following
receipt of the 2001 tax rebates, and that around two thirds of the rebates were spent in
total on nondurable consumption, considering the cumulative effect over the six months
period following receipt. 25 Misra and Surico (2014) stress the heterogeneity of the con-
sumption response to both the 2001 and 2008 episodes. They show that the aggregate
consumption response is smaller once this heterogeneity is taken into account than the
 25
      They do not analyze expenditure on durable goods.



                                                  32
estimates imposing homogeneity would suggest. The total disbursements of $38 billion in
2001 and $96 billion in 2008 lead to an estimated aggregate consumption response of $16
($26) billion in non-durable consumption in 2001 based on the heterogeneous (homoge-
neous) estimates, and to an increase of $15 ($56) billion in total consumption in 2008. 26
Sahm et al. (2010) use survey data on spending intentions. Their estimated spending
responses are smaller than the ones estimated from actual expenditure data, indicating
that around one third of the 2008 Economic Stimulus Payments were spent. 27 Analyzing
an older episode, Hausman (2015) finds that within one year, World War I veterans spent
between 60 percent and 75 percent of bonuses that they received in 1936, mostly on cars
and housing.


3.2     Military News Shocks as Natural Experiments
One way to address the potential endogeneity of government spending is to use military
events as natural experiments. The work of Barro (1981) and Hall (1986) recognized the
usefulness of military events in this regard early on. Geopolitical events leading to a large
buildup of military expenditure are often plausibly exogenous, because they arise due to
actions of some other nations. Thus, they can potentially be used as natural experiments
to isolate exogenous changes in government spending. The first paper systematically
following this approach is the study by Ramey and Shapiro (1998). Based on newspaper
articles, they identify three major military news shocks in the post-World-War II area:
the Korean War news shock in the third quarter of 1950, the Vietnam War news shock
in the first quarter of 1965, and the Carter-Reagan buildup after the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan in the first quarter of 1980. Ramey (2011) adds to this list the shock of
September 11, 2001. Because the identification is based on newspaper articles, these
studies also fall under the “narrative approach,” but they try to identify the dates of
military shocks that can be used as natural experiments. Note that timing the news
shock is not trivial, especially during the Vietnam War. Ramey and Shapiro (1998)
document that newspaper articles only started arguing about a military buildup after the
February 1965 attacks on the US Army barracks, long after the military coup of November
  26
     Kaplan and Violante (2014b) point out potential reasons for the generally lower impact of the 2008
reimbursements, among others the larger size of the individual household transfers, and the phasing out
at the lowest income levels.
  27
     Using the same methodology and data, Sahm et al. (2012) find that the form of payment matters,
and reducing tax withholdings leads to a smaller consumption response than explicitly distributing a
rebate. Misra and Surico (2014) provide some reconciliations of the different estimates of consumption
responses based on expenditure data and survey responses.


                                                  33
1, 1963, in Vietnam. Military actions of foreign entities caused all four events, such that
the argument that they were exogenous to current economic conditions in the United
States is very plausible.
    However, using these events as natural experiments to analyze the size of the fiscal
multiplier still poses some challenges. Specifically, these news might affect other relevant
variables that influence GDP, rather than only government spending. This argument
especially holds for World War II, in which rigid price controls were introduced and
patriotism was strong, both of which might have had a direct effect on labor supply.
For this reason, Ramey and Shapiro (1998) exclude World War II from the analysis. A
thorough discussion of potential confounding factors in the other episodes is, however,
somewhat missing from the literature. For example, the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001
likely affected uncertainty about the future path of the economy, and uncertainty shocks
can matter for economic performance (see, e.g. Bloom (2009)).
    The early study by Ramey and Shapiro (1998) runs a regression of GDP growth on
these quarterly military event dummies with up to eight lags, whereas Ramey (2011)
uses these dummies in a VAR approach. She finds that the military event dummies
significantly precede increases in military spending, and concludes that traditional VAR
approaches might fail to identify anticipation effects. This failure can potentially reconcile
the different outcomes that the traditional VAR approach and the “narrative approach”
relying on military buildups have found in the effect of government spending on private
consumption and real wages: traditional VAR approaches typically find a positive effect
of government spending shocks on consumption and the real wage, whereas the papers
relying on military news shocks find a negative effect on these two variables. Edelberg
et al. (1999) provide two robustness exercises for Ramey and Shapiro (1998): first, they
show that results are robust to small disturbances in the event dates. Second, and more
importantly, they run placebo exercises in the spirit of the placebo exercises discussed
in Section 2.2.1 and find that using arbitrary event dates leads on average to response
functions outside of the confidence bands of the true responses.
    Ramey (2011) goes one step further than relying simply on dummy variables, and
constructs a defense news variable that measures the change in expected net present value
of future military spending at the quarterly frequency based on newspaper accounts. This
variable is a strong predictor of government spending as long as World War II is included.
The implied fiscal multiplier relying on a VAR estimation lies between 1.1 and 1.2, but falls




                                             34
to between 0.6 and 0.8 if World War II is excluded. 28 In line with this evidence, Hall (2009)
stresses that the identifying variation in these studies comes from large wars, especially
World War II and the Korean War. Focusing on differential effects by spending categories,
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) find that military spending is the spending variable
associated with the largest multiplier.


3.3     Local Fiscal Multipliers
The literature on fiscal multipliers has recently started using natural experiments to es-
tablish the exogeneity of the fiscal instrument by relying on regional data and estimating
local fiscal multipliers. These multipliers are local in the sense that they analyze the
effects of changes in local spending financed by the federal administrative level, which
therefore constitute windfall payments from the point of view of the localities and are
not associated with an increase in taxation or local debt. 29 Importantly, this approach
ignores general equilibrium effects at the national level. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)
provide a theoretical discussion of how the local fiscal multiplier estimate can be tied to
a standard aggregate fiscal multiplier; we come back to this shortly at the end of this
section.
    A typical regression run in the local fiscal multiplier literature is the following variant
of (9):
                   ΔYi,t+1 = α + βΔF̂i,t+1 + γ 0 ΔXi,t+1 + δ i + η t + i,t+1 ,            (10)

where subscript i stands for the local entity, δ i are regional fixed effects, and η t are year
fixed effects.30
    An advantage of the local fiscal multiplier regression (10) over specification (9) is that
it allows the inclusion of regional and year fixed effects. The regional fixed effects cap-
ture any time-invariant regional characteristics that could lead to systematically lower or
higher growth in a respective region (e.g. in urban vs. rural regions). 31 More important in
  28
      In Owyang et al. (2013), this defense news variable is constructed for the United States from 1890
to 2010, and for Canada from 1921 to 2011. The authors then also analyze whether the government
spending multiplier is larger in recessions than in booms, and find evidence in favor for Canada, but not
for the United States. Barro and Redlick (2011) also use this variable on an annual frequency to estimate
multipliers, and find somewhat smaller multipliers than in Ramey (2011).
   29
      An exception to this rule is the paper by Clemens and Miran (2012).
   30
      Note that Corbi et al. (2014) and Shoag (2013) instead regress output growth on the level of the
fiscal instrument, rather than its change.
   31
      The papers by Serrato and Wingender (2014) and Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012) are exceptions in
this regard by not including regional fixed effects. The former instead includes state-decade fixed effects,
with the local level being the county level. The latter one does not include a time dimension, thereby


                                                    35
the context of estimating the fiscal multiplier might, however, be the inclusion of year fixed
effects. These effects allow one to control for any national fiscal and more importantly
monetary policies that happen concurrently with the local fiscal policy. Monetary policy
is often correlated with fiscal policy, and disentangling the effects of both is therefore a
major challenge for any macro estimation of fiscal multipliers. However, because monetary
policy is conducted exclusively on the national level, it can easily be controlled for by in-
cluding year fixed effects in an estimation of local fiscal multipliers. Given that local fiscal
multiplier studies all analyze multiple local subentities of a country, they lend themselves
naturally to analyzing potential heterogeneous effects of fiscal multipliers depending on
local characteristics such as business cycle conditions, openness, financial development,
and so on.

Instrumental Variables To address potential endogeneity of the fiscal instrument,
regression (10) is estimated via instrumental variables, where Δ F̂i,t+1 is the predicted
change in fiscal spending based on a first-stage regression involving the instrument I:

                               ΔFi,t+1 = κ + θIi,t + ζ 0 ΔXi,t+1 + εi,t+1 .                (11)

The challenge of the estimation is to find a valid instrument for the fiscal measure. The
exclusion restriction for the instrument is that it affects output growth only through its
effect on the fiscal measure. Here is where natural experiments step in. Consider, for
example, the paper by Serrato and Wingender (2014). Their instrument relies on the fact
that federal spending at the local level is tied to the size of the local population. The
estimates of the local population size come from different sources in different years: the
census carried out every 10 years provides direct counts of the local population, whereas
in the years in between two censuses, population estimates are updated based on vital
statistics and estimated migration flows. As a result, substantial fluctuations occur in
measured population in the year before a decennial census and the census year, which are
called census “error of closure.” The authors use this census error of closure to instrument
the change in federal spending on the local level in the affected years.
    For the census error of closure to be a valid instrument, it has to predict fiscal spending,
and the exclusion restriction has to hold. The first of these two conditions can relatively
easily be established by showing the first-stage regression results and running an F-test for
the joint significance of the instruments. Concerning the second condition, the authors
preventing the use of local fixed effects.


                                                   36
show theoretically that under classical measurement error in both census counts and
administrative estimates, or under the weaker condition that both estimates are biased in
the same order of magnitude, the exclusion restriction holds. Moreover, they explain in
detail how the two estimates arise and what the literature concludes on their accuracy and
potential biases. For example, one could imagine that the population estimates between
censuses systematically underestimate population growth in fast-growing counties, such
that the error of closure is always more positive in counties that experience an economic
expansion. Any persistence in growth would then result in a direct effect of the error of
closure on growth, violating the exclusion restriction. Controlling for past growth helps
address this concern but does not rule it out completely. To provide further evidence that
the exclusion restriction holds, the authors show that the census error of closure shows
only minimal geographical correlation at the county level and no time-series correlation.
Most importantly, it is not positively correlated with growth in the years before the error
of closure should actually affect federal fiscal spending on the county level. 32 Although
in the end these exercises remain suggestive, addressing potential concerns about the
exclusion restriction in further evidence of this kind is good practice.
    This literature uses two other interesting natural experiments. The first one, used in
the paper by Acconcia et al. (2014), is an Italian law specifying the dismissal of elected
local officials and their replacement with three external commissioners for 18 months
upon evidence of Mafia infiltration in city councils. This replacement leads on average
to sharp reductions in spending on public work at the provincial level, the reason being
that this sector is typically a lucrative source of business for the Mafia. The authors
show that growth rates prior to dismissal are not significantly different in treated and
control provinces. The second natural experiment in the paper by Cohen et al. (2011)
consists of changes in congressional committee chairmanships, which influence government
spending in the state of the new chairman. 33 Because chairmanship in a committee is
largely determined by seniority, and because chair turnover results from election defeat
or resignation of the incumbent, it is driven by political circumstances in other than the
home state of the incoming chairman and can thus be seen as exogenous.
  32
     The error of closure should only affect fiscal spending two years after the census is run, given that
publishing the results takes two years. In fact, a significant negative correlation exists between the error
of closure and employment and income growth in previous years. This finding might raise the worry
that spending rises in past recession areas, and that mean reversion might lead to future growth in these
areas. The authors argue that controls for past growth in the second-stage regression take care of these
concerns.
  33
     Feyrer and Sacerdote (2012) take a similar approach, relying on average seniority of House members,
when analyzing the effectiveness of the 2009 ARRA.


                                                    37
    There exist other papers in this literature that rely on the same approach of finding
a valid instrument for the fiscal measure in equation (10), but in which this instrument
is less clearly a natural experiment. There is an obvious “grey zone” of what can be
considered a natural experiment. In the spirit of our definition that a natural experiment
is an historical event that provides exogenous variation to give a plausible identifying
assumption, the Census error of closure, the law specifying replacement of local officials
upon evidence of Mafia infiltration, and the chairmanship in congressional committees,
are such historic episodes. A variety of papers in this literature use instruments to iden-
tify exogenous variation in government spending, where the instruments do not rely on
historical episodes and are themselves more directly linked to fiscal policies. Examples of
these papers are Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), who exploit different state-level sensi-
tivities to national military spending, 34 Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012), who use pre-crisis
state-level Medicaid spending to extract the exogenous component of increases in federal
match components of state Medicaid expenditure during the 2009 American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA), and Wilson (2012), who uses exogenous formulary allocation
factors such as federal highway miles in a state or a state’s youth share to instrument
government spending under the 2009 ARRA. Similarly, Clemens and Miran (2012) use
fiscal institutions on the state level, specifically how strict balanced budget rules are, to
identify exogenous variation in government spending. Shoag (2013) and Shoag (2015)
exploit variations in returns to state pension plans. 35 Kraay (2012) and Kraay (2014)
focus on World Bank lending, in which project financing is spread out over several years
after the lending decisions. In all of these cases, the instrument is quite closely related to
the research question, which makes it harder to argue that the exclusion restriction holds.
Therefore, all of these papers spend considerable effort on providing additional evidence
for the validity of the exclusion restriction. A common strategy to establish exogeneity
of the instrument is to include further controls and exploit specifics in the timing to ar-
gue that the identifying assumption holds; see, for example, Clemens and Miran (2012)
  34
      Fishback and Cullen (2013) analyze the effect of state-level military spending during the Second
World War, but do not use instruments for state-level military spending, but rather rely on narratives to
establish exogeneity.
   35
      Both papers use the same instrument. However, the analysis in Shoag (2013) focuses on the Great
Recession years 2008 and 2009, whereas Shoag (2015) exploits information from 1987 to 2008. Brückner
and Tuladhar (2014) also analyze a local fiscal multiplier using data from Japanese Prefectures. Whereas
their study shares the use of year and region fixed effects with the studies cited above, it addresses the
issue of endogeneity of local government expenditures by using a system GMM approach. The paper
by Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2015) analyzes federal spending on the state level during the Great
Depression, relying on instruments similar in spirit to Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), Chodorow-Reich
et al. (2012), and Wilson (2012)


                                                   38
and Kraay (2012).36 Wilson (2012) controls for a variety of variables that are potentially
correlated with post-2009 growth and also 2009 ARRA spending, for example, pre-2009
employment growth.

Regression Discontinuity           There are only few papers in the local fiscal multiplier
literature using a regression discontinuity approach. Since the exploited policy rules that
generate the discontinuities are close to the research question at hand, these papers are
closer in spirit to the second group of papers cited above than to the first group, which
relies more obviously on natural experiments. Corbi et al. (2014) exploit the fact that,
as in the United States, Brazilian federal transfers to municipal governments rely on the
population at the local level. In contrast to the United States, a specific step function
exists that specifies the total transfer amount for certain population classes. Thus, sharp
discontinuities arise in the transfers per capita around the cut-off values in this step
function, whereas all other variables should change smoothly around the cut-off. This is
the identifying assumption for their regression discontinuity approach. Another advantage
of their experiment is that several cut-off values exist (rather than, e.g., only one cut-off
value as in the paper by Trezzi and Porcelli (2014)), which gives the test high statistical
power. Sixty percent of the municipalities in the sample switch the population class at
least once in the sample period. Because the data show that adherence to the cut-off is
not implemented 100 percent, and, in fact, some judiciary disputes surround them, the
authors confront a fuzzy regression discontinuity design and use the theoretically predicted
transfers based on the actual population count as an instrument for the actual transfers.
They employ different bandwidths around the cut-off values, and also report results from
regressions with a rectangular kernel. In a similar spirit, Becker et al. (2010) and Becker
et al. (2013) use a regression discontinuity design to analyze the effect of EU grants on
local development, relying on a discontinuity in regional GDP per capita eligibility for
the grants.

Estimates of the Local Fiscal Multiplier              The estimates of the local fiscal multipliers
in the studies described above show surprising consistency and range between 1.5 and
2, despite the different identifying restrictions based on natural experiments or other
institutional details, different econometric approaches, different nations, and different
  36
    Kraay (2012) in addition uses predicted project-level disbursements, given the economic sector and
the geographic region, rather than actual ones to address concerns about endogeneity.




                                                 39
fiscal spending measures. 37 Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) show that an open economy
New Keynesian model with sticky prices and complementarity between consumption and
labor is best able to replicate these large local fiscal multipliers, which they call “open
economy relative multiplier”. They also show that the model implied “closed economy
aggregate multiplier”, which is commonly considered in the literature on fiscal multipliers,
depends in its size very much on the accompanying monetary policy.
    Another common feature of these studies is that the IV estimates are 5 to 15 times
larger than the simple OLS estimates of equation (10).38 This indicates that OLS es-
timates might be systematically downward biased, for example, because of automatic
stabilizers (which increase spending in downturns of the economy), general endogeneity
of government spending (increased discretionary spending to stimulate the economy in
downturns), and interaction with monetary policy (fiscal spending might step in specifi-
cally when monetary policy does not work due to a binding zero lower bound).


4        Identification: Causal Factors in Economic Growth
4.1       The Fundamental Causes of Growth
In the previous two sections, we have explored a number of natural experiments that
inform us about the validity of established macroeconomic models and the direction and
magnitude of causal relationships that operate within them. In this section, we ask what
natural experiments can teach us about the kind of models that we should be writing. In
other words, what are the important determinants of economic outcomes that are outside
of our standard models?
    By far the most influential application of natural experiments in this respect is the
search for the “fundamental” reasons of why some countries are rich while others are
poor. Corresponding to the breadth of this question, the empirical work in this area is
very diverse and much less focused than the work we covered in the previous sections. For
this reason, we find it useful to first lay out a rough framework to fix ideas and organize
the different strands of this literature into a coherent narrative.
       To distinguish the fundamental causes from proximate causes of economic growth,
  37
     These multipliers to windfall income are larger than the multiplier estimated by Clemens and Miran
(2012), who take local tax or debt adjustments into account.
  38
     For example, in Serrato and Wingender (2014), the 2SLS estimate is 15 times larger than the OLS
estimate, 7 times larger in Acconcia et al. (2014) , and 5 (based on regional data) to 15 (based on state
data) times larger in Nakamura and Steinsson (2014).


                                                   40
consider a typical production function that relates output Yt to the input of physical
capital Kt , human capital Ht , the number of workers Lt , and the level of labor-augmenting
technology At :
                                  Yt = Ktα Htβ (At Lt )1−α−β ,                          (12)

where 0 < α < 1, 0 < β < 1, and α+β < 1. By dividing both sides of this expression by L,
we can see that output per capita is a function of technology and the intensity of physical
and human capital per worker. Equation (12) thus describes a causal relationship: having
better technology and more capital and education per worker makes a country richer. 39
   Although this statement is undoubtedly true, it is also not very helpful for understand-
ing the large and persistent differences in income per capita across countries, without
understanding the process by which countries accumulate capital and technology. This
question is the object of a large theoretical literature on economic growth.
   Consider, for example, the canonical growth model based on Solow (1956) and Swan
(1956). In this model, At grows at the exogenous rate g and at every point in time,
and households invest a fixed proportion of their income into physical and human capital
according to
                                     K̇t = sk Yt − δ k Kt

and
                                          Ḣt = sh Yt − δ h Ht ,

where the savings rates s and depreciation rates δ are between zero and one, and sk +sh <
1.
    Using lowercase variables to denote the level of output, physical, and human capital
in terms of effective labor,

                                   xt ≡ Xt / (At Lt ) , X = Y, K, H,

we can then show that at the balanced growth path, consumption, output, physical,
and human capital per effective unit of labor are all constant. In particular, output per
effective labor is
                                                 1−α−β
                                                     α                1−α−β
                                                                          β

                               ∗          sk                   sh
                              y =                                               .
                                        g + δk               g + δh
It follows directly that output per capita (as well as physical and human capital per
  39
    Here we are assuming that all countries share the same production function (12) but do not otherwise
interact with each other.


                                                    41
capita) grows at the fixed rate g.
   The Solow-Swan model again describes a causal relationship: having better technology
and saving more for investment in human and physical capital makes a country richer.
Although this relationship gives us a better idea of how growth happens (by saving and
accumulating capital), it does arguably little for our understanding of why people in in
a poor country like Zimbabwe use worse technology and/or invest less in physical capital
and education than people in a rich country like the United States.
    In the half century since the publication of the Solow (1956) and Swan (1956) papers,
growth theory has made tremendous advances in understanding the mechanics of growth.
Aside from endogenizing the savings rates (s), one of the major advances of the litera-
ture has been to explain the dynamics of the technology process, such that At becomes
effectively an endogenous accumulated factor itself. With one major exception, which
we will discuss in detail below, these advances, however, do not change the fundamental
nature of the problem: physical capital, education, and technological progress are proxi-
mate rather than fundamental causes of growth. Understanding their dynamics helps us
understand the mechanics of growth (how it happens) but conceptionally does not tell us
why a poor country like Zimbabwe is fundamentally different from a rich country like the
United States.
    For the purposes of our following discussion, we will define the fundamental causes
of economic growth as the political, institutional, and social reasons that are preventing
many countries from investing enough in technology and productive factors. Formally, we
may think of a typical growth model as producing a mapping from a vector of parameters
φi governing the production and accumulation of technology and productive factors in a
                                            Y∗
country i to its level of output per capita Li,t
                                             i,t
                                                 on the balanced growth path:

                                               Yi,t∗
                                     F (φi ) →       .                               (13)
                                               Li,t

Whereas we think of the proximate causes of growth as operating within the function F ,
the fundamental causes are the political, institutional, and social factors that generate
cross-country variation in the parameters φi .
   In the remainder of this chapter, we consider the evidence that natural experiments
have uncovered for three such fundamental causes:

  1. institutions,

  2. social structure, and

                                            42
  3. culture.

    For the purposes of our following discussion, we define as “institutions” the broad
set of rules, regulations, laws, and policies that affect economic incentives and thus the
incentives to invest in technology, physical capital, and human capital ( Acemoglu, 2009).
By social structure we mean “patterned relations,” that is, the network of friendships and
family ties between large groups of individuals that affects the diffusion of information
and the ability of individuals to enforce contracts, as well as the system of socioeconomic
stratification (e.g., the class structure) of a society. As “culture” or “civic capital,” we
define those persistent and shared beliefs and values that help a group overcome the free-
rider problem in the pursuit of socially valuable activities (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales,
2012). Note that the literature often refers to the latter two categories jointly as “social
capital” (Putnam, 2000). We prefer to separate them here because both of these elements
have been empirically shown to have independent effects on growth, but otherwise have
no preference for one definition over another.
    Taken together, these three causes determine the social environment in which eco-
nomic activity takes place. Because conducting controlled experiments on this social
environment at the scale of countries or even regions is generally impossible, natural ex-
periments are arguably our best bet for making causal inference at this scale. In each
case, we will first discuss a selection of natural experiments that provide evidence of the
causal relationship between GDP per capita and institutions, social structure, and cul-
ture, respectively. Then, whenever available, we will discuss some of the evidence on
the dynamics of each of these forces and avenues for future research. Because each of
these literatures is vast, we cannot give a comprehensive overview of each of them ( Guiso
et al. (2012), Algan and Cahuc (2013), Alesina and Giuliano (2015), Nunn (2013), and
Chaney (2014) provide excellent surveys). Instead, we focus on giving a broad overview
of the types of measurement and identification issues that arise in these applications, and
provide specific examples.
    To our list of three fundamental causes, we add a set of natural experiments that speak
to the question of whether multiplicity might exist in the mapping ( 13). In other words,
the mechanics of economic growth may be such that two countries with identical φi may
end up on different balanced growth paths by pure coincidence or luck. This scenario
is the major exception mentioned above: models that generate multiple equilibria may
be able to explain why Zimbabwe is poor and the United States is rich, without taking
recourse to any fundamental causes of growth:


                                            43
   4. luck and multiple equilibria.

Here again we select papers to give a broad overview of the measurement and identification
issues.
   One striking feature that the studies in all four categories have in common is that they
tend to make relatively little use of the structure provided by growth models. That is,
                                                    Y∗
most approaches relate variation in φi directly to Li,t
                                                     i,t
                                                         , without making use of the structure
of F . In this sense, the literatures on the proximate causes and fundamental causes of
growth have developed relatively independently. We will comment on this issue further
below.


4.2      Institutions and Political Economy
Of the three fundamental causes of economic growth, “institutions”—the rules, regula-
tions, laws, and policies that affect the incentives to invest in accumulated factors of
production—have received by far the most attention from empiricists. The reason for this
attention is that institutions, and in particular the protection of property rights, fit neatly
into standard ways of thinking about incentives: investors will be reluctant to invest in
capital and technology if the returns from these investments are likely to disappear into
the pockets of corrupt bureaucrats. Clearly, bad institutions must thus be bad for growth.
A correspondingly long history of thought in economics links institutions to economic de-
velopment (North and Thomas, 1973; Jones, 2003; North, 1981; Mauro, 1995; Hall and
Jones, 1999; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998).
    However, despite this long intellectual history, which way the causality runs is far
from clear: for example, we may suspect that richer countries can also afford a better
judicial system, and thus better protect property rights. Similarly, researchers disagree
about what makes governments want to protect property rights. In practice, the set of
institutions a society adopts depends in complex ways on the society’s level of economic
development, culture, social structure, the education of the population, and its historical
experience. Identifying a causal effect of institutions on economic growth thus requires
an exogenous source of variation in the type of institutions that different societies adopt.
   Consider, for example, the following structural equation of interest:

                               log(Yi ) = α + βRi + Xi0 γ + i ,                          (14)

where Yi is income per capita in country i, Ri is a measure for the protection of property

                                              44
rights, and Xi is a vector of controls. The fundamental problem in identifying β is that
Ri and Yi are likely to be jointly determined such that cov(Ri , i ) 6= 0, resulting in biased
OLS estimates of (14). Unbiased estimates of β thus require exogenous variation in Ri .
    In this section, we first discuss a set of natural experiments that attempt to identify
such exogenous variation, and establish a causal link between institutions and growth.
We then turn to the mechanism that links institutions to growth and to the dynamics of
institutions.

4.2.1   The Effect of Institutions on Growth

In an influential study, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), consider the natural
experiment surrounding the colonization of virtually all of Africa, North and South Amer-
ica, Australia, and large parts of Asia by Europeans. Today, the countries that emerged
from these former colonies differ widely in their level of economic development and in
the functioning of their institutions – and these differences appear highly persistent over
time. For example, the United States has been richer than the Congo for more than a
century, and there is little evidence that this will change in the near future. Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (AJR) argue that the mortality rates Europeans settling in these
different colonies faced explain part of this heterogeneity: Europeans who made the trip
to the Congo could expect to be plagued by malaria and yellow fever and consequently
had much lower life expectancies than settlers heading for the present-day United States.
This health cost that Europeans faced when considering whether to settle in different
parts of the world determined the form of colonization that each country experienced.
    AJR’s idea is that in countries with a disease environment that was hazardous to Eu-
ropeans (e.g., the Congo), the early colonizers set up institutions that would maximize
the extraction of natural resources, requiring as small a European presence as possible.
These institutions did not introduce much protection of property rights and did not in-
volve checks and balances against the power of the ruling elites that were dominated by
Europeans. By contrast, colonies that were attractive destinations for European settlers
(e.g., Australia and the United States) imported European institutions that fostered safe
property rights and checks and balances in government. The resulting historical differ-
ences in institutions across countries then tended to persist to the present day, resulting
in persistent differences in economic performance that last to the present day.
    Figure 2 shows the relationship between settler mortality and a contemporary measure
for average expropriation risk for the 64 countries included in AJR’s sample. The authors


                                              45
argue that this negative and highly significant relationship delivers quasi-random variation
in Ri because the mortality rates of European settlers in the 17th to 19th centuries (or
any omitted variables correlated with them) are unlikely to have a direct effect on GDP
per capita today, other than their effect through institutions.
Figure 2: Relationship between settler mortality and expropriation risk in Acemoglu et al.
(2001)




    When instrumenting Ri with the mortality rates of soldiers, bishops, and sailors sta-
tioned in country i between 1600 and 1800 CE, AJR’s estimates of the parameter β are
positive and statistically highly significant. They imply that an improvement in Nigeria’s
level of protection of property rights to match that of Chile would, in the long-run, in-
crease Nigeria’s GDP per capita by a factor of 7. Heterogeneity in institutions may thus
account for a large part of the differences that exist today in wealth between countries.
    In an additional application of the same natural experiment, Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2002) argue that heterogeneity in institutions can also explain the large
changes in the relative prosperity that have occurred since 1500 CE Before the onset of
European colonization, civilizations in Meso-america, the Andes, India, and Southeast
Asia appear to have been richer than those in North America, Australia, or New Zealand.
Today, the relationship is reversed: a simple regression of GDP per capita in 1995 on
urbanization in 1500 (as a proxy for historical GDP per capita) yields a negative and
highly statistically significant coefficient. AJR show that differences in the institutions
imposed by European colonizers can again explain this fact. When adding measures of
institutions to the regression and instrumenting them with settler mortality, the negative

                                            46
correlation between present-day GDP per capita and historical urbanization disappears.
Because settler mortality and population density in 1500 are positively correlated, Euro-
pean colonizers tended to introduce or perpetuate extractive institutions in places where
they found a high density of local populations, while creating good institutions in places
where they settled in large numbers. 40
   The main identifying assumption for a causal interpretation of the results in both
papers is that, conditional on the controls included in the vector X, the mortality rates of
European settlers in the 17th to 19th centuries (or any omitted variables correlated with
them) have no effect on GDP per capita today, other than their effect through institutions.
    This assumption raises two main concerns. First, omitted variables that are correlated
with historical mortality rates could be correlated with present-day GDP per capita.
The most obvious of these variables is the current disease environment. For example,
places that were hard to settle historically may be difficult to live in today, resulting
in lower economic growth. AJR argue that this is not the case. The historical disease
environment had large negative effects on Europeans, but much smaller effects on the
indigenous populations. For example, local troops serving the British army in Bengal
had mortality rates that were comparable to those of British troops stationed in Britain,
whereas British troops in Bengal had mortality rates that were 7 to 10 times higher. In
addition, AJR’s estimates for β change little when controlling for elements of the current
disease environment, suggesting that the effect of the historical disease environment indeed
transmits itself through differential European settlement at the time. They also show that
their results are robust to controlling for other correlates of GDP per capita, such as the
identity of the colonizer, the origin of the legal system, and various measures of climate
conditions.
    The second main concern is much harder to address: the effect of European settlement
may transmit itself through a range of different mechanisms that may be correlated with
the protection of property rights. In particular, Europeans may also have imported their
own culture and high levels of civic capital or they may have brought valuable social ties
to their countries of origin. Thus, AJR are unable to distinguish the effect of institutions
from the effect of other persistent variables that may be correlated with both European
settlements and institutions, and in particular from the two other fundamental causes of
  40
    For a more in-depth discussion of the merits and weaknesses of AJR (2001)’s analysis, see Easterly
and Levine (2003, 2012), Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004), Olsson (2004), Ro-
drik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2004), Albouy (2012), Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2012), and
Acemoglu, Gallego, and Robinson (2014).



                                                 47
economic growth discussed in the next two subsections. More generally, any instrumental
variables approach that relies on cross-sectional variation will run into this problem.
    Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014) attempt to make progress on distinguishing
the effects of institutions and culture using data on light intensity in combination with
a regression discontinuity approach. They argue that the borders between many African
countries were drawn in the mid to late 19th century by Europeans who were largely unin-
formed about local conditions. As a result, these borders partition more than 200 historic
homelands of ethnicities between two different modern-day countries in a quasi-random
way, subjecting identical cultures residing in geographically homogeneous territories to
different country-level institutions. Their main specification takes the following form:

                                                               0
          yp,e,i = α + βIQLiHIGH + f (BDp,e,i ) + γP Dp,e,i + Xp,e,i Φ + η e + p,e,i ,    (15)

where yp,e,i is a dummy variable that is 1 if pixel p (an area corresponding to about 12 ×
12 km) in the historic homeland of ethnic group e in country i is lit — a simple measure
of whether residents of that piece of land can afford nighttime lighting. IQLHIGH is
an indicator that is 1 if the pixel is in the part of the partitioned homeland that is
located in the country with the relatively higher institutional quality, f (BDp,e,i ) is a
polynomial of the shortest distance of the pixel centroid to the country border, P D is
population density, X contains additional controls, and η e is an ethnic homeland fixed
effect. Under the identifying assumption that at the country border, institutions change
discretely, while all other relevant influences on yp,e,i (including culture and geography)
change continuously, β measures the effect of relatively better institutions at the country
border.
    In contrast to the results of AJR (2001)’s cross-country analysis, the authors find
no effect of institutions at the country border: across different variations, they cannot
distinguish β from zero, suggesting that, at the border, exogenous variation in national
institutions is not associated systematically with higher wealth (more light). These results
may suggest that, at least for Africa, omitted factors such as culture (civic capital) or social
structure might explain the strong association between institutions and GDP per capita.
However, more consistent with AJR (2001)’s results, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou find
a positive and significant effect of better institutions for split groups that are located close
to national capitals. The absence of an effect at the border of the average African country
could thus simply be explained by the fact that the influence of many African countries’



                                               48
governments is weak in remote regions. 41
   In a closely related paper, Pinkovskiy (2013) also uses a regression discontinuity ap-
proach to test for discontinuities in the amount of light per capita at country borders, but
applies his analysis to the entire world, rather than only to Africa. Because most borders
in the world were not drawn randomly but might be determined by the location of ethnic
homelands, culture, or other variables, he restricts his estimates to within 50km of the
border. Within this narrow bandwidth, one may plausibly argue that the exact location
of the border is quasi-random, even though borders outside of Africa were not drawn
by largely uninformed imperial powers. In contrast to Michalopoulos and Papaioannou
(2014), Pinkovskiy finds a large and statistically significant discontinuity at national bor-
ders, although it is not significant when restricting the sample to Africa. In addition, this
effect of the country border becomes statistically insignificant once Pinkovskiy controls
for differences in the rule of law.

4.2.2    The Effect of Institutions on Business Cycles and Conflict

Given this evidence of a causal link between institutions and growth, an obvious question
is how this effect transmits itself in practice. One interesting, and often overlooked,
piece of evidence comes from yet another application of AJR (2001)’s natural experiment.
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaicharoen (2003) show that countries with worse
institutions (again instrumented with settler mortality) also have more volatile business
cycles and are more prone to episodes of economic crises. Once the authors control for
this effect of institutions, the standard macroeconomic policies that are often blamed for
macroeconomic instability (e.g., high government spending and high inflation rates) are
no longer systematically associated with macroeconomic volatility.
    The authors draw two main conclusions from this finding. First, bad macroeconomic
policies are often a symptom of underlying institutional problems. Second, they are
often not the primary mediating channel through which institutions affect macroeconomic
stability. These results suggest that a more useful line of thought might be that policies
such as excessive government spending and high inflation rates are just two of a large set
of tools that politically powerful groups use to extract rents from the economy. Any policy
(perhaps imposed by the IMF or another international organization) that shuts down one
of these distortions but does not resolve the underlying institutional problems, may then
  41
     There is also a technical debate on the bleeding of nighttime light across borders that may attenuate
any estimated border-effect, see the discussion in Pinkovskiy (2013).



                                                   49
simply result in the use of a different tool (another macroeconomic or microeconomic
distortion) that achieves the same aim. Macroeconomic instability and low growth may
then be thought of as collateral damage from this rent-extraction process. 42
    In a second application of their natural experiment surrounding the quasi-random
drawing of African boundaries by relatively un-informed Europeans, Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2011) show that ill-designed institutions may also slow economic develop-
ment by prompting long-term conflict. Using data on the pre-colonial locations of 834
ethnic groups, they show that the drawing of African boundaries indeed appears to have
quasi-randomly partitioned 229 of these groups between two adjacent states: partitioned
and non-partitioned ethnicities do not appear to differ systematically in their pre-colonial
characteristics, except that partitioned groups tended to cover larger land areas and to
have historical homelands with larger areas under water. The authors then show that
between 1997 and 2010, partitioned ethnic homelands had a 30% higher likelihood of ex-
periencing political violence (e.g., battles between government forces, rebel groups, and
militias) and a 40% higher likelihood of experiencing violence against civilians (e.g., mur-
ders, abductions, and child-soldiering raids) than non-partitioned ethnic homelands. This
higher incidence of violence is also associated with worse economic outcomes and lower
provision of public goods.

4.2.3    Persistent Effects of Historical Institutions

The main conclusion from this set of studies is that dysfunctional institutions are a major
obstacle to economic development because they deter investment, create macroeconomic
instability, and potentially lead to violent conflict. A crucial question for policy is then
whether replacing such institutions reverses these adverse effects. Several papers study
this question using natural experiments surrounding the imposition and subsequent abo-
lition of historical institutions.
    Banerjee and Iyer (2005) examine the long-term impact of colonial land revenue sys-
tems in British India. In some Indian districts, British officials levied taxes on agricultural
income, whereas in other districts, the collection of taxes was left to a class of native
landlords who were free to set the revenue terms for the peasants under their rule and
to dispossess them if they did not pay their dues. After Indian independence in 1947, all
direct taxes on agricultural income (and thus both institutions) were abolished. Neverthe-
  42
    Most macroeconomic models imply that macroeconomic volatility reduces growth; see Scott R. Baker
and Nicholas Bloom (2013) for estimates of this relationship.



                                                50
less, Banerjee and Iyer find that to the present day, districts that used the landlord-based
system have lower agricultural yields and investment, lower public investment in health
and education, as well as worse health and educational outcomes. To show that these
relationships are causal, the authors instrument the choice of land revenue system with a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the district was annexed between 1820 and 1856, a period
during which the authors argue the British preferred the non-landlord-based systems for
political and intellectual reasons that are orthogonal to the characteristics of the annexed
districts. Banerjee and Iyer argue that these adverse effects of the landlord-based system
persist because of its effect on the social structure of the affected areas: it created a class-
based antagonism that limits the capacity for collective action in the affected districts to
the present day. As a result, these districts are relatively less able to muster the political
influence to claim their fair share of expenditure in education, health care, and public
goods.
    Rather than focusing on heterogeneous institutions within districts that were directly
controlled by the British, Iyer (2010) studies the long-term effects of direct British colonial
rule versus indirect rule across 415 districts in present-day India. Although all of India was
under British political control by the middle of the 19th century, the British administered
directly only part of this area (“British India”), while Indian Kings (“Princely States”)
who had considerable autonomy ruled the remaining parts. After the end of colonial rule
in 1947, all of India then came under a uniform administrative and political structure. The
major problem when attempting to estimate the causal effect of direct British control is
that the British did not randomly annex areas, but presumably were more eager to annex
richer than poorer areas. Iyer deals with this selection problem by using the “Doctrine of
Lapse,” a policy that was in place from 1848 to 1856, under which the British annexed
princely states whose rulers died without a natural heir. Using lapse as an instrument for
direct British rule, she finds no effect on agricultural productivity and investment, but
a negative effect of direct British rule on the provision of public goods, education, and
health care that lasts through the 1990s, although these persistent effects appear to be
decreasing over time.
   Whereas both Banerjee and Iyer (2005) and Iyer (2010) rely on instruments in their
identification strategy, Dell (2010) uses a regression discontinuity design to study the
long-term effects of the mita forced labor system that the Spanish instituted in Peru and
Bolivia from 1573 to 1812. Under this system, villages within a geographically precisely
determined area were required to send one seventh of their male adult population to work
in silver and mercury mines. Similar to Pinkovskiy (2013), she argues that the exact

                                              51
location of the mita boundary is quasi-random within a 50km band, such that all other
relevant influences on household consumption vary smoothly at the border of the mita
area. Subject to this assumption, Dell estimates that the mita had a persistent negative
effect that lowers household consumption by 25% almost 200 years after its abolition. She
argues that this effect most likely transmits itself again through the lower provision of
public goods and education services to these areas.
    Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) analyze the long-term effect of institutions on
individual economic preferences, as opposed to economic outcomes. They explore Ger-
man separation and reunification as a natural experiment to analyze how 45 years of
communist rule affected individuals’ attitudes toward market capitalism, and the role of
the state in providing insurance and redistribution from the rich to the poor. Seven years
after reunification, East Germans are still much more likely to favor a strong role of the
government. This difference in preferences is larger for older cohorts, who lived under
different systems for a longer time period. The micro data allow the authors to include
rich controls for individual economic motives to favor a strong government, such that
the difference can confidently be attributed to the effect of living under a market system
versus a communist system. Similar to the convergence found in Iyer (2010), the longer
East Germans live under the new market system, the more their preferences resemble
those of West Germans. Under the assumption of linear convergence, full convergence
will take one to two generations. This convergence is the product of two forces: around
one third of the convergence is due to a shift in the cohort composition towards younger
cohorts, and around two thirds can be attributed to actual convergence of preferences
within individuals. 43
    The main conclusion from this set of natural experiments is that historical institutions
have long-lasting effects—even after their abolition—that transmit themselves through
their effect on the distribution of political power, social structure, preferences, or some
other mechanism. Although all three studies focusing on economic outcomes commit
considerable effort to narrow down the potential channels of persistence, their design does
not allow them to identify the exact channel. A remaining challenge for future work is
thus to go beyond causal identification of the treatment effect of historical institutions
and to identify natural experiments that speak simultaneously to the treatment effect and
its channel of persistence.
  43
    Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln (2015) similarly find evidence for the endogeneity of democratic
preferences.




                                                52
4.2.4    Determinants and Dynamics of Institutions

If institutions have a large causal effect on economic growth, a crucial question is how
countries acquire well-functioning institutions and what might determine their evolution
over time. The natural experiments covered so far suggest colonization has generated
large and persistent differences in the “level” of the quality of governance and institutions
across countries. This view is also consistent with a large literature on the economic
consequences of legal origins, which has shown that the identity of the colonizing country
determines the type of legal system used in former colonies as well as its performance along
a broad range of dimensions (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998, 1997;
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008). Another example of institutional change
resulting from foreign domination and conquest is the abolition of feudalism and the
imposition of French civil law in German states conquered during the Napoleonic wars
(Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson, and Robinson, 2011).
    Aside from these large-scale cross-sectional experiments, a more practical question,
at least from a policy perspective, may be what determines the dynamics of institutions
over time. To address this question, a large set of studies attempts to identify exogenous
shocks to the political balance of power between different groups within a polity, and
how these shocks may foster or retard the development of good political and economic
institutions. A closely related set of studies, which we discuss in section 4.3.3, focuses
instead on identifying exogenous shocks to a society’s social structure.

Shocks to the Political Balance of Power
  One interesting approach to identifying exogenous shocks to the political balance of
power uses shocks to the natural environment as an instrument. For example, Brueckner
and Ciccone (2011) combine information about GDP per capita and average annual rain-
fall with measures of democratization and constraints on the executive in sub-Saharan
African countries 1981 to 2006. 44 Because many sub-Saharan countries rely heavily on
agriculture, negative rainfall shocks (droughts) may serve as a good instrument for reces-
sions in these countries. Brueckner and Ciccone’s main specification relates changes in
constraints on the executive to lagged GDP per capita and a full set of time and coun-
try fixed effects, while using lagged average rainfall as an instrument for lagged GDP per
capita. They find a negative and highly significant coefficient on GDP per capita. Because
 44
    Constraints on the executive typically refer to the extent of institutional constraints on the decision-
making powers of the chief executive, such as the president.



                                                    53
the specification uses only variation within countries (due to the inclusion of country fixed
effects), this finding implies that transitory recessions are associated with democratiza-
tion, a result that is in line with a literature that has argued theoretically that autocracies
tend to become vulnerable at times of economic crisis (e.g., Lipset (1959), Huntington
(1991), Acemoglu and Robinson (2005)).
   The main advantage of using changes in the natural environment rather than “man-
made” historical events as an instrument is that ruling out reverse causation between GDP
per capita and droughts is easy. The main disadvantage is that droughts, and shocks to
the natural environment in general, may affect democratization (and many other things)
through a variety of channels. Brueckner and Ciccone have two main responses to this
concern. First, their standard specification relates changes in constraints on the executive
to last year’s GDP growth, such that the timing of the effects mitigates the possibility
that droughts may affect GDP through institutions rather than the other way around.
Second, they show that the reduced-form effect of rainfall on democratization is much
smaller in countries that rely less on agriculture. 45
    Chaney (2013) applies a similar empirical strategy to a completely different context.
He argues that in medieval Egypt, the political power of religious leaders tended to increase
during years with deviant Nile floods, because economic crises increased their capacity
to coordinate a revolt. His main specification shows that in years with deviant floods,
Egypt’s main religious figure was less likely to be replaced and that those years also showed
more evidence of popular unrest. He then shows evidence from a variety of sources to
distinguish his interpretation from a variety of other channels through which deviant
floods might have affected Egyptian society.
    Rather than using historical variation in floods over time, Hornbeck and Naidu (2014)
study the effect of a single event, the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, on the balance
of power between black laborers and white landowners in the affected areas. In 1927,
the Mississippi River broke its banks in an unprecedented flood that inundated 26,000
square miles and displaced the affected population. Hornbeck and Naidu argue that this
event represented a significant shock to oppressive racial institutions that were geared
towards keeping black laborers on the land and in jobs with depressed wages. Subject
to the identifying assumption that flooded and non-flooded areas in the same state and
  45
    Also see Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) and Franck (2015) for similar natural experiments.
Other empirical papers studying the relationship between income and political institutions include Barro
(1999), Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer (2007), Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Yared (2005), Persson
and Tabellini (2009), Burke and Leigh (2010), and Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo, and Robinson (2014)



                                                  54
with similar pre-flood characteristics would have developed similarly absent the flood,
they show that flooded areas experienced an immediate and persistent out-migration of
black laborers. In the following decades, these areas, deprived of cheap labor, modernized
agricultural production and increased capital intensity relative to non-flooded areas.
    Instead of shocks to a country’s natural environment, a large literature on the “re-
source curse” studies the effect of exogenous changes in the value of countries’ endowment
of commodities on the quality of their institutions. For example, Caselli and Tesei (2015)
calculate the flow of resource rents accruing to commodity-exporting countries. They
argue that most commodity exporters are small relative to the world market, such that,
for example, a change in the world price of oil is exogenous to Venezuela’s political sys-
tem. Their main specification relates the one-year change in an index of the quality of
a country’s political institutions to the lagged, three-year average change in the price
of its principle export commodity. Their findings are consistent with the idea that an
increase in the value of a non-democratic country’s natural resources tips the balance of
political power in favor of the ruling elite: when autocratic countries receive a positive
shock to their flow of resource rents, they tend to respond by becoming more autocratic
subsequently.46

Popular Mobilization
  The main conclusion from the set of papers studying the effect of shocks to a coun-
try’s political balance of power is that some of these shocks may make it easier to place
constraints on the ruling elite, and thus obtain “good” institutions. However, how such
constraints may be imposed in practice remains unclear, particularly in non-democratic
societies that lack a functioning mechanism for replacing the ruling elite. Part of the
reason for this lack of evidence is that typical measures of institutional quality vary only
at the annual or lower frequency and are thus hard to tie to particular events. In a re-
cent study, Acemoglu, Hassan, and Tahoun (2014) suggest using daily financial data to
measure the real-time effects of popular mobilization in street protests on investors’ ex-
pectations of economic rents from future favoritism and corruption accruing to politically
connected firms. Their approach generalizes the event study methodology typically used
in the finance literature that estimates the value of political connections from changes in
the relative stock market valuations of politically connected firms (Roberts, 1990; Fisman,
2001).
 46
      Also see Brueckner, Ciccone, and Tesei (2012) for a similar exercise.



                                                     55
   During Egypt’s Arab Spring, street protests first brought down Hosni Mubarak’s gov-
ernment and then ushered in an era of competition between three groups that repeatedly
rotated in and out of power: elites associated with Mubarak’s National Democratic Party
(NDP), the military, and the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood. In their main specification,
Acemoglu, Hassan, and Tahoun estimate the direct effect of street protests on the val-
uation of firms connected to the group currently in power relative to their effect on the
valuation of non-connected firms:

                           0             0
                                             
                   Ri,t = Ii,t β + Pt × Ii,t   γ + Xi0 × δ t + δ t + η s + i,t ,        (16)

where Ri,t is the log return of firm i on day t and Pt denotes the daily number of protesters
in Tahrir Square estimated from Egyptian and international print and online media. Ii,t
denotes a vector of two dummies, the first reflecting political connections to the group
currently in government and the second recording connections to the two other rival
(non-incumbent) power groups. Xi is a vector of firm-level controls, and δ t and η s denote,
respectively, time and sector dummies. The coefficients of interest are the entries of
the vector γ, and measure the effect of the number of protesters in Tahrir Square on
the relative stock market valuation of firms connected to the incumbent group and the
relative valuation of firms connected to the two rival (currently non-incumbent) groups.
    The estimates of γ show a robust and quantitatively large negative effect of larger
protests on the returns of firms connected to the incumbent group, but no effect on
the valuation of their rivals. For example, a turnout of 500,000 protesters in Tahrir
Square lowers the market valuation of firms connected to the incumbent group by 0.8%
relative to non-connected firms, but triggers no offsetting gain in the value of “rival”
(non-incumbent) connected groups. These results hold even when excluding periods from
the analysis during which protests may have resulted in a change in regime or any kind
of formal institutions.
     The main identifying assumption for a causal interpretation of the effect of protests
on the relative valuation of firms connected to the incumbent group and their rivals is
that (i) no omitted variables should exist that fluctuate at the daily frequency and are
correlated with both stock returns and the number of protesters in Tahrir Square, and
(ii) no reverse causality should result from daily differential returns on firms connected to
different power groups to the intensity of protests. Key to corroborating this assumption is
the daily frequency of the data and the timing of the effect: if both stock market valuations
and protests respond to some other slow-moving variable, then one might expect stock


                                                56
returns to be correlated with future protests (the lead of protests should be statistically
significant). The authors show that this is not the case in the data. Instead, stock returns
respond only during and immediately after the protest. According to their preferred
interpretation, these results provide evidence that popular mobilization and protests have
a role in restricting the ability of connected firms to capture excess rents and thus may
limit favoritism and corruption even if they do not result in changes in formal institutions
or the identity of the government.
    This interpretation of a causal link between popular mobilization and corruption is
also in line with evidence from a natural experiment that links popular mobilization to
a range of other political outcomes in the United States: Madestam, Shoag, Veuger, and
Yanagizawa-Drott (2013) study the effect of the first large rallies by the Tea Party on
April 15, 2009 (the day income tax filings became due). In many regions, these rallies
were the first large event organized by the movement. Using rainfall on that day as
an instrument, the authors show that higher attendance at these initial rallies (due to
good weather) is associated with higher subsequent political support for the Tea Party’s
political positions, more votes for the Republican party in the midterm elections of 2010,
and more conservative voting records of congressmen subsequently elected in the region.


4.3    Social Structure
A powerful idea in economic sociology is that the economic success of an entity, be it
an individual, a household, or a geographic region, depends on its position in the social
structure of the marketplace. Well-connected individuals who bridge “holes” in this social
structure are more likely to be economically successful and may generate a competitive
advantage for the firms at which they work and the regions in which they live ( Loury,
1977; Burt, 1992; Granovetter, 1985, 2005). For example, one might imagine that well-
connected individuals provide “social” collateral for economic transactions that would not
otherwise be feasible, or reduce informational frictions by providing a credible channel for
communication (Coleman, 1988; Greif, 1993a; Stiglitz, 1990). According to this view,
social ties that are formed and maintained for historical or personal reasons are a fun-
damental cause of economic growth and thus affect the economic development of entire
geographic regions.
   Saxenian (1999) gives an example of this view. She analyzes the biographies of Indian
engineers who migrated to California in the 1970s. Following the liberalization of the
Indian economy in 1991, these immigrants were in a position to leverage their social ties to


                                            57
relatives and friends in Hyderabad and Bangalore. Many excelled in their personal careers,
managing outsourcing operations for US firms. Saxenian argues that by connecting Silicon
Valley firms to low-cost and high-quality labor in their regions of origin, these Indian
immigrants became instrumental in the emergence of their home regions as major hubs
of the global IT services industry.
    Although empirical evidence of the effect of social ties on a range of microeconomic
outcomes is compelling, estimating the effect of social ties on economic growth poses ad-
ditional difficulties. 47 The reason is that social ties are likely to be non-random across
as well as within regions. Individuals who have social ties may have common unobserved
characteristics, sort endogenously across regions, or form social ties in anticipation of fu-
ture economic benefits (Manski, 1993; Glaeser, Laibson, and Sacerdote, 2002). Identifying
a causal link between social ties and macroeconomic outcomes thus requires exogenous
variation both in (a) the economic value of social ties and (b) in the formation of these
ties across geographic regions. In general, and in the Indian example above in particular,
such exogenous variation either does not exist or cannot be measured.
    In this section, we first discuss a natural experiment that attempts to address this
identification problem, and establish a causal link between social ties and growth. We
then turn to the effect of social ties on other aggregates such as trade and foreign direct
investment. Compared to the large body of literature on institutions, the study of this
fundamental cause of economic growth is in its infancy. In particular, we are unaware
of natural experiments that study the dynamics of the formation and value of social ties
over time.

4.3.1    The Effect of Social Ties on Growth

Burchardi and Hassan (2013) use the natural experiment surrounding the fall of the
Berlin Wall to identify the causal effect of social ties on economic growth. They argue
this setting’s key advantage is that the partition of Germany was generally believed to
be permanent. After the physical separation of the two German states in 1961, private
economic exchange between the two Germanies was impossible. As a result, West Ger-
mans who maintained social ties with East Germans during this period did so for purely
non-economic reasons. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, trade between the two Germanies
  47
    These microeconomic outcomes range from education (Sacerdote (2001)) and employment (Munshi
(2003)) to performance in the financial industry (Cohen et al. (2008)) and agricultural yields (Conley and
Udry (2010)). Also see Bertrand et al. (2000), Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu (2007), Beaman (2012),
Kuhnen (2009), Shue (2013), and Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2013).


                                                   58
suddenly became feasible. To the extent that social ties facilitate economic exchange,
the fall of the Berlin Wall thus generates exogenous variation in the value of these ties
(condition (a) stated above).
   In their main specification, Burchardi and Hassan study the growth in income per
capita across West German regions in the six years following the fall of the Berlin Wall
as a function of the share of the region’s population that has ties to relatives in East
Germany. Their structural equation of interest is

                                                        0
                               Yr95 − Yr89 = β Tr89 + Zr γ + εr ,                         (17)

where Yrt is log income per capita in region r in year t, Tr89 is a proxy for the share of the
region’s population that has ties to the East, and Zr is a vector of controls that contains a
complete set of federal state fixed effects, log income per capita in 1989 ( Yr89 ), the growth
rate of income per capita between 1985 and 1989, and the distance from region r to the
inner-German border. Because the specification controls for the pre-trend in growth, the
coefficient β estimates the differential change in the growth rate of income per capita
after 1989 for regions with different intensities of social ties to the East.
    Equation (17) consistently estimates the parameter of interest if Cov (Tr89 , εr ) = 0.
However, this covariance restriction may not hold in the data, because the strength of
social ties to East Germany may be correlated with differences in growth prospects across
regions. An unbiased estimate of β thus requires exogenous variation in the regional
distribution of social ties (condition (b) stated above). Burchardi and Hassan argue that
such variation arises as the result of a large-scale migration post World War II when
millions fled from East Germany to the West. An overwhelming concern for the migrants
arriving in the West at the time was an acute lack of housing. During World War II,
almost a third of the West German housing stock was destroyed. Variation in wartime
destruction thus made settling in some parts of West Germany more difficult than in
others at a time when millions of migrants were arriving from the East. Burchardi and
Hassan argue that the extent of regional destruction in 1946 thus provides the exogenous
source of variation in the regional distribution of social ties needed for identifying β.
    Their key identifying assumption combines a difference in differences approach with
instrumental variables: it states that, conditional on the covariates in Z, (i) no omitted
variable drives both wartime destruction and differential changes in income growth post
1989, and (ii) wartime destruction in 1946 has no effect on changes in the growth rate of
income per capita after 1989 other than through its effect on the settlement of migrants


                                              59
who have social ties to the East.
   Using the degree of wartime destruction as an instrument for the share of the pop-
ulation with social ties to the East, Burchardi and Hassan then explicitly test the hy-
pothesis that a concentration of households with social ties to East Germany in 1989 in
a given West German region is causally related to a rise in the growth rate of income
per capita after the fall of the Berlin Wall. They find that regions that received a one-
standard-deviation larger share of migrants from the East prior to 1961 experienced a
4.6-percentage-point higher growth rate of income per capita in the six years following
the fall of the Berlin Wall. Although both entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs who live
in regions with strong social ties to the East experience a rise in their incomes post 1989,
the incomes of entrepreneurs increase at a significantly higher rate. Moreover, the share
of the population engaged in entrepreneurial activity rises in regions with strong social
ties to the East. Consistent with this increase in entrepreneurial activity, West German
firms that are headquartered in regions with strong social ties to the East are more likely
to invest in East Germany between 1989 and 2007.
    A crucial question for the interpretation of these results is whether this link between
social ties and growth is a purely “microeconomic” phenomenon in the sense that a few
people who have ties to the East internalize all of the benefits from this tie, or whether it
is a “macroeconomic” phenomenon that involves positive spill-overs from one person’s tie
to the East to the income growth of un-connected individuals living in the same region.
    Using household-level data, Burchardi and Hassan show that the income growth of
households with ties to at least one relative in the East is on average 6 percentage points
higher in the six years following the fall of the Berlin Wall than that of comparable
households with no such ties. The authors then relate the effects of social ties on household
and region-level income growth using a model in which household income is a function
of direct and indirect (higher-order) social ties to the East, where individual households
may benefit from having friends with ties to the East, even if they themselves have no
such ties. Their preferred estimates imply that, other things equal, a direct social tie
to the East has the same effect on individual household income as a 50-percentage-point
(or 3.5-standard-deviation) increase in the regional share of households with such ties.
From the perspective of an individual household, the incremental benefit from a direct
social tie to the East is thus large compared to the incremental benefit from higher-order
social interaction. Nevertheless, indirect social ties to the East account for two thirds of
the aggregate effect, because all of a region’s households benefit from indirect social ties,
whereas only a subset of the population benefits from direct social ties.

                                             60
4.3.2    The Effect of Social Ties on Trade and FDI

Aside from an interest in identifying the fundamental causes of economic growth, trade
economists have long documented a strong association between social ties and the pattern
of international trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) as part of a broader effort to
understand the role of informal barriers in shaping economic interactions across borders
(Gould, 1994).48 The central puzzle in this literature is that geographic distance and
country borders have a strong negative impact on bilateral trade flows, even after control-
ling for any measurable barrier to trade. Part of this puzzle may be resolved if social ties
are effective means of overcoming informal barriers to trade (e.g., informational frictions
or problems with contract enforceability) and are negatively correlated with geographic
distance and country borders.
    Perhaps the most influential of these studies is Rauch and Trindade (2002), who study
the effect of ethnic Chinese networks on international trade. They study Chinese networks
in particular because data on the population share of ethnic Chinese are readily available
and because Chinese migrants are present in most countries of the world. In their main
specification, the authors estimate a conventional gravity equation that explains bilateral
trade as a function of the product of the GDP of the two countries, geographic distance,
and the product of the share of the population of the two countries that is ethnic Chinese.
This product can be interpreted as a proxy for the strength of social ties between Chinese
residents in the two countries – the probability that if one selects at random an individual
in each country, both will be ethnic Chinese. Focusing on countries in which ethnic
Chinese constitute at least 1% of the population (e.g., as in all of Southeast Asia), this
variable has remarkable predictive power for bilateral trade, suggesting trade would be on
average around 60% lower in the absence of the Chinese ethnic network. This conditional
correlation is stronger for trade in differentiated goods, which is consistent with the view
that the Chinese ethnic network facilitates trade by reducing asymmetric information.
Combes, Lafourcade, and Mayer (2005) find a similarly strong conditional correlation
between the volume of trade between a given pair of French regions and the bilateral
stock of migrants between the two regions, where they measure the stock of migrants as
the number of individuals born in region i that work in region j. Once they add this
variable to their gravity equation, the estimated effects of distance and region borders
on trade are reduced to a much more reasonable level (both effects drop by about 50%).
  48
     A number of other papers show that measures of affinity between regions, such as trust, telephone
volume, and patterns of historical migration, correlate strongly with other aggregate outcomes, such as
foreign direct investment (Guiso et al., 2008b) and international asset flows (Portes and Rey, 2005).


                                                  61
Garmendia, Llano, Minondo, and Requena (2012) find similar results for Spain.
    The main conclusion from this set of papers is that failing to account for the effect
of social ties across borders and within countries may explain why traditional gravity
equations have found unreasonably large effects of distance and country borders on trade.
However, none of the three studies attempt to deal with potential endogeneity or reverse
causality, such that the conditional correlations between trade flows and social ties that
they document should not be interpreted as causal effects. In other words, the effect of
social ties on trade flows is not identified in these papers for the same reason that ( 17) is
not identified without an appropriate instrument.
    Three recent studies address this issue using different natural experiments. Parsons
and Vezina (2014), Cohen, Gurun, and Malloy (2014), and Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan
(2015) evaluate the causal impact of migrant networks on the variation in international
trade and FDI across locations in the United States. To the extent that these papers
look at trade and FDI originating from the same country, the United States, some of
the concerns of reverse causality are mitigated: the regulatory environment, most direct
barriers to trade and investment, as well as the ease with which migrants from different
countries can emigrate are all relatively uniform.
   Parsons and Vezina’s strategy is similar to that of Burchardi and Hassan (2013) in the
sense that they study variation in social ties that results from a historical migration that
occurred while economic interaction with the migrants’ region of origin was impossible. At
the end of the Vietnam war, the US government imposed a trade embargo on Vietnam and
evacuated 130,000 Vietnamese citizens to the United States. Upon arrival at one of four
processing centers located in Arkansas, California, Pennsylvania, and Florida, charitable
organizations were charged with finding sponsors who were willing to provide food and
shelter for the refugees. Parsons and Vezina stress that a main objective of this process
was to disperse the Vietnamese refugees as much as possible across the United States
to avoid an agglomeration of refugees, similar to that of Cubans in Florida. Consistent
with this view, they show that the resulting allocation of refugees is uncorrelated with
a range of variables that may proxy for the potential for trade with Vietnam, which is
quite plausible because of the trade embargo that was in force at the time the refugees
were allocated. Instead, they argue that the variation in the allocation of refugees across
states was driven by quasi-random variation in the capacity of the charitable organizations
operating in different states. Importantly, Parsons and Vezina also show that the initial
allocation of this first wave of refugees in 1975 is highly predictive of the location of
ethnic Vietnamese in 1995, the year in which the trade embargo was finally lifted. Their

                                             62
structural equation of interest takes the form

                                                  0
                                   Xi = βVi + Ci γ + i ,                               (18)

where Xi is the average share of exports of state i to Vietnam between 1995-2010, Vi
is the stock of Vietnamese migrants in 1995, and Ci is a vector of controls. The stan-
dard specification uses the allocation of refugees across the United States in 1975 as an
instrument for Vi . The identifying assumption for a causal interpretation of β is thus
that the initial allocation of refugees is uncorrelated with i . Subject to this assumption,
Parsons and Vezina’s main specification implies that a doubling of the population share
of Vietnamese migrants relative to the mean increases the ratio of exports to Vietnam
over GDP by 19.8%.
    Cohen, Gurun, and Malloy (2014) instead use the forced relocation of ethnic Japanese
into Japanese Internment Camps during World War II as an exogenous shock to the loca-
tion of ethnic Japanese across US Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). These camps
were established in remote areas (away from any industrial activity that may be consid-
ered sensitive to the war effort) to house Japanese-Americans who lived predominantly on
the West Coast prior to the bombing of Pearl Harbour. After the war, the residents were
released from the camps. However, having lost their jobs and sold off their possessions
in their regions of origin, they often re-settled in MSAs that were geographically close to
the location of their internment. Cohen et al. (2014) show that this relocation had a per-
sistent effect on the regional distribution of the Japanese-American population that lasts
to the present day: MSAs that are within a 250-mile radius of the location of a former
internment camp have a 62% larger Japanese population today than other comparable
MSAs. To corroborate this finding, they show, importantly, that interment camps predict
higher populations of Japanese-Americans but not of other Asian-Americans.
   This persistent effect on the location of Japanese-Americans has a sizable effect on
the probability that firms located in a given MSA trade with Japan. Using the location
of Japanese internment camps as a instrument, they show that a one-standard-deviation
increase in the share of an MSA’s population that are Japanese-Americans doubles the
likelihood that a given firm will export to Japan. They find similarly large effects on the
probability of importing, the volume of trade, and even on the likelihood that a given
MSA has a sister city in Japan today.
   Although both Parsons and Vezina (2014) and Cohen et al. (2014) make convincing
arguments for a causal link between social ties and trade, both use natural experiments


                                             63
that resulted in a shock to the allocation of migrants from one particular country, such
that they cannot control for unobserved destination effects as one would in a gravity
equation. Assessing the external validity of these results and how they generalize to other
ethnicities is therefore difficult.
    To quantify the more general causal effect of social ties on US trade and FDI, Burchardi
et al. (2015) instead study the natural experiment that arises from the entire history of
settlement of the United States. Their strategy isolates quasi-random variation in the
allocation of migrants across destinations within the United States that results from the
interaction of two facts: First, migrants from different origins tended to arrive in the
United States at different times. Second, the set of destinations that are most economically
attractive to the typical migrant arriving in the United States changed over time.
    They motivate their approach using a reduced-form dynamic model of migrations.
Migrations from a given foreign origin country o to a given destination county d in period
t depend on the total number of migrants arriving in the United States from o (a push
factor), the relative economic attractiveness of destination county d to migrants arriving
at the time (a pull factor), and the size of the pre-existing local population of ancestry
o, allowing for the fact that migrants tend to prefer settling near others of their own
ethnicity (a recursive factor). Solving the model shows the number of residents today who
are descendants of migrants from o is a function of simple and higher-order interactions of
the sequence of pull and push factors. Burchardi et al. (2015) then use these interactions
to construct instruments for each US county’s present-day ancestry composition.
    To prevent omitted variables that affect both migrations and FDI from driving their
results, they measure the pull factor of each US destination for migrants from o, using the
number migrants arriving in d at the same time from a continent other than o’s continent
of origin. That is, they predict a migrant’s choice of destination within the United States
using the revealed behavior of the average migrant arriving at the same time but from
a different continent. Similarly, they measure the push factor using the total number of
migrants arriving in the United States from o at time t, excluding those who settle in
the vicinity of d. Interacting these measures of pull and push factors for each vintage
of census data since 1880 isolates variation in the present-day ancestry composition of
US counties that derives solely from the interaction of the staggered arrival of migrants
from different origins with time-series variations in the relative attractiveness of different
destinations within the United States.
   In their main specification, Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan find that doubling the
number of individuals with ancestry from a given foreign country increases by 4.2 per-

                                             64
centage points (or 237% relative to the mean) the probability that at least one firm from
that US county engages in FDI with that country. The main identifying assumption for a
causal interpretation of this result is that omitted variables making a given location within
the United States differentially more attractive for migrants from a specific origin for both
settlement and FDI do not affect the location choices of the average migrant originating
from other continents and simultaneously have large effects outside of the surrounding
states of the destination in question.
    Flexibly applying this instrumentation strategy to the entire set of origins and des-
tinations, the authors estimate heterogeneous effects of ancestry on FDI across origins
and destinations. Across origins, they find that the effect increases with the geographic
distance and the judicial quality of the origin country. Across destinations, they find con-
sistent evidence of a positive impact of regional diversity on FDI: the more diverse and
less ethnically homogeneous the local population, the larger the total effect of ancestry on
FDI. Similarly, the effect of ancestry on FDI falls with the population of migrants from
the same origin in neighboring counties, and from neighboring origins, so that a small
minority from a distant part of the world that is not otherwise represented in the local
ethnic mix has the largest marginal impact on FDI.
    By instrumenting separately for each wave of immigration, Burchardi et al. (2015) are
also able to distinguish the effect of first-generation immigrants from the effect of their
descendants. They find a significantly smaller effect for the first generation, implying the
full effect of ancestry on FDI is long lasting and takes multiple generations to fully unfold.
    Simultaneously instrumenting for migration from multiple origins also enables the
authors to base their estimation on a gravity equation, including destination fixed effects
that control for differences in size, market access, and productivity across US destinations.
Although the results with respect to FDI remain stable regardless of the inclusion of
destination and other (more complicated) fixed effects, the authors find no systematic
causal impact of ancestry on the patterns of international trade of US states whenever
they control for destination fixed effects. This latter finding is in stark contrast to the
results in Parsons and Vezina (2014), and Cohen et al. (2014), and suggest that the causal
relationship between social ties and trade found in these papers may not generalize to a
larger set of origin countries.




                                             65
4.3.3   The Effect of Internal Social Structure on Institutions and Growth

Although the literature on social ties focuses on the external relationships of a social
entity, a number of studies have also used natural experiments to assess the effect of
the internal relationships between different groups within a given society on aggregate
economic outcomes, and in particular on the ability of a society to develop a functional
political system and “good” institutions.
    Perhaps the most convincing of these studies is Dippel (2014), who considers the nat-
ural experiment surrounding the formation of Native American reservations. In the 19th
century, the US government formed several reservations consisting of members of eth-
nically and linguistically homogeneous tribal bands. While respecting ethnic differences,
this process largely ignored differences in historical institutions, such that some (“mixed”)
reservations received constituents of several previously politically independent sub-tribal
bands while others did not. Dippel shows that these mixed reservations have significantly
worse contemporary economic outcomes, even when conditioning only on variation within
reservations belonging to the same tribe. To account for potential confounding factors in
the formation of reservations, he instruments the likelihood of a mixing of several previ-
ously independent bands with historical mining activity in the historic homeland of the
tribe, where mining activity generated incentives for the US government to form fewer,
and thus more likely mixed, reservations. He then shows that the majority of the di-
vergence in economic outcomes appears only after the 1980s, when the Bureau of Indian
Affairs ceded reservation governance to the local reservations. Using information on con-
temporary political conflict and corruption within reservations, he argues convincingly
that the adverse economic effects are explained by the fact that mixed reservations tend
to have more dysfunctional political institutions.
    Another set of studies has linked the emergence of good institutions to the relative
influence of the middle class. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) use a difference-
in-differences approach to argue that Western European countries that developed a large
and politically influential merchant class were able to develop constraints on the executive
and safe property rights that were crucial for subsequent economic growth. Their evidence
comes from a panel data set of GDP per capita, institutional quality, and the number
of Atlantic voyages undertaken by each European country 1300-1850. They show that
the onset of the Atlantic trade after 1500 was a major positive shock to GDP per capita
in countries on the Atlantic coast. However, this shock led to an increase in constraints
on the executive only in Atlantic countries that already had relatively higher constraints


                                             66
on the executive in medieval times: the interaction between Atlantic trade and medieval
institutions explains most of the variation in institutional quality across European coun-
tries. The authors argue that these results are consistent with their view that a merchant
class could only emerge in countries in which rulers were relatively constrained and did
not monopolize the Atlantic trade.
    Although AJR (2005) provide historical and anecdotal evidence to corroborate their
interpretation, a problem with their analysis is that they do not observe the size of the
merchant class directly. More generally, a major challenge for the literature attempting
to establish a causal link between social structure and institutions is that consistent
measures of social structure are rarely available for a sufficiently long period of time, and
in particular for historical episodes in which one might observe quasi-exogenous variation
in social structure.
    While stopping short of claiming success at having identified a causal effect, Acemoglu,
Hassan, and Robinson (2011) make some progress in this dimension by studying the mass-
murder of Jews following the Nazi invasion of Russia during World War II. Uniquely,
Soviet authorities kept extensive records of the size and ethnic composition of the middle
class (“white-collar workers”) in Russian regions (oblasts), dating back to 1926. Before the
outbreak of World War II, Jews were heavily over-represented in white-collar occupations,
such that their persecution and murder by the occupying forces represented a significant
shock to the size of the middle class. Using variation both within oblasts occupied by
the Nazis and across occupied and non-occupied oblasts, the authors show that oblasts
in which the Holocaust most severely reduced the size of the middle class have worse
political and economic outcomes today. These oblasts grew less since 1945 both in terms
of population and GDP per capita, exhibited greater vote shares for communist candidates
during the 1990s, and more support for preserving the Soviet Union in a referendum held in
1991. Moreover, the shock to the relative size of the middle class in oblasts most adversely
affected by the Holocaust appears to persist over time, until the last Soviet census held
in 1989. Acemoglu, Hassan, and Robinson argue that their evidence is consistent with
the view that a shock to the size of the middle class may have permanent effects because
it reduces the core constituency for policies that advance constraints on the executive
and safe property rights (most notably in the form of more political support for the
preservation of communism).




                                             67
4.4    Trust and Civic Capital
The literature on culture and economics offers various competing definitions of social
capital, culture, trust, and related concepts. For the purposes of structuring our dis-
cussion, we focus on the concept of “civic capital,” which Guiso et al. (2012) define as
“those persistent and shared beliefs and values that help a group overcome the free rider
problem in the pursuit of socially valuable activities.” We prefer to use this relatively
narrow definition mainly because it allows a convenient grouping of the existing empirical
literature. First, it clearly distinguishes civic capital from social structure, the focus of
the literature discussed in the previous section. We may loosely think of “social capital”
as the union of the two concepts. Second, it closely describes the variables used in the
empirical literature, which often focuses on various measures of how much individuals are
willing to trust a stranger, and other measures of beliefs about the intentions and actions
of others.
    The idea that the set of norms and beliefs that make cooperation among individuals
easier should be a driver of economic growth has a long tradition in the social sciences,
going back at least to Banfield (1967), Coleman (1988), and Greif (1993b). Putnam,
Leonardi, and Nanetti (1993) famously argued that Southern Italy is less developed eco-
nomically than the North because of a lower level of civic capital, and conjectured that
this difference is a result of the fact that Northern cities had a long tradition of self-rule,
which fostered a tradition of civic engagement, at a time when Southern cities were tightly
controlled by Norman kings.
    The basic idea in this literature is that culture in general and civic capital in particular
changes only slowly over time. Parents pass on beliefs and values to their children, such
that civic capital is akin to a slow-moving, accumulated factor. Societies with a higher
level of civic capital have a higher capacity for economic growth because they develop
better tools for overcoming market failures and collective action problems.
    The prime example for such a belief is trust. Even in a society with an efficient
police force and functioning courts, most commercial transactions involve some element
of trust (Arrow, 1972). For example, when you hire an accountant to do your taxes, you
trust that she will not abuse your private information to commit credit card fraud. If
you cannot trust your accountant, you might prefer to do your taxes yourself. Similarly,
when you take a taxi, you trust that the driver knows how to drive, is not intoxicated,
has not manipulated the meter, and will not simply lock the door, drive you off to the
desert, and hold you for ransom. Although you can take accountants and taxi drivers to


                                              68
court, doing so will cost time and money, and even the most efficient court systems cannot
enforce all the rules all the time. Other transactions that rely on trust include employment
contracts in which managers cannot perfectly monitor employees, sales in which goods are
delivered before or after payment is made, and many financial transactions and investment
decisions. (Thinking about it this way, the amount of trust people in developed societies
put in perfect strangers is remarkable!) The more complex an economy becomes, and the
more labor is divided into specialized tasks, the more important may be the shared belief
that strangers can generally be trusted.

4.4.1    The Effect of Trust on Growth

A number of papers have used cross-country data to document a conditional correlation
between measures of civic capital and economic development. Knack and Keefer (1997)
show that measures of trust and civic cooperation are strongly associated with higher
GDP, higher economic growth, and higher investment-to-GDP ratios, even after control-
ling for education, institutions, and other factors. However, these results do not speak to
causation. The obvious problem is that people who live in wealthy countries with good
institutions may rationally put more trust in strangers because they know they will be
partially protected by a well-functioning police force and efficient courts. Clearly, institu-
tions, civic capital, and economic development are mutually interdependent variables. A
key challenge in demonstrating a causal effect of civic capital on growth is thus not only
to identify exogenous variation in civic capital, but also to separate its effect from the
effect of institutions.
    Three papers attempt to tackle this challenge using natural experiments that rely on
the idea that civic capital depends on the experiences of each generation and is at least
partially transmitted from one generation to the next. 49 For example, one might expect
individuals whose parents grew up under an authoritarian dictatorship to be less trusting
than otherwise similar individuals whose parents grew up in a democracy.
    Tabellini (2010) uses the fact that some Western European countries emerged as the
union of several very heterogeneous historical political entities. He studies the variation
in gross value added per capita across 69 regions within these countries. To the extent
that present-day institutions vary only at the country-, rather than the regional-level,
country fixed effects absorb any differences in current institutions. He then instruments
  49
     Several studies show trust indeed has an inherited component; see Rice and Feldman (1997), Putnam
(2000), and Guiso et al. (2006).



                                                 69
for current measures of civic capital using literacy in 1880 and a measure of constraints
on the executive between 1600 and 1850, while controlling for urbanization in 1850. The
key identifying assumption is that these historical instruments affect present-day eco-
nomic development only through their effect on the persistent component of civic capital.
Conditional on this (rather demanding) assumption, Tabellini shows that the exogenous
component in civic capital has a large positive effect on regional economic development.
A more conservative interpretation of the same fact, that is nevertheless interesting in its
own right, is that distant political history is an important determinant of current economic
performance not just across but also within countries.
   Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008a) consider a similar experiment within Italy. In
the Northern part of Italy, some cities achieved the status of a free city during medieval
times, whereas others remained under the control of a feudal lord or the Holy Roman
Emperor. Consistent with the results in Tabellini (2010), they find that those cities that
achieved self-rule earlier (by 1136 or 1300 CE) exhibit higher measures of social capital
today. However, Guiso et al. (2008a) then go one step further by instrumenting the
dummy variable for early self-rule with two variables that they argue historically affected
the cost of achieving self-rule but are unlikely to affect directly the level of civic capital
or the level of output today: whether the city was a seat of a bishop who may have been
able to coordinate the struggle for independence, and whether the city was founded in
pre-Roman (Etruscan) times and is therefore located in a geographic position that is easy
to defend militarily. Using these two instruments, they confirm that a longer history of
self-rule is significantly associated with higher social capital and higher GDP per capita
today.
    Although more robust than Tabellini (2010), the identifying assumption for a causal
interpretation of the results in Guiso et al. (2008a) is still a tall order: self-rule, the
two variables driving the cost of self-rule, or any omitted variables correlated with these
measures cannot have a direct effect on GDP per capita today, except through their
effect on civic capital. Even if formal institutions did not vary within Italy (which they
do to some extent), administrative capacity, the functioning, and the quality of these
institutions surely vary across regions even though they might follow the same letter of
the law. As a result, both of these natural experiments may still confound the effects of
civic capital and institutions or any other omitted variable that is correlated with these
variables.
    Two recent papers attempt to tackle this problem using clever strategies that are not
natural experiments according to our definition. Algan and Cahuc (2010) use the inherited

                                             70
trust of descendants of US immigrants covered in the General Social Survey to recover
a long time series of trust for their origin countries, reaching back to the beginning of
the 20th century. This long time-series then allows them to relate changes in GDP per
capita to changes in inherited trust over several generations, while controlling for all of
the time-invariant effects that complicate the interpretation of the results in Tabellini
(2010) and Guiso et al. (2008a). In addition, they also control for time variation in
the quality of institutions in order to convincingly distinguish the effect of institutions
from the effect of trust. Their estimated effect of trust is positive, highly statistically
significant, and quantitatively large. For example, according to these estimates, GDP
per capita in Russia and Mexico would have been 60% higher had these two countries
inherited the same level of trust as Swedes. Gorodnichenko and Roland (2010) also rely
on the idea that cultural traits are inherited and instrument culture (in their case, a
measure of individualism rater than trust) with the genetic distance of the population
to the most individualist countries in the world (the United States and UK). Consistent
with the other studies, they also find a large effect of culture on growth.

4.4.2   Effect of Trust on Financial Development and Other Aggregates

Although the papers surveyed in the previous section may have convincingly identified
a causal effect of civic capital on growth, they have little to say about the mechanism
through which this effect transmits itself and about how civic capital affects growth.
One obvious candidate is financial development: financial contracts are arguably “trust
intensive”, in the sense that handing over cash to a stranger today in the hopes of receiving
returns in the future requires a large amount of trust in that stranger. Higher levels of
civic capital may thus enable a society to sustain a more sophisticated financial system
that may then in turn facilitate economic growth. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004)
study this channel.
    Similar to Guiso et al. (2008a), this paper measures variation in civic capital across
regions within Italy and relates these measures to the use of financial instruments by
households responding to a survey by the Italian central bank. The identification strategy
again relies on the idea that part of social capital is inherited from previous generations.
Thus, when a household moves from one Italian region to another, the level of civic capital
(but not the quality of institutions) in its region of origin still influences its behavior. In
their main specification, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (GSZ, 2004) relate a household’s
use of financial instruments to the level of civic capital (measured as voter turnout or


                                              71
the volume of blood donations) in its region of origin, a set of region fixed effects, and a
number of household-level controls. They find that households that originate in regions
with higher levels of social capital are more likely to use checks, invest more in the stock
market, and rely less on informal loans from friends and family. These effects tend to be
stronger in regions with weak law enforcement.
    The authors’ preferred interpretation of these results is that the civic capital plays an
important role in the degree of financial development across Italy. If these results gen-
eralize to the variation in financial development across countries, they may thus account
for part of the observed effect of civic capital on economic growth.
    Apart from this evidence of a financial channel, additional evidence on the mechanism
by which civic capital affects growth is scarce, and if it exists largely not causally identified.
A promising avenue for future applications of natural experiments may be the relationship
between trust and regulation. For example, Aghion, Algan, Cahuc, and Shleifer (2010)
document that levels of trust and the level of government regulation are strongly negatively
correlated across countries.

4.4.3   Determinants and Dynamics of Trust

The main conclusion from the series of studies that document an effect of civic capital
on growth and financial development is that, from a macroeconomic perspective, we may
think of civic capital as a slow-moving state variable that co-determines a society’s ca-
pacity for economic growth. A crucial question then is what governs the dynamics of this
state variable. That is, how do some societies end up with a high level of civic capital
while others suffer from low levels of civic capital? The existing literature has examined
natural experiments that identify three factors determining the dynamics of civic capital:
historical institutions, experiences of violence and conflict, and the climate.

Historical Institutions
  As part of their identification strategies, Tabellini (2010) and Guiso et al. (2008a) show
that historical institutions appear to affect the level of trust, decades or even centuries
later. Both papers show that the descendants of residents that lived in areas that had
more constraints on the executive historically exhibit higher levels of trust today.
    Becker, Boeckh, Hainz, and Woessmann (2015) examine a natural experiment in which
one might expect similar results. Parts of five Eastern European countries (Montenegro,
Poland, Romania, Serbia, and Ukraine) were under the rule of the multi-ethnic Habsburg


                                               72
empire until the end of World War I. In some parts, this rule lasted for hundreds of years.
Compared to both its contemporaries and some of its successor states, the Habsburg
empire had a reputation for having a restrained and effective bureaucracy, courts, and
police. The descendants of residents of areas formerly under Habsburg control thus had
a longer history of living under “good” institutions in this sense than their present-day
countrymen. Becker et al. (2015) study the effect of this treatment using a regression-
discontinuity design.
    Their main specification relates responses from a survey covering individuals in all five
countries to their location relative to the former border of the Habsburg empire. They
find that individuals living within 200 km of the former Habsburg side of the border
are not significantly more trusting of strangers or more likely to be members of a civic
organization than their countrymen on the other side of the former border. Although this
finding may be due to a lack of power in their specification, they do find that individuals
on the former Habsburg side are significantly more trusting of the police and less likely
to pay bribes to officials.

History of Violence or Conflict
  One interesting detail in the results of Algan and Cahuc (2010) is that inherited trust
in Sweden increased after 1935 while it decreased in continental Europe and the UK.
They conjecture that this differential change may be the effect of World Wars I and II:
individuals that experience violence and conflict may pass down a lower level of trust to
their descendants. Two papers examine this link between violence and trust in different
historical settings.
    Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) link the variation in levels of trust across individuals in
Africa to the history of slave trade. They argue that the demand for slaves by Europeans
(and later Americans) based predominantly in Atlantic ports created conditions that
would result in distrust among the indigenous population. Particularly in the later phases
of the slave trades, individuals found themselves enslaved not as the result of inland raids
by foreigners but as the result of kidnappings or trickery on the part of other members of
the indigenous population. By selling others into slavery, one could obtain the means to
purchase iron weapons, thus protecting oneself from enslavement. A number of historical
sources show that the majority of individuals were sold into slavery by kidnappers or even
by their own relatives. Exposure to the slave trade may therefore have severely reduced
the level of trust in the affected societies.



                                             73
   Nunn and Wantchekon’s structural equation of interest takes the following form:

                                                  0            0
          trustj,e,d,i = αi + β slave exportse + Xj,e,d,i Γ + Xd,i Ω + Xe0 Φ + j,e,d,i ,   (19)

where αi denotes country fixed effects, slave exportse measures the number of slaves
taken from ethnic group e during the slave trade per square kilometer of area settled by
                   0
the ethnic group, Xj,e,d,i denotes a rich set of individual-level controls including ethnicity,
                        0
education, and age, Xd,i   controls for the ethnic composition of district d in country i, and
Xe0 is a vector of ethnicity-level controls that capture subnational variation in colonial
rule, in particular, the disease environment and measures of pre-colonial prosperity.
    In their main specification, Nunn and Watchenkon instrument slave exports with the
distance of an ethnic group from the coast, which is where European slave traders kept
their bases. Because geographic features in general are correlated with all kinds of things,
they then make a careful argument that, conditional on the controls they include in
their standard specification, the distance to the coast is plausibly uncorrelated with other
factors that affected trust. First, they argue that Africans did not engage in overseas
trade before the slave trade, such that distance to overseas trade is not a confounding
factor in their case. Second, they stress the importance of the ethnicity-level controls
for other forms of European contact. Third, they include additional controls for each
ethnicity’s historical reliance on fishing. Conditional on these controls, they argue that
the exclusion restriction is plausibly satisfied. Their estimates show that a one-standard-
deviation increase in exposure to the slave trade is associated with approximately a 0.2-
standard-deviation decrease in various measures of trust of neighbors and trust of other
ethnicities.
    A fairly common problem with papers using large natural experiments such as the
enslavement of Africans is that unobservables could potentially bias the result. For ex-
ample, in Nunn and Wantchekon (2011), we may worry that despite the large number
of controls the authors propose, differences in pre-existing trust and prosperity or some
other unobservable correlated with slave trade and trust may not be adequately accounted
for. To assuage these concerns, Nunn and Wantchekon use a technique developed by Al-
tonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) and Bellows and Miguel (2009) that calculates how much
stronger selection on unobservables, relative to selection on observables, would have to be
to overturn the estimated effect:
                                          R     R     F
                                         β̂ /(β̂ − β̂ ),



                                                74
        R        F
where β̂ and β̂ are the coefficients of interest estimated with a restricted and the full
set of controls, respectively. If including observable covariates does not have a large effect
on the coefficient of interest, this number is large and selection on unobservables would
have to be multiple times more severe than selection on observables to overturn the result.
Nunn and Wantchekon find that including their full set of controls changes their coefficient
of interest so little that this statistic is above 3 in all of their specifications. Whatever
their specifications are missing would thus have to have a very large selection effect to
overturn their qualitative result.
    A second paper probes the relationship between inter-state conflict and trust. Jancec
(2012) uses a differences-in-differences approach to show that individuals living in regions
within the present-day countries of Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, Romania, and
Ukraine that experienced more frequent changes in the ruling nation state between 1450
and 1945 exhibit lower trust in political institutions today. However, similar to Becker
et al. (2015), he finds no effect on measures of civic behavior and trust toward strangers.

Geography and Climate
   Rather than identifying “man-made” shocks, such as wars and historical migrations,
Durante (2010) takes a more radical approach and links civic capital directly to envi-
ronmental factors that determine the need for cooperation. The idea (similar to Ostrom
(1990)) is that the earliest societies, centered around subsistence farming, would develop
a culture of cooperation and trust where it is needed for survival. He argues that in
regions where precipitation and temperature are highly variable from year to year, soci-
eties needed to develop civic capital to sustain investment in irrigation and other large
works that facilitated survival. Similarly, in regions with very diverse climatic conditions,
developing civic capital increases the probability of survival, by facilitating trade and
risk-sharing. Using long-term climate data reaching back to 1500 CE, he indeed finds a
significant association between trust and these climatic variables in the cross section of
European regions. Interestingly, these results are robust to including country fixed effects
and controlling for early institutions as in Tabellini (2010), suggesting that part of the
effect of climate on trust may indeed transmit itself through civic capital.


4.5    Multiple Equilibria and Path Dependence
Some growth models that feature non-convexities produce multiple equilibria, such that
the mapping between the steady state GDP per capita and φi in (13) is not unique. For


                                             75
example, Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989) show that multiple equilibria can arise in
a simple model with monopolistic competition and a fixed cost of production. In their
model, a given firm finds that incurring the fixed cost of production is profitable only if
other firms do the same, due to a demand spillover. In the “bad” equilibrium, firms do
not invest, because they expect that other firms will also not invest. This scenario is an
example of a coordination failure – economic growth does not happen because economic
actors have the “wrong” expectations and cannot coordinate to invest simultaneously.
Although it seems implausible that countries might be persistently poor just because
its residents cannot coordinate to simultaneously change their expectations, many more
complicated models also feature multiple steady states. In these models, long-run GDP
per capita is path-dependent, and once an economy finds itself on the path to a bad steady
state, it may be hard to reverse its trajectory.
    To our knowledge, no single natural experiment has been used to test the hypothesis
that multiple steady states may explain cross-country income differentials. Part of the
reason for the absence of such an experiment might be that viewing the income differential
between the Congo and the United States purely as the result of a historical accident seems
unsatisfactory. Instead, the literature has focused on the more modest goal of showing
that the interaction of non-convexities and historical accidents can have an effect on the
sectoral composition of production or on its spatial distribution within a given country.
    Juhasz (2014) uses data on 19th-century France to show a causal effect of tempo-
rary trade protection during the Napoleonic wars on the long-run location of the cotton-
spinning industry in France. She argues that the continental blockade that prohibited
direct shipping between Britain and France during the war differentially affected the costs
of shipping goods from Britain to different regions within France. In particular, regions
in Northern France that historically had relatively low costs of trading with Britain were
temporarily more protected from British imports, because these imports now had to be
shipped through Spain. Under the identifying assumption that more and less protected
regions would have developed similarly absent the effect of the continental blockade on
trade costs, she shows that relatively more protected regions significantly increased their
capacity in mechanized cotton spinning (a new technology at the time). She then shows
that this change in the regional distribution of the cotton-spinning industry within France
persisted 30 years after the end of the blockade. Her results are thus consistent with
non-convexities in the adoption of new technologies, and the view that infant industry
protection can have a lasting effect on the location of production within and possibly also



                                            76
across countries.50
    A large body of work in urban economics has used natural experiments to examine
this question at the scale of cities. Although the focus of this literature is not explicitly
on macroeconomic variables, we summarize it briefly, keeping in mind that factors of
production, in particular labor, are much less mobile at the country or region level, such
that it is unclear how results would change at larger levels of aggregation. In an influential
study, Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2008) use a difference-in-differences approach to show
that the bombing of Japanese cities during World War II had no long-run effect on the
relative size of cities and even their industrial composition, suggesting that fundamentals
rather than chance govern the long-run spatial distributions of these variables. Miguel and
Roland (2011) show similar results using an instrumentation strategy for the US bombing
of Vietnam.
    Bleakely and Lin (2012) show contrasting evidence that a temporary locational ad-
vantage can have long-lasting effects on population density. They argue that many cities
in North America formed in places where natural obstacles, such as waterfalls, blocked
continued water transport and thus required overland hauling. These places (“portage
sites”) attracted transportation services and commerce such that large settlements and
cities would often form. However, this natural advantage is no longer relevant today,
because trains, trucks, and airplanes have supplanted ships as the primary transporta-
tion technology, and locks and canals now make hauling cargo from one ship to another
unnecessary. In this sense, technological progress generated a temporary positive shock
to locational fundamentals of portage sites that plausibly no longer exists today. Nev-
ertheless, Bleakly and Lin show not only that portage sites are significantly associated
with higher population density today (including large cities such as Washington DC and
Philadelphia), but also that no evidence exists of a relative decline in these areas, because
their natural advantage as portage sites dissipated. Their findings are thus consistent
with the existence of multiple equilibria in the location of cities and towns.
    A series of papers in this literature also uses the division and reunification of Ger-
many as a natural experiment. Most directly focused on testing for multiple equilibria
is Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2011). Using a simple difference-in-differences approach
on a panel of passenger-traffic data for German airports, they show that the division of
Germany led to a significant increase in the growth rate of passenger traffic in Frankfurt
(previously a minor destination) and to a simultaneous shrinking of passenger traffic at
  50
     See Kline and Moretti (2014) for similar evidence from the Tenessee Valley Authority, where subsidies
appear to have permanently increased the level of manufacturing employment.


                                                   77
Berlin airport (the previous main hub). However, after reunification, this trend did not
reverse, leaving Germany’s main airport hub in Frankfurt. Using various methods the
authors argue that this apparently permanent shift cannot be explained by fundamentals,
and instead is evidence of multiple equilibria in the location of a country’s main airport
hub.
   Two closely related papers document evidence that is consistent with a specific source
of multiple equilibria – the agglomeration externalities that operate in new economic
geography models. The basic idea in this literature is that consumers like locating close to
firms, and that firms like being close to other firms for various reasons, most commonly to
economize on commuting and trade costs (Krugman, 1991). If these agglomeration forces
are strong enough relative to dispersion forces (e.g., the costs of congestion), multiple
equilibria may arise. One simple prediction of these models is that market access is an
important driver of economic development. Redding and Sturm (2008) test this hypothesis
using German division and reunification. Using a difference-in-differences approach, they
find that over the 40-year period of German division, the population of West German cities
close to the inner-German border declined significantly relative to other West German
cities, a finding that is consistent with the predictions of the model. Their main identifying
assumption is that, absent the effect of the inner-German border on market access, cities
closer to and farther away from the border would have developed similarly. In Ahlfeldt,
Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015), the authors take the analysis one step further and
use the division and reunification of Berlin as a natural experiment, allowing them to
quantitatively estimate agglomeration and dispersion forces at the city level. This paper
is methodologically distinct from all the other papers covered in this chapter in that
it focuses explicitly on structural, rather than reduced-form estimation. The authors
develop a quantitative model of city structure that features multiple agglomeration and
dispersion forces. They are able to separately identify these forces, because of the variation
in the surrounding economic activity of city blocks that results from the division and re-
unification of the city. Interestingly, the identifying assumption for this structural model
is just a sharper version of that used in the previous paper: that Berlin’s division and
subsequent reunification affects the systematic change in the pattern of economic activity
across city blocks only through its effect on commuting costs and changes in access to
production and residential externalities.
    Taken together, these studies seem to suggest that historical accidents can have an
effect on the spatial distribution of production within a given country. However, it is
important to note that, conceptionally, none of these studies can distinguish multiple

                                             78
equilibria from long-term persistence. Moreover, none of them speak to the existence of
multiple equilibria at the country level.


5      Critical Assessment and Outlook
In this chapter, we describe the use of natural experiments in macroeconomics for three
distinct purposes: to verify underlying model premises, to quantify policy parameters,
and to identify causal mechanisms that are absent from conventional models. We do this
by covering the use of natural experiments in the literatures on the Permanent Income
Hypothesis, on fiscal multipliers, and on the fundamental causes of growth.
   An easy test of the assumption of forward-looking behavior of the Permanent Income
Hypothesis can be carried out if one can identify instances when households receive pay-
ments resulting from a preannounced change in income. A series of natural experiments
that identify such preannounced changes finds that agents adjust consumption at receipt,
which is in contrast to the assumption of forward-looking rational behavior. Some of these
experiments suggest binding liquidity constraints can partly, but not entirely, explain this
finding. They tend to find that more liquidity constrained households react more strongly
at receipt, but even unconstrained households appear to adjust their consumption upon
receiving a preannounced payment. The pattern of results across different types of natu-
ral experiments suggests a degree of near-rational behavior: in response to large income
changes, households do appear to adhere to the Permanent Income Hypothesis, and only
when faced with small income changes does the evidence not line up with the model
predictions. Modelling near-rationality explicitly and embedding a natural experiment
directly into such a model would be useful to generate further insights. Moreover, an-
alyzing new measures of liquidity constraints that incorporate wealthy hand-to-mouth
consumers could possibly help reconcile some of the conflicting evidence on the impor-
tance of liquidity constraints. A clear disadvantage of natural experiments also becomes
apparent in this application: analyzing preannounced income decreases would directly
rule out the possibility that binding liquidity constraints drive the results, and analyz-
ing large preannounced income changes would rule out near-rational behavior. Whereas
a researcher running field or laboratory experiments would thus make sure any given
experiment covers both features, natural episodes encompassing these two features are
rare.51
  51
     Replicating large income changes in a designed experiment would, however, be costly and thus also
difficult.


                                                 79
   The literature on the fiscal multiplier faces the challenge of identifying fiscal policies
that are orthogonal to current economic conditions. Two approaches involving natural
experiments can help: the first uses increases in military spending caused by geopoliti-
cal events as exogenous shocks to national fiscal policies, and the second exploits cross-
regional variation at the sub-national level driven by historical episodes to establish exo-
geneity. Whereas the first approach typically estimates aggregate fiscal multipliers smaller
than 1, the second approach consistently returns estimates of the local fiscal multiplier
between 1.5 and 2. However, these aggregate and regional multipliers are different con-
cepts and cannot be directly compared. A model is needed to gain further insights into
their relationship. 52
    Identifying the fundamental reasons some countries are rich while others are poor is
a major challenge in economics. The main empirical difficulty is that most of the likely
drivers of growth, such as the accumulation of physical and human capital, the quality
of institutions, the level of trust, and social structure, depend in complicated ways on
the level of income and on each other. In the last two decades, natural experiments
have become the most widely used tool to try to resolve this question by identifying the
causal determinants of economic growth. Using such large-scale natural experiments as
the age of European colonization or German reunification, the literature has produced
convincing evidence that the major fundamental causes of growth are outside traditional
models of economic growth. Instead, cross-country variation in political and economic
institutions, cultural traits, and social structure appear to explain the majority of cross-
country and often even the majority of within-country variation. The literature has been
less successful at distinguishing these causal channels from each other. In particular,
much of the work causally linking institutions and trust to growth does not convincingly
differentiate between these two channels. In addition, much work remains to be done
in trying to understand the dynamics and the interaction of these fundamental causes
over time. The study of social structure, meaning social ties and networks as well as the
social stratification of society, as a fundamental determinant of economic growth is a new,
promising field that has arisen in this context, allowing a deeper understanding of the
direct effect of social structure on growth and its effect on the evolution of institutions. A
common thread across the different studies identifying the fundamental causes of economic
growth is that they focus almost exclusively on the reduced-form relationship between the
fundamental causes and economic outcomes, but make no use of the structure of existing
 52
      See the discussion of Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) in Section 3.



                                                   80
models of economic growth. Bridging the gap between these two literatures may prove a
promising avenue for future research.
   How researchers use natural experiments in practice differs between the three liter-
atures we have covered. The literature on the Permanent Income Hypothesis employs
natural experiments directly in identifying pre-announced income changes, whereas the
other two strands of the literature mainly rely on microeconometric techniques such as
instrumental variables and regression discontinuity designs. Some studies that do not
rely on specific historical events for identification also use these techniques. As a result,
deciding what can and cannot be considered a natural experiment in these latter two
strands of literature involves some judgment.
    The fundamental challenge, however, is the same in all three literatures, namely, to
argue the historical episode in question provides the quasi-random variation that is nec-
essary to identify causal effects. Although creating a comprehensive checklist that all
analyses involving natural experiments can use is impossible, we list below some common
features that distinguish successful papers that rely on the use of natural experiments:

Identifying assumption The identifying assumption underlying the study should be
clearly stated. What does the reader need to believe to causally interpret the effect?
What aspect of the natural experiment does the study exploit and how does it translate
into exogenous variation? Why can reverse causality be ruled out? Can we think of any
omitted factors that jointly affect the natural experiment and the outcome variable of
interest?

Supporting evidence Researchers should provide as much evidence as possible to
corroborate the identifying assumption. Such evidence may include showing treatment
and control groups do not differ on observables prior to treatment, an analysis of pre- and
post-treatment trends, the timing of the effect, and the use of multiple instruments. At a
minimum, a careful description of the specific historical episode is needed that makes clear
the origin of the quasi-random variation and allows the reader to gauge the potential scope
for endogeneity and other confounding factors. Thus, detailed institutional knowledge on
the episode surrounding the experiment is required. Researchers should carefully consider
and explicitly discuss which omitted factors one might reasonably worry about.

Additional methods to support a causal interpretation If possible, researchers
should use additional analyses to establish that the treatment and not other factors cor-

                                             81
related with treatment drives the outcome variable. Specifically, placebo exercises that
analyze placebo treatments can provide credibility to the claim of causality. Moreover,
showing robustness to the use of different control groups if more than one is possible, and
using matching methods to guarantee the control group lines up well with the treatment
group in terms of observable characteristics can help assuage concerns about randomness.

Quantitative implications Arguing convincingly in favor of a causal interpretation is
usually impossible without explicitly stating the quantitative implications of the estimates.
Is the size of the effect reasonable? How does it compare to the influence of other factors
that are known to affect the outcome variable?

    A common promising avenue for future research identified in all three strands of lit-
erature is to move beyond reduced form approaches and incorporate natural experiments
into structural models. Models will be useful to identify specific mechanisms at work and
channels through which effects transmit, and to argue more forcefully about the plausibil-
ity of the quantitative sizes of effects. Natural experiments could then potentially prove
useful in identifying a wider variety of structural model parameters.
    Our discussion of the use of natural experiments in macroeconomics has also shown
the “natural” limits of this approach. Because the researcher does not create the historical
episode constituting the experiment, it is often not ideally suited to analyze the question
at hand. As a result, different natural experiments often produce different answers to the
same question. In addition, many of the more tightly identified natural experiments leave
open the question of external validity. Finally, because natural experiments rely on history
for identification, they are naturally more useful for understanding the past rather than
the future. Although this is not problematic in many contexts, it does preclude natural
experiments from addressing the effects of unprecedented events, such as climate change.
   Nevertheless, we believe that two decades of research using natural experiments have
produced a range of substantial insights into the functioning of the economy, and have
made major contributions to the field of macroeconomics.




                                             82
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic Control Methods for Com-
 parative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program.
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490), 493–505.

Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (2003). The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study
 of the Basque Country. American Economic Review 93 (1), 113–132.

Abdallah, C. S. and W. D. Lastrapes (2012). Home Equity Lending and Retail Spending:
  Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Texas. American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 4 (4), 94–125.

Acconcia, A., G. Corsetti, and S. Simonelli (2014). Mafia and Public Spending: Evidence
  on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-experiment. American Economic Review 104 (7),
  2185–2209.

Acemoglu, D. (2009). Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton University
  Press.

Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2011). The Consequences of
  Radical Reform: The French Revolution. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3286–
  3307.

Acemoglu, D., F. A. Gallego, and J. A. Robinson (2014). Institutions, Human Capital,
  and Development. Annual Review of Economics 6 (875-912).

Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and J. A. Robinson (2011). Social Structure and Develop-
  ment: A Legacy of the Holocaust in Russia. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2),
  895–946.

Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and A. Tahoun (2014). The Power of the Street: Evidence
  from Egypt’s Arab Spring. mimeo University of Chicago.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen (2003). Institutional causes,
  macroeconomic symptoms: volatility, crises and growth. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 50 (1), 49–123.




                                          83
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001). The Colonial Origins of Com-
  parative Development: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review 91,
  1369–1401.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2002). Reversal of Fortune: Geography
  and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117, 1231–1294.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2005). The Rise of Europe: Atlantic
  Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth. American Economic Review 95,
  546–579.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2012). The Colonial Origins of Com-
  parative Development: An Empirical Investigation: Reply. American Economic Re-
  view 102 (6), 3077–3110.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. A. Robinson, and P. Yared (2005). From Education to
  Democracy. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 95 (2), 44–49.

Acemoglu, D., S. Naidu, P. Restrepo, and J. A. Robinson (2014). Democracy does cause
  growth. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2005). Economic origins of dictatorship and democracy.
  Cambridge University Press.

Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. S. Souleles (2007). The Reaction of Consumer Spending
  and Debt to Tax Rebates-Evidence from Consumer Credit Data. Journal of Political
  Economy 115 (6), 986–1019.

Agarwal, S., N. Marwell, and L. McGranahan (2013). Consumption Responses to Tem-
  porary Tax Incentives: Evidence from State Sales Holidays. Working Paper.

Agarwal, S. and W. Qian (2014a). Consumption and Debt Response to Unanticipated
  Income Shocks: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Singapore. American Economic
  Review 104 (12), 4205–30.

Agarwal, S. and W. Qian (2014b). Access to Home Equity and Consumption: Evidence
  from a Policy Experiment. Working Paper.



                                          84
Aghion, P., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc, and A. Shleifer (2010). Regulation and Distrust. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 125 (3), 1015–1049.

Ahlfeldt, G. M., S. J. Redding, D. M. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2015). The Economics of
  Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall. Econometrica (forthcoming).

Akerlof, G. and J. Yellen (1985). A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle with Wage
  and Price Inertia. Quarterly Journal of Economics , 823–838.

Albouy, D. Y. (2012). The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical
  Investigation: Comment. American Economic Review 102 (6), 3059–3076.

Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schündeln (2007). Good Bye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of
  Communism on People. American Economic Review 97 (4), 1507–1528.

Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2015). Culture and institutions.       Journal of Economic
  Literature (forthcoming).

Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2010). Inherited Trust and Growth. American Economic Re-
  view 100 (5), 2060–2092.

Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2013). Trust and Growth. Annual Review of Economics 5 (1),
  521–549.

Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber (2005). Selection on Observed and Unob-
  served Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of Political
  Economy 113 (1), 151–184.

Anderson, C. J. (2003). The psychology of doing nothing: Forms of decision avoidance
  result from reason and emotion. Psychological Bulletin 129, 139–167.

Arrow, K. J. (1972). Gifts and Exchanges. Philosophy & Public Affairs 1 (4), pp. 343–362.

Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012, May). Measuring the Output Responses
 to Fiscal Policy. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2), 1–27.

Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2013). The Diffusion of
  Microfinance. Science 341 (6144).




                                           85
Banerjee, A. and L. Iyer (2005). History, Institutions and Economic Performance: The
  Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India. American Economic Review 95 (4),
  1190–1213.

Banfield, E. C. (1967). The moral basis of a backward society. Free Press.

Barro, R. J. (1981). Output Effects of Government Purchases. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 89 (6), 1086–1121.

Barro, R. J. (1999). Determinants of democracy. Journal of Political Economy 107 (S6),
  S158–S183.

Barro, R. J. and C. J. Redlick (2011). Macroeconomic Effects From Government Purchases
  and Taxes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 51–102.

Beaman, L. (2012). Social Networks and the Dynamics of Labor Market Outcomes:
  Evidence From Refugees Resettled in the U.S. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (1),
  128–161.

Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh, C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann (2015). The Empire is Dead, Long
  Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy.
  The Economic Journal (forthcoming).

Becker, S. O., P. H. Egger, and M. von Ehrlich (2010). Going NUTS: The effect of EU
  Structural Funds on regional performance. Journal of Public Economics 94 (9-10), 578
  – 590.

Becker, S. O., P. H. Egger, and M. von Ehrlich (2013). Absorptive Capacity and the
  Growth and Investment Effects of Regional Transfers: A Regression Discontinuity De-
  sign with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects. American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy 5 (4), 29–77.

Bellows, J. and E. Miguel (2009). War and local collective action in Sierra Leone. Journal
  of Public Economics 93 (11-12), 1144 – 1157.

Bertrand, M., E. Luttmer, and S. Mullainathan (2000). Network Effects and Welfare
  Cultures. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 1019–1055.

Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2009). What Do High-Interest Borrowers Do with Their Tax
  Rebate? American Economic Review 99 (2), 418–423.

                                           86
Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002). An Empirical Characterization Of The Dynamic
  Effects Of Changes In Government Spending And Taxes On Output. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1329–1368.

Bleakely, H. and J. Lin (2012). Portage and Path Dependence. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 127, 587–644.

Bloom, N. (2009). The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623–685.

Bodkin, R. (1959). Windfall Income and Consumption. The American Economic Re-
  view 49 (4), pp. 602–614.

Broda, C. and J. A. Parker (2014). The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and the Ag-
  gregate Demand for Consumption. Journal of Monetary Economics 68, Supplement (0),
  20–36.

Browning, M. and M. D. Collado (2001). The Response of Expenditures to Anticipated
  Income Changes: Panel Data Estimates. American Economic Review 91 (3), 681–692.

Brückner, M. and A. Tuladhar (2014). Local Government Spending Multipliers and Finan-
  cial Distress: Evidence from Japanese Prefectures. The Economic Journal 124 (581),
  1279–1316.

Brueckner, M. and A. Ciccone (2011). Rain and the democratic window of opportunity.
  Econometrica 79 (3), 923–947.

Brueckner, M., A. Ciccone, and A. Tesei (2012). Oil Price Shocks, Income, and Democ-
  racy. Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (2), 389–3.

Brueckner, M. and M. Gradstein (2013). Effects of transitory shocks to aggregate output
  on consumption in poor countries. Journal of International Economics 91, 343–357.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2015). Migrants, Trade, and Investments.
  Working Paper .

Burchardi, K. B. and T. A. Hassan (2013). The Economic Impact of Social Ties: Evidence
  from German Reunification. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3), 1219–1271.

Burke, P. J. and A. Leigh (2010). Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4), 124–57.


                                          87
Bursztyn, L. and D. Cantoni (2015). A Tear in the Iron Curtain: The Impact of Western
  Television on Consumption Behavior. Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcom-
  ing).

Burt, R. (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Harvard Univer-
  sity Press, Cambridge MA.

Carroll, C. D. and L. H. Summers (1991, January). Consumption Growth Parallels Income
  Growth: Some New Evidence, pp. 305–348. University of Chicago Press.

Caselli, F. and A. Tesei (2015). Resource windfalls, political regimes, and political stabil-
  ity. Technical report. Forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.

Chaney, E. (2013). Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion and Political Power.
  Econometrica 81 (5), 2033–2053.

Chaney, T. (2014). Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks, Chapter Networks
  in International Trade.

Chetty, R. (2012). Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
  Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply. Econometrica 80 (3), 969–1018.

Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012). Does State
  Fiscal Relief during Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American
  Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3),
  118–45.

Clemens, J. and S. Miran (2012). Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government
  Spending. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2), 46–68.

Cochrane, J. (1989). The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation of Consump-
  tion to Near-Rational Alternatives. The American Economic Review 79 (3), 319–37.

Cohen, L., J. Coval, and C. Malloy (2011). Do Powerful Politicians Cause Corporate
  Downsizing? Journal of Political Economy 119 (6), 1015 – 1060.

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy (2008). The Small World of Investing: Board
  Connections and Mutual Fund Returns. Journal of Political Economy 116 (5), 951–
  979.


                                             88
Cohen, L., U. Gurun, and C. Malloy (2014). Resident Networks and Firm Trade. Working
  Paper, October 2014.

Coleman, J. (1988). Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal
  of Sociology 94, 95–120.

Combes, P.-P., M. Lafourcade, and T. Mayer (2005). The trade-creating effects of business
  and social networks: evidence from France. Journal of International Economics 66, 1–
  29.

Conley, T. and C. Udry (2010). Learning About a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana.
  The American Economic Review 100 (1), 35–69.

Corbi, R., E. Papaioannou, and P. Surico (2014). Federal Transfer Multipliers. Quasi-
  Experimental Evidence from Brazil. Working Paper 20751, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Coulibaly, B. and G. Li (2006). Do Homeowners Increase Consumption after the Last
  Mortgage Payment? An Alternative Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 88 (1), 10–19.

Davis, D. R. and D. E. Weinstein (2002). Bones, Bombs, and Breakpoints: The Geography
  of Economic Activity. American Economic Review 92 (5), 1269–1289.

Davis, D. R. and D. E. Weinstein (2008). A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban
  Industrial Structure. Journal of Regional Science 48 (1), 29–65.

DeFusco, A. A. (2014). Homeowner Borrowing and Housing Collateral: New Evidence
  from Expiring Price Controls. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Dell, M. (2010). The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita. Econometrica 78 (6),
  1863–1903.

Dippel, C. (2014). Forced Coexistence and Economic Development: Evidence from Native
  American Reservations. Econometrica 82 (6), 2131–2165.

Duffy, J. (2008). Macroeconomics: a survey of laboratory research. Handbook of Experi-
 mental Economics 2.

Durante, R. (2010). Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: An
 Empirical Investigation. Mimeo, Science Po.

                                           89
Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003). Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments Influ-
  ence Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 3–39.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2012). The European Origins of Economic Development.
  NBER Working Paper 18162.

Edelberg, W., M. Eichenbaum, and J. D. Fisher (1999). Understanding the Effects of a
  Shock to Government Purchases. Review of Economic Dynamics 2 (1), 166–206.

Evans, W. N. and T. J. Moore (2011). The short-term mortality consequences of income
  receipt. Journal of Public Economics 95 (11), 1410–1424.

Feyrer, J. D. and B. Sacerdote (2012). Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Effects of the
  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Mimeo, Dartmouth University.

Fishback, P. and J. A. Cullen (2013). Second World War spending and local economic
  activity in US counties, 1939-58. Economic History Review 66 (4), 975–992.

Fishback, P. V. and V. Kachanovskaya (2015). In Search of the Multiplier for Federal
  Spending in the States During the Great Depression. The Journal of Economic His-
  tory 75 (1), 125–162.

Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the Value of Political Connections. American Economic
  Review 91 (4), 1095–1102.

Franck, R. (2015). The political consequences of income shocks: Explaining the consoli-
  dation of democracy in france. Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).

Friedman, M. (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton University Press.

Fuchs-Schündeln, N. (2008). The Response of Household Saving to the Large Shock of
  German Reunification. American Economic Review 98 (5), 1798–1828.

Fuchs-Schündeln, N. and M. Schündeln (2005). Precautionary Savings and Self-Selection:
  Evidence from the German Reunification “Experiment”. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 120, 1085–1120.

Fuchs-Schündeln, N. and M. Schündeln (2015). On the Endogeneity of Political Pref-
  erences: Evidence from Individual Experience with Democracy. Science 347(6226),
  1145–1148.


                                          90
Garmendia, A., C. Llano, A. Minondo, and F. Requena (2012). Networks and the disap-
 pearance of the intranational home bias. Economics Letters 116, 178–182.

Gebhardt, G. (2013). Does Relationship Specific Investment Depend on Asset Ownership?
 Evidence from a Natural Experiment in the Housing Market. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 11(1), 201–227.

Gelman, M., S. Kariv, M. D. Shapiro, D. Silverman, and S. Tadelis (2014). Harnessing nat-
 urally occurring data to measure the response of spending to income. Science 345 (6193),
 212–215.

Glaeser, E., D. Laibson, and B. Sacerdote (2002). An Economic Approach to Social
  Capital*. The Economic Journal 112 (483), F437–F458.

Glaeser, E. L., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004). Do Institutions
  Cause Growth? Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271–303.

Glaeser, E. L., G. Ponzetto, and A. Shleifer (2007). Why does democracy need education?
  Journal of Economic Growth 12 (2), 77–99.

Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland (2010). Culture, institutions and the wealth of nations.
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gould, D. M. (1994). Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for
 U.S. Bilateral Trade Flows. Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (2), 302–316.

Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embed-
  dedness. American Journal of Sociology 91 (3), 481–510.

Granovetter, M. (2005). The Impact of Social Structure on Economic Outcomes. The
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (1), 33–50.

Greif, A. (1993a). Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
  Maghribi Traders’ Coalition. The American Economic Review 83 (3), 525–548.

Greif, A. (1993b). Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade:
  The Maghribi Traders’ Coalition. American Economic Review 83 (3), 525–548.

Gross, T., M. J. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2014). Liquidity Constraints and Consumer
  Bankruptcy: Evidence from Tax Rebates. Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (3),
  431–443.

                                           91
Gross, T. and J. Tobacman (2014). Dangerous Liquidity and the Demand for Health
  Care: Evidence from the 2008 Stimulus Payments. Journal of Human Resources 49 (2),
  424–445.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2004). The Role of Social Capital in Financial
  Development. American Economic Review 94 (3), 526–556.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2006). Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?
 Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (2), 23–48.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008a). Long-Term Persistence. NBER Working
  Paper No. 14278.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008b). Social Capital as Good Culture. Journal
 of the European Economic Association 6 (2-3), 295–320.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2012). The Handbook of Social Economics,
 Chapter Civic Capital as the Missing Link, pp. 417–480. Elsevier.

Hall, R. E. (1986, May). The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations, pp. 237–
  266. NBER Chapters. University of Chicago Press.

Hall, R. E. (2009). By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More Output?
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 40 (2), 183–249.

Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999). Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
  Output Per Worker Than Others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1), 83–
  116.

Hassan, T. and T. Mertens (2014). The Social Cost of Near-Rational Investment. NBER
  Working Paper .

Hausman, J. K. (2015). Fiscal Policy and Economic Recovery: The Case of the 1936
  Veterans’ Bonus. The American Economic Review (forthcoming).

Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu (2007). Whom You Know Matters: Venture
 Capital Networks and Investment Performance. The Journal of Finance 62, 251–301.

Hornbeck, R. and S. Naidu (2014). When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Eco-
  nomic Development in the American South. American Economic Review 104 (3), 963–
  90.

                                          92
Hsieh, C.-T. (2003). Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence
  from the Alaska Permanent Fund. American Economic Review 93 (1), 397–405.

Huntington, S. P. (1991). Democracy’s third wave. Journal of Democracy 2 (2), 12–34.

Imbens, G. W., D. B. Rubin, and B. I. Sacerdote (2001). Estimating the Effect of Unearned
  Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
  Lottery Players. American Economic Review 91 (4), 778–794.

Iyer, L. (2010). Direct Versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4), 693–713.

Jancec, M. (2012). Do Less Stable Borders Lead to Lower Levels of Political Trust?
  Empirical Evidence from Eastern Europe. Mimeo, University of Maryland at College
  Park.

Jappelli, T. and L. Pistaferri (2010). The Consumption Response to Income Changes.
  Annual Review of Economics 2, 479–506.

Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2006). Household Expenditure and the
  Income Tax Rebates of 2001. American Economic Review 96 (5), 1589–1610.

Jones, E. (2003). The European miracle: environments, economies and geopolitics in the
  history of Europe and Asia. Cambridge University Press.

Juhasz, R. (2014). Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption: Evidence from the
  Napoleonic Blockade. Job Market Paper.

Kaplan, G. and G. I. Violante (2014a). A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
  Stimulus Payments. Econometrica 82 (4), 1199–1239.

Kaplan, G. and G. I. Violante (2014b). A Tale of Two Stimulus Payments: 2001 vs. 2008.
 American Economic Review 104 (5), 116–121.

Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2014). Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
  and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 275–331.

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A
 Cross-Country Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4), 1251–1288.


                                           93
Kraay, A. (2012). How large is the Government Spending Multiplier? Evidence from
  World Bank Lending. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2), 829–887.

Kraay, A. (2014).   Government Spending Multipliers in Developing Countries: Evi-
  dence from Lending by Official Creditors. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 6 (4), 170–208.

Kreinin, M. E. (1961). Windfall Income and Consumption: Additional Evidence. The
  American Economic Review 51 (3), pp. 388–390.

Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. The Journal of
  Political Economy 99 (3), 483–499.

Kueng, L. (2015). Explaining Consumption Excess Sensitivity with Near-Rationality:
 Evidence from Large Predetermined Payments. mimeo.

Kuhn, P., P. Kooreman, A. Soetevent, and A. Kapteyn (2011). The Effects of Lottery
 Prizes on Winners and Their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery.
 American Economic Review 101 (5), 2226–47.

Kuhnen, C. (2009). Business Networks, Corporate Governance, and Contracting in the
 Mutual Fund Industry. The Journal of Finance 64 (5), 2185–2220.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2008). The Economic Consequences
  of Legal Origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2), 285–332.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997). Legal Determinants
  of External Finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131–1150.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998). Law and Finance.
  Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113–1155.

Landsberger, M. (1966). Windfall Income and Consumption: Comment. The American
  Economic Review 56 (3), pp. 534–540.

Lipset, S. M. (1959). Some social requisites of democracy: Economic development and
  political legitimacy. American Political Science Review 53 (01), 69–105.

Loury, G. C. (1977). Women, Minorities and Employment Discrimination, Chapter A
  Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences, pp. 153–188. Lexington Books.


                                           94
Ludvigson, S. C. and A. Michaelides (2001). Does Buffer-Stock Saving Explain the
  Smoothness and Excess Sensitivity of Consumption?      American Economic Re-
  view 91 (3), 631–647.

Madestam, A., D. Shoag, S. Veuger, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2013). Do Political
 Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement. The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 128 (4), 1633–1685.

Mankiw, N. G. (1985). Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic
  Model of Monopoly. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (2), 529–537.

Manski, C. (1993). Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.
 Review of Economic Studies 60, 531–542.

Mastrobuoni, G. and M. Weinberg (2009). Heterogeneity in Intra-monthly Consump-
 tion Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement. American Economic Journal:
 Economic Policy 1 (2), 163–89.

Mauro, P. (1995). Corruption and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3),
 681–712.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2012). The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009
 Cash for Clunkers Program. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1107–1142.

Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou (2011). The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble for
 Africa. NBER Working Paper 17620.

Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou (2014). National Institutions and Subnational
 Development in Africa. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1), 151–213.

Miguel, E. and G. Roland (2011). The Long Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam. Journal
  of Development Economics 96 (1), 1–15.

Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004). Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
 Instrumental Variables Approach. Journal of Political Economy 112 (4), pp. 725–753.

Misra, K. and P. Surico (2014). Consumption, Income Changes, and Heterogeneity:
 Evidence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs. American Economic Journal: Macroe-
 conomics 6 (4), 84–106.


                                           95
Mountford, A. and H. Uhlig (2009). What are the effects of fiscal policy shocks? Journal
 of Applied Econometrics 24 (6), 960–992.

Munshi, K. (2003). Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U. S.
  Labor Market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 549–599.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1989). Industrialization and the Big
 Push. Journal of Political Economy 97, 1003–1026. Reprinted in Dilip Mookherjee and
 Debraj Ray, eds., Readings in Theory of Economic Development, Blackwell Publishing,
  2001.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014). Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
  from US Regions. American Economic Review 104 (3), 753–92.

North, D. C. (1981). Structure and change in economic history. W.W. Norton & Company.

North, D. C. and R. P. Thomas (1973). The Rise of the Western World: a New Economic
  History. Cambridge University Press.

Nunn, N. (2013). Historical development. Handbook of Economic Growth 2, 347.

Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011). The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
 Africa. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3221–3252.

Olsson, O. (2004). Unbundling Ex-Colonies: A Comment on Acemoglu, Johnson, and
  Robinson, 2001. Mimeo, Goteborg University.

Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective
  action. Cambridge University Press.

Owyang, M. T., V. A. Ramey, and S. Zubairy (2013). Are Government Spending Mul-
 tipliers Greater during Periods of Slack? Evidence from Twentieth-Century Historical
 Data. American Economic Review 103 (3), 129–34.

Parker, J. A. (2014). Why Don’t Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from a 25
  Million Dollar Experiment. mimeo.

Parker, J. A., N. S. Souleles, D. S. Johnson, and R. McClelland (2013). Consumer Spend-
  ing and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008. American Economic Review 103 (6),
  2530–53.


                                          96
Parsons, C. and P.-L. Vezina (2014). Migrant Networks and Trade: The Vietnamese Boat
  People as a Natural Experiment. mimeo, University of Oxford .

Paxson, C. H. (1993). Consumption and Income Seasonality in Thailand. Journal of
  Political Economy 101 (1), pp. 39–72.

Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2009). Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and
  Economic Change. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2), 88–126.

Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2013). Economic discontinuities at borders: Evidence from satellite
  data on lights at night. Mimeo, Feseral Reserve Bank of New York.

Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005). The determinants of cross-border equity flows. Journal of
  International Economics 65 (2), 269–296.

Putnam, R., R. Leonardi, and R. Nanetti (1993). Making Democracy Work. New York:
  Simon & Schuster.

Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community.
  Simon and Schuster.

Ramey, V. A. (2011). Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 1–50.

Ramey, V. A. and M. D. Shapiro (1998, June). Costly capital reallocation and the effects
  of government spending. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48 (1),
  145–194.

Rauch, J. E. and V. Trindade (2002). Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1), 116–130.

Redding, S. J., D. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2011). History and Industrial Location: Evidence
  from German Airports. Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3), 814–831.

Redding, S. J. and D. M. Sturm (2008). The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from German
  Division and Reunification. American Economic Review 98 (5), 1766–97.

Reis, R. (2006). Inattentive consumers. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (8), 1761 –
  1800.



                                          97
Rice, T. W. and J. L. Feldman (1997). Civic Culture and Democracy from Europe to
  America. The Journal of Politics 59 (4), pp. 1143–1172.

Roberts, B. E. (1990). A Dead Senator Tells No Lies: Seniority and the Distribution of
  Federal Benefits. American Journal of Political Science 34 (1), 31–58.

Rodrik, D., A. Subramanian, and F. Trebbi (2004). Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
  Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development. Journal of
  Economic Growth 9 (2), 131–165.

Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2010). The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Es-
  timates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks. American Economic Review 100 (3),
  763–801.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and D. B. Rubin (1983). The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
  Observational Studies for Causal Effects. Biometrika 70 (1), 41–55.

Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
  Roommates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 681–704.

Sahm, C. R., M. D. Shapiro, and J. Slemrod (2010, August). Household Response to
  the 2008 Tax Rebate: Survey Evidence and Aggregate Implications, pp. 69–110. The
  University of Chicago Press.

Sahm, C. R., M. D. Shapiro, and J. Slemrod (2012). Check in the Mail or More in the
  Paycheck: Does the Effectiveness of Fiscal Stimulus Depend on How It Is Delivered?
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3), 216–50.

Saxenian, A. (1999). Silicon Valley’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs. Public Policy Insti-
  tute of California.

Scholnick, B. (2013). Consumption Smoothing after the Final Mortgage Payment: Testing
  the Magnitude Hypothesis. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4), 1444–1449.

Scott R. Baker and Nicholas Bloom (2013). Does uncertainty reduce growth? Using disas-
  ters as natural experiments. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Serrato, J. C. S. and P. Wingender (2014). Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers. Mimeo,
  Duke University.


                                           98
Shapiro, J. M. (2005). Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp
  nutrition cycle. Journal of Public Economics 89 (2-3), 303–325.

Shapiro, M. D. and J. Slemrod (2003). Consumer Response to Tax Rebates. American
  Economic Review 93 (1), 381–396.

Shoag, D. (2013). Using State Pension Shocks to Estimate Fiscal Multipliers since the
  Great Recession. American Economic Review 103 (3), 121–24.

Shoag, D. (2015). The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multi-
  plier from State Pension Plan Returns. Mimeo, Harvard University.

Shue, K. (2013). Executive Networks and Firm Policies: Evidence from the Random
  Assignment of MBA Peers. Review of Financial Studies 26 (6), 1401–1442.

Solow, R. M. (1956). A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 70 (1), 65–94.

Souleles, N. S. (1999). The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds.
  American Economic Review 89 (4), 947–958.

Souleles, N. S. (2000). College tuition and household savings and consumption. Journal
  of Public Economics 77 (2), 185 – 207.

Stephens, Melvin, J. (2003). ”3rd of tha Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
  Consumption between Checks? The American Economic Review 93 (1), pp. 406–422.

Stephens, Melvin, J. (2006, 07). Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption.
  Economic Journal 116 (513), 680–701.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1990). Peer Monitoring and Credit Markets. The World Bank Economic
  Review 4 (3), 351–366.

Swan, T. W. (1956). Economic growth and capital accumulation. Economic Record 32 (2),
  334–361.

Tabellini, G. (2010). Culture and institutions: economic development in the regions of
  Europe. Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4), 677–716.

Trezzi, R. and F. Porcelli (2014). Reconstruction multipliers. Finance and Economics
  Discussion Series 2014-79, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

                                          99
Wilson, D. J. (2012). Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American
 Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3),
 251–82.




                                         100
Appendix Table 1: Overview of Permanent Income Hypothesis Papers Relying on Natural Experiments

Study               Experiment         Data Source                                Sample                Main Dependent     Frequency    PIH      Quantitative Reaction at           Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                        Variable           of Data               Implementation


Standard PIH studies

Aaronson,           Minimum Wage       CEX interview survey (1982‐2008);          200,500 household‐    spending on         quarterly   reject   households where minimum          based on liquid assets;
Agarwal, and        Hikes; income      CPS (1980‐2007) and SIPP (1983‐            survey observations   nondurables and                          wage labor is the source of at    some evidence in favor
French (2012)       increase           2007) for data on income;                  on spending, of       durables, including                      least 20 percent of household
                                       proprietary dataset from national          which 11 percent      separate sub‐                            income spend 3.4 times the short‐
                                       financial institution (1995‐2008):         derive some income    categories, and                          term increase in income, but
                                       credit card account and each credit        from minimum wage     change in debt                           mostly on cars
                                       card holder's auto, home equity,           work                  (total and sub‐
                                       mortgage, and credit card balance                                categories)


Agarwal, Liu, and   2001 Federal       proprietary data set from a large          75,000 credit card    credit card        monthly      reject   spending increases by 40% of the based on credit limit,
Souleles (2007)     Income Tax         financial institution that issues credit   accounts open as of   spending,                                average household rebate         utilization rate, and age;
                    Rebates; income    cards nationally (2000‐2002): data         June 2000, followed   balances, and                            cumulatively in the 9 months     strong evidence in favor
                    increase           on credit bureau reports, credit card      monthly for 24        debt, as well as                         after receipt for consumers
                                       spending, balance, debt                    months                credit limit                             whose most intensively used
                                                                                                                                                 credit card account is in the
                                                                                                                                                 sample

Agarwal and Qian 2011 Singapore    credit card, debit card, and bank  random sample of all spending, debt,                 monthly      cannot increase in card spending by 8       based on liquid assets
(2014)           Growth Dividends; checking account data from leading bank customers of credit card usage                               reject cents per month for every dollar     and credit card limit;
                 income increase   bank in Singapore (2010‐2012 )     leading Singaporean                                                      received, corresponding to a total   liquidity constrained
                                                                      bank (180,000                                                            increase of 80 cents in the 10       consumers react
                                                                      observations)                                                            month period after                   stronger, though also
                                                                                                                                               announcement; monthly increase       already at
                                                                                                                                               similar after announcement and       announcement, i.e.
                                                                                                                                               implementation                       likely incompletely
                                                                                                                                                                                    binding constraints

Broda and Parker    2008 Economic      Nielsen's Consumer Panel (2008):           data on weekly        weekly spending weekly          reject   three months cumulative increase based on income and
(2014)              Stimulus Payments; scanned purchases in grocery stores,       purchases of 28,937   on household                             in spending on Nielson Consumer survey question
                    income increase    drugstores and mass‐merchandise            households            goods based on                           Panel goods amounts to 7         regarding the
                                       sectors                                    (1,131,208            barcode scanners                         percent of ESP receipt           availability of easily
                                                                                  observations)         used by                                                                   accessible funds;
                                                                                                        households                                                                evidence in favor
Study               Experiment           Data Source                        Sample                 Main Dependent     Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at           Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                   Variable           of Data              Implementation


Browning and        Spanish Bonus        Spanish Encuesta Continua de       2,341 households       spending on         weekly     cannot spending patterns of bonus and       no test
Collado (2001)      Payment Scheme;      Presupuestos Familiares (1985‐     (16,143                nondurables and                reject non‐bonus groups are
                    income increase      1995): data on earnings and        observations) of       durables, including                   indistinguishable
                    and decrease         spending                           which about 80         separate sub‐
                                                                            percent are            categories
                                                                            classified as bonus

Coulibaly and Li    Last mortgage     CEX interview survey (1984‐2000)      70,593 observations,   spending on        quarterly   cannot homeowners do not increase           no test (none of
(2006)              payment;                                                including 286 with     nondurables and                reject consumption after the last           respondents likely to be
                    disposable income                                       last mortgage          durables, plus                        mortgage payment                     constrained)
                    increase                                                payments               subcategories



Gelman, Kariv,      regular paycheck     Check, a financial aggregation and   75,000 randomly      total spending,    daily       cannot Nonrecurring spending and fast       based on ratio of
Shapiro, Silverman, or social security   service application combining        sampled US Check     nonrecurring                   reject food and coffee shop spending        average daily balance
and Tadelis (2014) check arrival;        information from different financial users                spending, and fast                    show only mild comovement with       on saving and checking
                    income increase      accounts (2012‐2013)                                      food and coffee                       regular payments                     account to average
                    and decrease                                                                   shop spending                                                              daily spending; strong
                                                                                                                                                                              evidence in favor



Hsieh (2003)        Alaska Permanent CEX interview survey (1980‐1981,       806 Alaskan            spending on        quarterly   cannot a 10 percent increase in        based on current
                    Fund Payments    1984‐2001)                             households             nondurables and                reject household income increases non‐ income; no evidence in
                    and income tax                                                                 durables, and                         durable consumption             favor
                    refunds; income                                                                different sub‐                        insignificantly by only 0.002
                    increase and                                                                   categories                            percent
                    decrease

Johnson, Parker,    2001 Federal         CEX interview survey (2000‐2002)    13,066 observations   spending on      quarterly     reject   households spend 20‐40 percent     based on age, income,
and Souleles        Income Tax           with added questions on tax rebates on households who     nondurables,                            of their rebates on non‐durable    and liquid assets; some
(2006)              Rebates; income                                          received the tax      strictly                                consumption goods during the       evidence based on
                    increase                                                 rebate                nondurables, and                        three‐months period in which the   income and liquid
                                                                                                   food                                    rebates were received, and         assets, not age
                                                                                                                                           roughly two thirds during six‐
                                                                                                                                           months period
Study              Experiment          Data Source                            Sample                Main Dependent    Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at            Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                    Variable          of Data              Implementation


Mastrobuoni and    Social Security    Continuing Survey of Food Intake by     745 observations      caloric intake    daily       mixed    retirees with savings above $5000 based on liquid assets;
Weinberg (2009)    benefits payments; Individuals (1994‐1996)                 from households in                                           smooth caloric intake over the    strong evidence in favor
                   income increase                                            which Social Security                                        pay cycle, while those with less (see main result)
                   and decrease                                               income makes up at                                           than $5000 in savings have 24
                                                                              least 80 percent of                                          percent lower caloric intake
                                                                              total income                                                 during the final few days of pay
                                                                                                                                           cycle than during first week

Misra and Surico   2001 Federal        CEX interview survey (2000‐2002        17,718 household      spending on       quarterly   reject   during six‐months period in which   based on high income
(2014)             Income Tax          and 2007‐2008) with added              who received          nondurables and                        payment was received,               and high mortgage debt
                   Rebates and 2008    questions on tax rebate and stimulus   rebates in 2001 or    durables, plus                         households spent 43 percent of      (wealthy hand‐to‐
                   Economic Stimulus   payments                               2008                  subcategories                          payments on nondurable              mouth consumers);
                   Payments; income                                                                                                        consumption in 2001, and 16         evidence in favor
                   increase                                                                                                                percent on total consumption in
                                                                                                                                           2008
Parker (1999)      Caps on Social      CEX interview survey (1980‐1993)       133,820               spending on       quarterly   reject   when a household's Social           based on age and liquid
                   Security tax and                                           observations on       nondurables and                        Security contributions fall so that assets; weak evidence
                   changes in Social                                          57,051 households     durables, and                          income rises by $1, nondurable in favor
                   Security tax                                                                     different sub‐                         consumption rises by 20 cents
                   withholding;                                                                     categories
                   income increase
                   and decrease

Parker, Souleles, 2008 Economic      CEX interview survey (2007‐2008)         17,478 household      spending on       quarterly   reject   during three‐months period in       based on age, income,
Johnson, and      Stimulus Payments; with added questions on stimulus         observations, of      nondurables and                        which payment was received,         and liquid assets; some
McClelland (2013) income increase    payments                                 which 11,239          durables, plus                         households increase their           evidence based on
                                                                              received economic     subcategories                          expenditures on nondurable          income and age, not on
                                                                              stimulus payments                                            goods by 12 to 39 percent of the    liquid assets
                                                                                                                                           payment, and on overall
                                                                                                                                           consumption by 50 to 90 percent

Paxson (1993)      Seasonal income Thai Socio‐economic Surveys (1975‐         27,963 economically spending on         monthly     cannot spending patterns of farm and         no test
                   patterns in Thai    1976, 1981, and 1986)                  active (i.e., not      nondurables                  reject non‐farm households are
                   agriculture; income                                        retired) households                                        indistinguishable
                   increase and                                               that did not engage
                   decrease                                                   in forestry or fishing
Study              Experiment         Data Source                           Sample                Main Dependent    Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at            Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                  Variable          of Data              Implementation


Scholnick (2013)   Last mortgage     proprietary data set from a Canadian   4,147 individuals    credit card        monthly     reject   no quantitative interpretation      based on households
                   payment;          bank (2004‐2006): credit card and      who have payed off expenditures                              reported; reaction of               paying positive interest
                   disposable income mortgage accounts data                 their mortgage or                                            consumption to preannounced         on credit card debt; also
                   increase                                                 who have less than 1                                         income increase is weaker the       non liquidity
                                                                            year of mortgage                                             larger the income increase          constrained consumers
                                                                            payments left                                                                                    react significantly

Shapiro (2005)     Food stamps;       Continuing Survey of Food Intake by   6,652 observations caloric intake       daily       reject   caloric intake declines by a        no test
                   income increase    Individuals (1989–1991); Nationwide   from surveyed                                                statistically significant 0.40
                   and decrease       Food Consumption Survey               individuals who                                              percent per day after receipt of
                                      (1987–1988): data on market value     receive food stamps                                          food stamps
                                      and nutritional characteristics of
                                      food eaten; survey conducted to
                                      document effects of Maryland's
                                      adoption of the Electronic Benefit
                                      Transfer system (1992‐1993)

Shea (1995)        Unionized wage;    PSID survey (1981‐1986): data on      647 observations      spending on food annual       reject   a one percentage point increase     based on liquid assets
                   income increase    food consumption matched with         drawn from 285        consumed at                            in wage growth is associated with   and heterogeneous
                   and decrease       data on wage growth from union        households whose      home and in                            a 0.89 percentage point increase    reactions to increases
                                      contracts                             head is a union       restaurants, plus                      in food consumption                 vs. decreases; mildly
                                                                            member and can be     the bonus value of                                                         supportive of liquidity
                                                                            reasonably assigned   food stamps                                                                constraints in
                                                                            to specific union                                                                                traditional measures;
                                                                                                                                                                             yet, reaction stronger to
                                                                                                                                                                             income decrease

Souleles (2002)    1981 Economic      CEX interview survey (1982‐1983)      2,399 household‐      spending on       quarterly   reject   for each dollar increase in take‐ based on age, income,
                   Recovery Tax Act                                         quarter               nondurables and                        home pay, nondurable              and liquid assets; no
                   (Reagan Tax Cuts);                                       observations, head    total consumption                      consumption rises by about two‐ evidence in favor
                   income increase                                          aged 24 to 64                                                thirds of a dollar

Souleles (2000)    Paying for college; CEX interview survey (1980‐1993)     7,200 household      spending on        quarterly   cannot a one dollar decrease in income       NA
                   income decrease                                          observations with    nondurables                    reject due to paying college tuition
                                                                            child aged 16–24, of                                       leads to an 8 cent increase (not
                                                                            which 1249 have                                            decrease) in nondurable
                                                                            positive college                                           consumption
                                                                            expenditure
Study             Experiment          Data Source                          Sample                 Main Dependent     Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at           Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                  Variable           of Data              Implementation


Souleles (1999)   Income tax          CEX interview survey (1980‐1991)     4,121 observations spending on         quarterly      reject   one dollar of refund receipt raises based on liquid assets;
                  refunds; income                                          on households        nondurables and                           strictly nondurable consumption some evidence in favor
                  increase                                                 receiving income tax total consumption                         by 2.6 cents, and total
                                                                           refunds, head aged                                             consumption by 18 cents
                                                                           24 to 64

Stephens (2008)   Final payment of a CEX interview survey (1984‐2000)      4,583 observations     spending on        quarterly   reject   a 10 percent increase in after‐tax based on age, liquid
                  vehicle loan;                                            on households who      nondurables,                            income increases non‐durable       wealth, and maturity of
                  disposable income                                        have an expiring       except for public                       consumption by 2.8 percent         expiring vehicle loan;
                  increase                                                 vehicle loan           transportation and                                                         evidence in favor based
                                                                                                  gas and motor oil                                                          on age and liquid assets,
                                                                                                                                                                             but not based on
                                                                                                                                                                             maturity of prior loan


Stephens (2006)   Regular paycheck    UK Family Expenditure Survey: two 12,827 households         total spending,    weekly      reject   instant consumption increases by based on asset income;
                  receipt; income     week diary of all expenditures (1986‐ with a dependently    spending on strict                      5 percent in week when           strong evidence in favor
                  increase and        1998)                                 employed monthly      nondurables, food                       households receive monthly
                  decrease                                                  paid primary earner   at home, and                            paychecks
                                                                            aged 25 to 59         instant
                                                                                                  consumption
                                                                                                  goods

Stephens (2003)   Receipt of Social   CEX diary survey (1986‐1996)         9,942 consumer        spending on         daily       reject   households that receive at least no test
                  Security check on                                        units which           instant                                  70 percent of income from Social
                  "3rd of tha                                              contribute a total of consumption,                             Security increase instant
                  Month"; income                                           123,034 potential     food, and                                consumption and food away from
                  increase and                                             expenditure days      nondurables                              home by roughly 20 percent in
                  decrease                                                                                                                week following arrival of Social
                                                                                                                                          Security check

Stephens and      Change in           Japanese Family Income and           2,503 retirees and spending on            monthly     reject   non‐durable consumption            based on age, total net
Unayama (2011)    frequency of        Expenditure Survey (1986‐1994):      employees before     nondurables and                           increases by four percent in the   financial assets and
                  Japanese public     diary data on expenditures and       reform (pension paid durables                                  month of check receipt, while      demand deposits; no
                  pension payments    income                               once every 3                                                   strict non‐durable and food        evidence in favor
                  (February 1990);                                         months), and 3,595                                             consumption both increase by
                  income increase                                          after reform                                                   over two percent when checks
                  and decrease                                             (pension paid once                                             are received
                                                                           every 2 months)
Study               Experiment           Data Source                          Sample                Main Dependent        Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at            Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                    Variable              of Data              Implementation


Wilcox (1989)       changes in Social aggregate data on retail sales and                            total retail sales,   monthly     reject   an increase in benefits by 10        no test
                    Security amounts; personal consumption expenditures                             also divided in                            percent increases total retail sales
                    income increase   (1965‐1985)                                                   durable and non‐                           by 1.4 percent, with a 3 percent
                                                                                                    durable good                               increase in durable goods sales
                                                                                                    stores, and all                            (mostly cars)
                                                                                                    commodities


Liquidity constraint relaxation

Abdallah and        1998 Texas           county (1992, 1997, 2002) and state 3006 counties / 45     retail sales          annual       NA      real per capita spending of         NA
Lastrapes (2012)    constitutional       (1992‐2002) level data on retail    states with complete   (measured directly    (county              average Texas county increases
                    amendment on         sales; American Housing Survey      data                   on county level, or   level: 1992,         by 2 to 4 percent due to
                    home equity loans    (1994 and 2002): household‐level                           as ratio of sales     1997, 2002           relaxation of borrowing
                    allows mortgages     data on second‐lien equity homes                           tax revenues to       only)                constraints
                    for non‐housing                                                                 sales tax rates at
                    expenditures                                                                    state level)

Bertrand and        2008 Economic      customers of a payday lending chain 881 active payday        payday loan take‐ weekly          NA       payday loan customers reduce       based on frequency of
Morse (2009)        Stimulus Payments; (March to September 2008)           loan customers           up                                         borrowing on average by $46        use of payday loans; no
                    income increase                                                                                                            after receipt of the rebate check evidence in favor
                                                                                                                                               of on average $600; frequency of
                                                                                                                                               borrowing also falls significantly


Gross,            2001 Federal      data set compiled based on public         all consumer          Chapter 7 and      weekly         NA       bankruptcies increase by 2% after   based on income, share
Notowigdigdo, and Income Tax        access to Court Electronic Records        bankruptcy filings in Chapter 13                                 2001 rebates and 6% after 2008      of subprime borrowers,
Wang (2014)       Rebates and 2008 system                                     81 out of 94 US       bankruptcy filings                         rebates; also shift from Chapter    and home ownership
                  Economic Stimulus                                           courts (1998 to                                                  13 to Chapter 7 bankruptcies        rate at ZIP code level;
                  Paymens; income                                             2008)                                                                                                no evidence in favor
                  increase


Leth‐Petersen       1992 Danish credit   Danish public administrative         63,613 households     imputed           annual          NA       credit constrained households       based on liquid assets;
(2010)              market reform        registers: data on wealth, income,   aged between 25       expenditures                               with an equity to house value       some evidence in favor
                    allows mortgages     household composition,               and 65 in 1991        (income minus                              ratio of 0.5 or higher increase     if equity to home value
                    for non‐housing      characeristics of dwelling (1987‐                          change in wealth)                          their expenditure by 1 to 3         is high
                    expenditures         1996)                                                                                                 percent in the years following
                                                                                                                                               change in law
Study              Experiment          Data Source                             Sample                 Main Dependent      Frequency   PIH      Quantitative Reaction at          Liquidity Constraint
                                                                                                      Variable            of Data              Implementation


Temporary price cuts

Agarwal, Marwell, Sales Tax Holidays CEX diary survey (1997‐2011);             over 700,000           spending on         daily       reject   sales tax holidays increase daily no test
and McGranahan                       proprietary credit card transactions      household‐date         specific categories                      clothing spending by $1.17 (i.e.
(2013)                               data from a large financial institution   observations from      (esp. children's                         29% of daily household clothing
                                     (2003, February 8 ‐ October 20)           CEX diaries; over 10   clothing), credit                        spending); no significant
                                                                               million consumer‐      card transactions                        reduction in spending
                                                                               date observations                                               before/after sales tax holiday on
                                                                               from credit card                                                these categories, or during sales
                                                                               data                                                            tax holidays on other categories



Mian and Sufi      2009 Cars           data on car purchases from R.L. Polk 957 metropolitan or new car purchases monthly             cannot cities with lots of qualifying     no test
(2012)             Allowance Rebate    for US metropolitan or micropolitan micropolitan                                               reject clunkers have significantly higher
                   System ("Cash for   statistical areas (2004‐2010),       statistical areas                                                increase in car sales in months of
                   Clunkers")          augmented by data from census,                                                                        program, but then reduce them,
                                       Equifax Predictive Services, Federal                                                                  such that cumulative reponse
                                       Housing Finance Agency, BLS and IRS                                                                   over 12 months is zero
