                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ADMITTING STUDENTS TO SELECTIVE EDUCATION PROGRAMS:
                 MERIT, PROFILING, AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

                                            Dario Cestau
                                            Dennis Epple
                                            Holger Sieg

                                        Working Paper 21232
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21232


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We would like to thank Derek Neal, two referees, as well as Peter Arcidiacono, Pat Bayer, Flavio Cunha,
Glen Ellison, John Engberg, Hanming Fang, Eric Hanushek, Joe Hotz, Sunny Ladd, Kjell Salvanes,Petra
Todd, and seminar participants at numerous workshops and seminars for comments and suggestions.
Financial support for this research is partially provided by the Institute of Education Sciences and
the NSF. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Dario Cestau, Dennis Epple, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Admitting Students to Selective Education Programs: Merit, Profiling, and Affirmative Action
Dario Cestau, Dennis Epple, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 21232
June 20155HYLVHG1RYHPEHU
JEL No. I2

                                              ABSTRACT

For decades, colleges and universities have struggled to increase participation of minority and
disadvantaged students. Urban school districts confront a parallel challenge; minority and disadvantaged
students are underrepresented in selective programs that use merit-based admission. In their referral
and admission policies to such selective programs, school districts may potentially set different admission
thresholds based on income and race (affirmative action), and they may potentially take account of
differences in achievement relative to ability across race and income groups (profiling). We develop
an econometric model that provides a unified treatment of affirmative action and profiling. Implementing
the model for an urban district, we find profiling by race and income, and affirmative action for low-
incomestudents. Counterfactual analysis reveals that these policies achieve more than 80% of African
Americanenrollment that could be attained by race-based affirmative action.


Dario Cestau                                         Holger Sieg
IE Business School                                   Department of Economics
Madrid                                               University of Pennsylvania
Spain                                                3718 Locust Walk
Dario.Cestau@ie.edu                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                     and NBER
Dennis Epple                                         holgers@econ.upenn.edu
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu
1         Introduction

For decades, colleges and universities have grappled with the challenge of increasing
participation of minority and disadvantaged students. Differential admissions criteria
designed to increase participation of minority and disadvantaged students inevitably
collide with concerns for fairness toward those who are displaced. Courts, legislatures,
and electorates have weighed in to define the acceptable limits of affirmative action in
higher education.1 While the spotlight has largely focused on higher education, school
districts in large metropolitan areas confront the same challenge; minority and disad-
vantaged students are underrepresented in selective programs for gifted and talented
students.2 Efforts to increase participation of minority and disadvantaged students
in these programs are no less controversial than their higher-education counterparts.3

        School districts nationwide make a large investment in providing programs to serve
gifted and talented students.4 The National Association for Gifted Children estimates
that there are approximately three million academically gifted children in grades K-
12 in the U.S. - almost seven percent of the student population. As a proportion of
    1
     The two most recent affirmative action rulings by the US Supreme Court are on Fisher v Uni-
versity of Texas (June 24, 2013) and Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action (April 22,
2014). We return to these in our policy analysis.
   2
     To cite a recent example, on September 27, 2012, a complaint was filed with the U.S. Department
of education claiming that the admissions policies of eight elite public high schools in New York
City violate the 1964 Civil Rights Act, causing extreme under-representation of black and Hispanic
students. (Baker, 2012).
   3
     The New York Times dubbed the director of the city’s gifted and talented program a ”lightning
rod for fury” when she announced changes to the admissions policies for the city’s gifted programs
(NYT, March 22, 2006). Approximately, two years later, the times reported: ”When New York
City set a uniform threshold for admission to public school gifted programs last fall, it was a crucial
step in a prolonged effort to equalize access to programs that critics complained were dominated
by white middle-class children whose parents knew how to navigate the system.” The new policy
has also met with intense criticism, and the director of the city’s gifted and talented program has
concluded: “We implemented the eligibility criteria, it didn’t shake out that way and now we have
to take another look at it.” (NYT, June 19, 2008)
   4
     The empirical evidence on the impact of gifted and talented programs on achievement is discussed
in Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, & Pathak (2011).



                                                  1
the student population, this is comparable to the percentage of high school students
admitted to selective colleges and universities.5 Most large public school districts in
the U.S. operate selective programs to serve gifted and talented students.6 Admission
to these programs is competitive and merit-based, and often subject to state govern-
ment requirements and guidelines. The purpose of this paper is to formulate and
estimate a model to analyze the effects of profiling and affirmative action policies on
participation of minority and disadvantaged students in gifted education. We believe
this to be the first econometric model providing a unified treatment of affirmative
action and profiling in urban schools that is based on an equilibrium framework that
permits counterfactual analysis of policy.

       A strong negative connotation is attached to the term profiling in some contexts,
especially law enforcement. We emphasize that we use the term as it has traditionally
been applied in the policy domain. For example, the U.S. Department of Labor uses
a “Worker Profiling and Reemployment Services System”7 to facilitate targeting of
reemployment services to new claimants for unemployment benefits, and a widely
cited report on OECD labor market policies (Martin, 1998) advocates profiling for
the same purpose. A recent EU conference on ‘Profiling systems for effective labour
market integration’ provides a definition that accords with our use of the term: “To
target appropriate services, measures and programmes considered most suitable to
meet the requirements of (the individual’s) particular “profile” by statistics-based
programme selection (European Commission, 2011).” As we discuss further below,
   5
     Reardon, et. al. (2012) identify the 171 most selective colleges and universities and report that
approximately 7% of high school students attend one of these selective institutions.
   6
     International Baccalaureate programs also use stringent admission procedures. The most highly
ranked public high schools in New York, Boston, and Philadelphia all use merit-based admission
procedures. The referral and admission processes used for the gifted program in the district we study
are widely used elsewhere. To provide just a few examples here, the state of Florida prescribes
procedures that very closely parallel those used by our district, as does the Los Angeles Unified
District, the second largest school district in the country, and the Atlanta district.
   7
     http://www.doleta.gov/programs/wprs.cfm


                                                  2
the district we study is in a state in which the state government instructs school
districts to consider the “profile of the person” in its decisions about gifted admission.

       We develop a new model in which a school district faces a mandate to provide
a special program to help highly able students reach their potential.8 The district
assigns a value for gifted program participation that is an increasing function of a
student’s ability. This value reflects the district’s assessment of the educational gains
obtained by the student taking into consideration the additional costs of operating
the program. Since ability is not fully observed by the district, there is uncertainty
about these gains. As a consequence, the district behaves in a Bayesian manner and
relies on achievement scores to form beliefs about a student’s ability. The school
district can also obtain an additional signal about student’s ability by conducting a
costly IQ test. We interpret the existing state mandate to imply that students cannot
be admitted to the program without taking an IQ test.9 The objective function of
the district is then given by the difference between the aggregate net benefits of the
program and the aggregate costs of IQ testing. We characterize the optimal referral
and admission policies that maximize the objective function of the district. One key
property of our model is that optimal policies are cut-off strategies that are functions
of the observed test scores and achievement measures.

       Our baseline model considers the case of merit-based admission which arises when
the objective function of the district is only a function of ability. However, the
district must make a judgment of the extent to which the benefits of the program vary
with other observed student characteristics such as poverty or race. We, therefore,
consider two generalizations of our model. The first extension follows Becker (1957)
   8
     Neal & Johnson (1996) show that black-white differences in premarket skill do account for a
significant portion of the black- white earnings gap in the early 1990’s.
   9
     Ability is not only difficult to observe, but it is also non-verifiable. In contrast, IQ can be
observed and verified by parents and teachers.



                                                 3
and models preference-based affirmative action. This case arises when the district
assigns higher values to minority students holding ability constant.10 Two primary
arguments are generally advanced in support of affirmative action. One is that,
by facilitating enrollment of a critical mass of minority students, affirmative action
reduces the isolation otherwise experienced by minority students. The other is that
the potential for interactions among diverse peers benefits both majority and minority
students.11 Affirmative action implies that the school district adopts lower referral
and admission criteria for minority students.

       Similar issues arise with respect to economic disadvantage. Hence, in addition to
minority status, we consider whether a student is economically disadvantaged. Our
measure of economic disadvantage is based on whether a student is eligible for free
or reduced price lunch. Below, we use FRL to denote students eligible for free or
reduced-price lunch.

       A student who has, in some way, experienced hardship may underperform on
achievement tests relative to his or her capability.              By taking account of such
empirically-grounded differences across demographic groups, a district may be better
able to determine which students are most suited to admission to the gifted program.
Hence, the second extension of our model allows for use of empirically grounded differ-
  10
     Becker (1957) introduced the analysis of taste based discrimination into economics. Phelps
(1972) and Arrow (1973) developed a theory of statistical discrimination. The effects of affirmative
action in employment have been studied by Lundberg (1991), Coate & Loury (1993), and Moro &
Norman (2003, 2004). Chung (2000) considers the relationship between role models and affirmative
action. Affirmative action in higher education is considered by Chan & Eyster (2003) , Loury,
Fryer, & Yuret (2008), and Epple, Romano, & Sieg (2006, 2008). Arcidiacono (2005) estimates a
structural model to determine how affirmative action in admission and aid policies affects future
earnings. Hickman (2010a, 2010b) develops and estimates a structural model of college admissions
and compares the effects of alternative admissions policies on incentives for academic achievement,
the racial achievement gap, and the racial college enrollment gap. Long (2007) provides a valuable
summary of the legal status of affirmative action and a review of the evidence regarding the effects
of affirmative action.
  11
     These arguments are detailed in the University of Michigan brief in Grutter v. Bollinger:
http://www.vpcomm.umich.edu/admissions/legal/grutter/UM-Grutter.pdf


                                                 4
ences in distributions of achievement, IQ, and ability for demographic groups defined
by race and FRL status. We find that minority students have higher IQ conditional
on achievement than non-minority students in the range of achievement relevant for
referrals for IQ testing. This property then implies that the district can improve
referral decisions by adopting a lower referral threshold for minority students. While
this profiling based on differences in distributions across racial groups is beneficial to
minority students, it is not preferential treatment.12

       To gain additional insights into the quantitative properties of our model and
demonstrate its practical relevance, we parametrize the model and develop a Max-
imum Likelihood Estimator. Our estimation approach acknowledges the fact that
important variables are either latent (ability), partially latent (IQ scores), or mea-
sured with error (achievement). We estimate the parameters of the district’s objec-
tive function from observed test scores, gifted referrals, and admissions by race and
economic disadvantage (eligibility status for free or reduced-price lunch) of different
demographic groups.

       Our empirical analysis is based on a sample of three cohorts of elementary school
students that entered first grade in the academic years 2003, 2004, and 2005. Our em-
pirical analysis documents the divergence between the demographics of the district’s
student body relative to the demographics of those participating in the district’s gifted
program. We then implement our maximum likelihood estimator. We find that our
model fits the data well and that estimated referral and admission thresholds are
consistent with policies articulated by the district. We find profiling with respect to
both race and subsidized lunch status. We find affirmative action in admission with
  12
    Knowles, Persico, & Todd (2001) stimulated a large body of work on profiling in law enforcement.
In higher education, research on profiling includes Loury et al. (2008), Epple et al. (2008), and Epple,
Romano, Sarpca, and Sieg (2012). State policies mandating admission of a specified fraction of each
high school to state universities, motivated in part to achieve racial balance through profiling, are
studied by Long (2004a, 2004b) and Cullen, Long, & Reback (2012).


                                                   5
respect to subsidized lunch status. We do not find any evidence of affirmative action
based on race.

       A large proportion of African American students in our sample are eligible for
free or reduced-price lunch. As a consequence, our estimated model implies that
applying the FRL admission policies to all African American students, regardless of
FRL status, would have a modest effect on increasing African American enrollment in
the gifted program. Hence, in contrast to higher education13 , we find that referral and
admission policies based on FRL status but not race can have a quite substantial effect
in increasing minority student participation. Our model also implies that eliminating
affirmative action for FRL students by standardizing referral and admission decisions
at the level of non-FRL students would reduce the size of the gifted program by up to
50 percent. We thus conclude that adopting strict merit based referral and admission
policies, would significantly alter the size and composition of the program.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the theoretical
model of optimal referral and admission for a merit-based selective program. Section 3
discusses the implications of affirmative action and profiling within our model. Section
4 introduces a parameterization of the model and develops a Maximum Likelihood
Estimator. Section 5 discusses our data set. Section 6 reports the empirical results
of this study. Section 7 discusses the policy implications that can be drawn from this
analysis. Section 8 offers some conclusions.
  13
    In his review of affirmative action in colleges and universities, Long (2007) concludes that ”...cor-
relates of race are unlikely to substitute successfully for the consideration of race itself.”




                                                   6
2        A Model of Merit-Based Referral and Admission

We consider the decision problem of a public school district that operates a selective
educational program. Admission is competitive and merit-based. Ability is inherently
difficult to observe and cannot be verified. Admission criteria are, therefore, based on
prior academic achievement and a standardized aptitude or IQ test. Testing is costly.
Hence, not all students are referred for testing. We model the choice of policy for
referral of students for testing and the choice of policy for admission to the selective
program.

       There is a continuum of students that differ by ability, b. Let q denote the student’s
score on an IQ test and a performance on a prior achievement test. Let f (a, b, q) be
the joint density of achievement, academic ability, and IQ score in the population.
Students may also differ by discrete characteristics such as race or low income status.
We first present the analysis for a single discrete type and then extend to consideration
of more than one such type.


Assumption 1 The density f (a, b, q) is continuous on its support (a, ā) × (0, b̄) ×
(0, q̄).14


       Gifted programs are motivated by the objective of targeting education to high-
ability students to help them develop their capabilities. The value or value-added
that the district attaches to having a student of type b participate in the selective
program is denoted by v(b).


Assumption 2
a) The value function v(b) is continuous and differentiable. Moreover, it is monoton-
  14
    For notational simplicity, we assume in the following that the upper bounds are infinity and the
lower bound for achievement is negative infinity.

                                                 7
ically increasing in b, i.e. vb (b) ≥ 0.
b) The cost of testing a student a student is constant and equal to c.15


       The district initially observes a and chooses a referral policy denoted by α(a).
The testing procedure provides the student IQ score. a and q are both informative of
students ability, hence the district grants access to the gifted program based on this
information.

       The district optimally chooses a referral policy and an admission policy. We make
the following assumptions about the information revelation and hence the nature of
the admission and referral process.


Assumption 3
a) The decision rule that determines who is referred for testing is a function of prior
achievement:


                                         0 ≤ α(a) ≤ 1                                              (1)


b) The decision rule that determines admission is a function of the IQ score and prior
achievement:


                                       0 ≤ β(a, q) ≤ 1                                             (2)


       The district forms beliefs in a Bayesian way and chooses the optimal referral and
admission policies to maximize the expected difference between benefits and costs.
  15
    The IQ test employed by the district is an interactive test administered by a psychologist to
an individual student. State law mandates that gifted status be determined by a certified district
psychologist. Cost is typically cited as the reason for limiting the number of students who are tested.
(See NYT, June 19, 2008)



                                                  8
The objective function of the district is then given by:
                       Z     ∞   Z   ∞   Z   ∞
                                                 α(a) β(a, q) v(b) f (a, b, q) da db dq
                         0        0  0
                             Z   ∞Z ∞Z ∞
                       −                           α(a) c f (a, b, q) da db dq                  (3)
                             0       0       0


The first term captures the expected benefits of the program. The second term
captures the costs due to IQ testing.16

       We can solve the decision problem above using standard techniques of variational
calculus. It is optimal for the district to use a cut-off strategy for both referral and
admission policies.


Proposition 1 The optimal solution of our model can be characterized by thresholds
ā and q̄(a).


All proofs are given in the Appendix.

       As shown in the proof of Proposition 1, the district will only admit a student to
the gifted program if he or she performs sufficiently well on the IQ score, i.e. if the
expected value added to the program is non-negative:
                                                  Z     ∞
                                 V (a, q) =                 v(b) f (b|a, q) db ≥ 0              (4)
                                                    0


The district is indifferent if the equation above holds with equality. This condition
implies a threshold function q̄(a) such that a student is admitted to the program if
and only q ≥ q̄(a).
  16
    An alternative approach is to model the behavior of the district as wishing to allocate limited
space in the gifted program based on fairness or efficiency considerations. These ideas are explored
in Abdulkadiroglu (2005) and Kojima (2012).



                                                             9
       Similarly, the optimality condition for referral for IQ testing can be written as:
                                  Z   ∞   Z   ∞
                        W (a) =                   v(b) f (b, q|a) db dq ≥ c               (5)
                                  q̄(a)   0


The first term measures the benefits of the students that are referred. The second
term captures the costs associated with testing. The district is indifferent if the
equation above holds with equality. This condition then defines a threshold function
ā such that a student is referred to the program if and only a ≥ ā.

       Note that participation in the gifted programs is voluntary. Students who are
admitted to the gifted program by the district can opt out of the gifted program
and attend regular classes. Based on our conversations with members of the school
district we know that the take-up rate among students is very high, easily exceeding
90 percent. As a consequence, while we do not observe take-up decisions by individual
students, we feel quite confident that the take-up rate is sufficiently high as to make
this issue moot. For applications where acceptance of admission is less routine, it
would not be difficult to extend the model and the estimation procedure to allow for
voluntary participation decisions as long as the researcher observes admission and
attendance decisions.17



3        Affirmative Action and Profiling

Students from disadvantaged backgrounds tend to be underrepresented in selective
programs. Factors such as hardship that may cause underperformance relative to
ability on achievement tests may then be used in referral and admission decisions,
i.e., profiling. Being a minority student or a student with FRL status are observable
  17
    An appendix is available upon request which shows how to extend our model to account for a
capacity constraint or additional operating costs that depend on the size of the program.


                                                    10
indicators that may be correlated with having experienced hardship. Another poten-
tial strategy to reduce underrepresentation in selective programs is affirmative action.
Either profiling or affirmative action can give rise to different criteria for such stu-
dents and can potentially be adopted in either admission or referral policies. In this
section, we undertake analysis to provide an economic foundation for understanding
and distinguishing affirmative action and profiling in referral and admission policies.

       To study the implications of profiling and affirmative action, we extend our model
to consider two discrete types. Let m denote a student of a disadvantaged or minority
type and M denote the advantaged or majority type.18 Where it does not cause
confusion below, we use the term minority to refer to a student who is economically
disadvantaged or a member of a racial minority or both.

       Let fj (a, b, q) j = m, M now denote the density of the each type and let vj (b)
denote the value that the district assigns to type j student given ability b.



3.1       Affirmative Action

Affirmative action arises in our model if preferential treatment is given to minority
students. We formalize this concept of affirmative action as follows.


Definition 1 Preference based affirmative action arises if a school district assigns a
higher value to students of type m than students of type M , i.e if


                                        vm (b) ≥ vM (b)                                       (6)


where equation (6) holds with strict the inequality for a set of b with positive measure.
  18
     In our empirical application we focus on African Americans and students that are eligible for
free or reduced lunch.



                                               11
   Affirmative action then leads to lower referral and admission thresholds for mi-
nority students. We can formalize this result by considering the case in which there
are no differences in the underlying distribution of types.


Proposition 2 If fm (a, b, q) = fM (a, b, q), then preference-based affirmative action
implies that referral and admission thresholds are lower for minorities, i.e. that ām ≤
āM and q̄m (a) ≤ q̄M (a).


   The intuition for this result is straightforward. A student is admitted to the gifted
program if the expected benefit conditional on prior achievement and IQ is positive.
Preference based affirmative action raises the benefits for minority students and as a
consequence lowers the admission threshold. Lower admission thresholds also imply
lower referral thresholds.

   Thus far, we have cast the discussion in terms of differences between minority and
majority students where minority status can be defined based on race (black vs non-
black) or income (subsidized lunch vs regular lunch). However, it is also possible that
heterogeneity in treatment arises for a variety of other reasons. For example, there
may be systematic differences in treatment of students from different neighborhoods.
For example, a district may use its gifted program as a mechanism to retain students
from higher income neighborhoods in district schools. Even if not formally adopted
by a district, similar variation may arise if, for example, a district defers to school
principals to some degree in determining referral thresholds. In our empirical analysis
below, we extend our model to test whether there is evidence of such policy variation
across school types in the district we study.




                                          12
3.2    Profiling

In practice, we observe significant differences in the distribution of observed outcomes
between minority and majority students which suggests that fm (a, b, q) 6= fM (a, b, q).
As a consequence the district may want to adopt different referral and admission
thresholds even if it does not engage in preference based affirmation action. For
example, if, conditional on achievement, minorities perform better on intelligence
tests that non-minorities, then the district would optimally take these differences
into consideration when making referral decisions. We show later in the paper that
some minority students perform better on IQ tests than majority students for some
levels of school achievement, (FM (q|a) ≥ Fm (q|a) for some values of a). This in
turn implies that for some levels of achievement minorities students are likely to have
higher ability than majority students.


Definition 2 The district engages in profiling if it takes the differences in the distri-
bution of ability conditional on achievement into consideration when making referral
and admission decisions.


   To isolate the effects of profiling in referral, we have the following result:


Proposition 3 If vm (b) = vM (b) and if FM (b|a, q) ≥ Fm (b|a, q), then the district
adopts a lower threshold for admission of minority relative to non-minority students
in admission decisions, i.e. q̄m (a) ≤ q̄M (a).


   The intuition is as follows. Suppose, among students of a given ability, minority
students perform worse than majority students on prior achievement tests. As a
consequence, for given prior achievement, minority students are likely to be more
able than majority students. Since the value function of the district depends on

                                            13
ability, these students have higher expected benefits from gifted admission. This then
translates into a lower referral threshold for minority than for majority students.



4      Identification and Estimation

Let R denote a discrete random variable that is equal to one if the student is referred
for testing and zero otherwise. Let A denote a discrete random variable that is equal
to one if the student is accepted into the selective program.


Assumption 4 Consider a random sample of students.


    1. We observe the referral decision, denoted by R, for all students in the sample.

    2. For students, who are referred for testing (R = 1), we observe q.

    3. We observe the admission decision, denoted by A, for all students that are
       referred for testing.

    4. We observe achievement with error, denoted by ã.

    5. We observe race and subsidized lunch status.

    6. We do not observe b for any student.


    We assume that (a, b, q) are jointly normally distributed for each type j. Measured
IQ equals ability plus a normally distributed error that is independent of (a, q)


                                      q = b + q                                      (7)




                                          14
The equation above implies that Ej [b] = Ej [q] and V arj (b) < V arj (q). Errors for
achievement and ability are classical measurement errors and depend on the observed
type j.

   The key assumptions here are that b is linear in q and that q is independent of b.
Both assumptions are important to disentangle latent ability from observed measured
scores, and as a consequence study the differences in ability and scores across racial
or socio-economic groups. To understand the limitations of these assumptions it is
useful to recast the problem within the larger literature of latent factor models. We
observe a number of different test scores and we do not need to aggregate these scores
into one composite score. Instead, we could alternatively follow Carneiro, Hansen, &
Heckman (2003) and assume that IQ scores and the test scores satisfy the following
latent factor model:


                                   q =        b + q

                                  a1 = β1 b + a1

                                    .     .

                                  ak = βk b + ak




Moreover, we can relax the assumption that b is a scalar and treat b as a vector.
This would allow us to distinguish between different types of skills (such as math
versus reading skills). It is conceivable that the district could place different weights
on the different ability components. It should be noted that most empirical studies
that adopt the more general latent factor models follow Carneiro et al. (2003) and
invoke the linearity and independence assumption. However, recent work by Cunha,
Heckman, & Schenach (2010) show that the linearity assumption is not essential for


                                           15
identification.

   Moreover, b is only identified up to a scaling factor, i.e. we need to normalize
the coefficient of one of the ability measurements to be equal to one to identify the
remaining parameters of the model. In our application it is natural to normalize the
coefficient of the IQ score since IQ plays the largest role in the decision making of the
district as we document in the paper.

   Most of the test scores that are commonly used to measure ability are normed-
reference scores that only allow us to rank students. These are, therefore, ordinal
measures of ability. This then raises two additional question. First, we would like to
know whether our model is identified if the school uses a monotonic transformation of
b, denoted by g(b). Note that we do not observed g. In that case the value of function
of the school can be written as V (g(b)). It should be clear, that we cannot disentangle
V from g without observing g. Hence our analysis focuses on the composite function:


                                   v(b) = V (g(b))


Our formal identification proof only covers the case in which v(b) is linear and thus
should be interpreted as a first order Taylor approximation of the true underlying
function V (g(b)). In all our work, we find that the linear specification of the value
function performs well. Nonetheless, it would be desirable to extend our analysis
to the non-linear case, but it is not a straightforward extension. Moreover, we can
conduct our policy analysis purely based on our knowledge of v(b), we do not need
to know V (·) or g(b).

   Second, and maybe more importantly, the ordinality of ability raises a more fun-
damental question of how to model admission to merit based programs. If there is
no inherent scale of test scores or if the comparison of test scores across cohorts are


                                           16
difficult, it may make sense for the district to define admission thresholds not in terms
of the level ability b, but in terms of the percentile rank of b. For example, the district
may decide to admit all students of a given cohort that score in the top five percent of
the ability distribution. Profiling then implies that we adjust the observed distribu-
tions for hardship, while affirmative action involves judgement about the desirability
of admitting students that score in different percentiles from different socio-economic
or racial groups. Our current framework assumes that the district makes decisions
based on whether the expected level of ability exceeds a specified threshold. The dis-
trict that we study is in a state that requires districts to provide gifted education to
students above the 97.5 percentile of IQ (130 or higher). In this respect, the policy is
in the spirit of the percentile ranking approach advocated by Barlevy & Neal (2012).

   The district’s value function for type j is given by:


                                           vj (b) = ζ0j + ζ1j b                        (8)

                                                  = ζ1j (b + ∆j )


where ∆j = ζ0j /ζ1j . In our application, we consider four types using race and FRL
status to define types. Given this assumption, the admission rule can be written as:
                               Z       ∞
                                           (b + ∆j ) fj (b|a, q) db ≥ 0
                                   0


which implies that admission rule only depends on ∆j , but not on ζ1j . The referral
rule is given by:
                      Z   ∞    Z   ∞
                                           ζ1j (b + ∆j ) fj (b, q|a) db dq ≥ c
                       q̄(a)   0




                                                      17
The referral decision, therefore, also depends on ζ1 . Given this parametrization, we
can obtain a closed form solution of the admission policy and a simple characterization
of the referral policy. As shown in Appendix D, we have the following result:


Proposition 4 Given the parametrization above, the optimal admission policy is
given by the linear function q̄j (a) = τ0j − τ1j a where:

                                   ζ
                                   0j
                                − ζ1j − µbj + Aj µaj + Qj µqj
                       τ0j =                                                            (9)
                                                      Qj
                                Aj
                       τ1j =
                                Qj

where Aj and Qj are known functions of the parameters of the model. A student of
type (j, a, q) is admitted to the program if and only if q ≥ q̄j (a).


   The proof of Proposition 4 also implies that the expected benefit of referral, Wj (a),
can be computed fairly efficiently by univariate integration. Moreover, there exists
a unique āj , which is the solution to the equation Wj (a) = c and can be efficiently
computed.

   With measurement error in achievement, the probability of observing R = 0
conditional on j and ã is given by:
                                                  Z       āj
                           P r{R = 0 |j, ã} =                  fj (a|ã) da           (10)
                                                      0


Similarly, the probability of observing R = 1 and A = 1 is:
                                             Z    ∞
             P r{R = 1, A = 1| j, q, ã} =            1{q ≥ q̄j (a)} fj (a|q, ã) da   (11)
                                             ā




                                             18
The probability of observing R = 1 and A = 0 is:
                                                 Z      ∞
                 P r{R = 1, A = 0| j, q, ã} =              1{q < q̄j (a)} fj (a|q, ã) da   (12)
                                                   ā


Given the specification of our model above, we can prove that our model is identified.


Proposition 5 The parameters of our model are identified.


      A formal proof is provided in Appendix E. Here we provide the key intuition be-
hind the proof. The parameters of the joint distribution of prior achievement and IQ
are identified from the observed empirical distributions. While we do not observe IQ
scores for the students who are not referred for testing, we can account for that trun-
cation problem. The levels of the coefficients of the value function are thus identified
from the observed conditional admission and referral probabilities.19 The error vari-
ance of prior achievement is identified from the degree of misclassification observed
in the data. If the error variance were zero, our model should perfectly explain the
observed referral decisions once we condition on the observed prior achievement score.
Differences between the model’s referral and admission predictions and the observed
outcomes are only due to measurement error in achievement.

      Note that the proof above relies on the joint normality assumption. This is not an
overly strong functional form assumption since our data are based on norm-referenced
tests. Standardized achievement scores typically are normally distributed at the state
level and IQ scores are normally distributed at the national level. Using multivariate
normal distributions is computationally convenient since the conditional expectations
of E[b|a, q] can be analytically characterized as shown in Proposition 4. As a conse-
quence, the threshold function for admission q(a) and the cut-off point for referral ā
 19
      Note that we treat testing costs, c, as observed by the econometrician.


                                                  19
can be computed. Extending this identification proof to models with for more flexible
functional form assumptions is not trivial, but the basic intuition of the proof should
carry over to the case in which the underlying distributions are not normal.20

       The likelihood for a single observation is then given by:


                      L = [P r{R = 0| j, ã} fj (ã)](1−R)                                   (13)

                             [P r{R = 1, A = 1| j, q, ã} fj (ã, q)]Rq A

                             [P r{R = 1, A = 0| j, q, ã} fj (ã, q)]R (1−A)


The likelihood for a sample of N students is then a straightforward product of the
terms above.

       Evaluating the likelihood function is not straightforward. To evaluate the likeli-
hood function above we need to numerically compute the optimal referral and ad-
mission policies for each type. The proof of Proposition 4 can be easily adapted to
generate an algorithm that efficiently accomplishes this purpose. The only challenge
here is to compute the optimal referral threshold which requires a line search algo-
rithm (See equation (30) in the appendix). Once we have computed the optimal
decision rules, it is relatively straightforward to evaluate the conditional probabilities
that form the likelihood function. We then compute the maximum likelihood estima-
tor using a standard nested fixed point argument. In the inner loop of the algorithm
we evaluate the likelihood function for each parameter value. In the outer loop we use
standard numerical optimization methods to find the argument that maximizes the
                                                                        √
likelihood function. It is straightforward to show that our estimator is N consistent
and asymptotically normally distributed. We use a standard bootstrap algorithm
to compute standard errors. Appendix F shows that our estimator works well in a
  20
    Identification of latent factor models can be achieved without imposing strong functional form
assumption as discussed, for example, in Schenach (2004) and Cunha et al. (2010).


                                               20
Monte Carlo study.



5     Data

Our application focuses on a selective gifted program that is operated by a mid-
sized urban district that prefers to stay anonymous. The district operates a Gifted
Center that serves students in elementary and middle school. Gifted students in
grades 1 through 8 participate in a one-day-per-week program at a designated location
away from the student’s home school. Students participate in programs designed
to enhance creative problem solving and leadership skills and are offered specially
designed instruction in math, science, literature, and a variety of other fields.

    The district adheres to state regulations concerning gifted students and services.
The state regulations outline a multifaceted approach used to identify whether a
student is gifted and whether gifted education is needed. The state requires gifted
status to be determined by a certified district psychologist. A mentally gifted student
is defined as someone with an IQ score of at least 130. The regulation specifies
that a student with IQ score below 130 may be admitted ”... when other educational
criteria in the profile of the person strongly indicates gifted ability (emphasis added).”
The state guidelines provide for consideration of factors that may ”mask” giftedness
including “. . . gender or race bias, or socio/cultural deprivation. . . ” Thus, the state
gives districts discretion to employ profiling and affirmative action in referral and
admission policies. Of course, the district is also subject to the U.S. constitution,
which has been interpreted by the Supreme Court as requiring that affirmative action
by race be a last resort in achieving diversity objectives.

    The IQ tests that the district uses are the most widely used tests in the U.S.
The tests differ primarily by student age. For the age range that we are studying,

                                           21
the district uses the fourth edition of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children
(WISC4). The district administers this examination using standard WISC4 protocol,
one-on-one, to a student by a psychologist trained in IQ testing. This test is designed
for elementary school children and is administered orally so that IQ assessment is not
heavily driven by the degree to which the student has developed reading and writing
skills sufficient to comprehend and complete a written exam. The WISC4 has roughly
15 subtests designed to elicit a range of cognitive capabilities; each subtest in turn is
comprised of a set of questions. The tester asks questions in a prescribed order and
scores student responses.

   The district codes electronically the students IQ score, but not the scores on the
subtests or the name of the psychologist administering the test. Thanks to excellent
cooperation from the district, we were permitted to send a team of Ph.D. students
to the district offices for a period of many days to pull each student’s paper file, scan
the student’s IQ test report into a file, and, from these, code the sub-scores. We also
coded the name of the psychologist who tested each student. We find some evidence
of testers “giving the benefit of the doubt” to students who are very close to the
threshold. For example, for most psychologists, the proportion of students scoring
at the threshold is somewhat larger than the proportion scoring one or two points
below the threshold. This appears to be modest in magnitude (on the order of 2 to
3 points), and is not systematically linked to student observables.

   Another concern with matching our model to the data is that our model does
not allow for private testing. Moreover, private testers may employ more lenient
standards than public testers giving some opportunity to parents to buy access to the
gifted program. Fortunately, our data set contains detailed information about the
identity of person that administered the IQ test allowing us to differentiate between
private and public testers. We find that there are only 24 students in the sample


                                           22
for whom we observe private test scores. These are all students from higher income
families and do not quality for free or reduced lunch. For all 24 students we observe
one private test score. All of them are admitted to the program based on the private
test. 22 out of the 24 students were also tested by a public psychologist. The average
private test is 130.6 compared to 116.6 for the publicly administered test. Note that
the average IQ of an accepted regular lunch student from a public test is 130.8. Of
course, there may be a larger number of students who are privately tested, but it is
reasonable to assume that we only observe private test scores when they are ”above
the bar.” While there is some evidence that private testers are more lenient than
public testers, we conclude that the number of students that are admitted into the
gifted program based on private test score is sufficiently small that it does not raise
serious doubts about our modeling and estimation approach.

    Most referrals and admissions for the gifted program occur during elementary
school in grades 1-3. We focus on this population in this paper. The sample consists
of the cohort of students that were in 1st grade in 2003/04, 2004/05, or 2005/06. We
follow these students until the end of 3th grade.21

    We start with a sample of 7,753 students. The district permits self-referral, and we
retain those referrals in our sample.22 We keep those students who were at the school
district during the first three grades of school. This reduces our sample to 5,409
students. We drop 751 observations without lunch status data and that changed
their lunch status over the three school grades. We eliminate 72 observations without
achievement data. We drop 24 observations for students who were admitted based
  21
     We find that the main qualitative and quantitative findings of this paper are robust to excluding
any of the cohorts used in the analysis as well as including students that were referred for testing in
the forth grade. Results are available upon request from the authors.
  22
     Approximately 11.5% of referrals are self-referrals. Relative to their numbers in the district, self-
referrals are proportionately higher among non-minority students who are not on free or reduced-
price lunch. Hence, our conclusions with respect to referral and admission of minority students are
certainly not driven by self-referrals.


                                                   23
on IQ scores provided by private testers after failing to gain admission by the IQ test
administered by the district.23 We eliminate 104 students marked as gifted at any time
during elementary school with no history of IQ test data. Finally, we filter outliers
by eliminating the five lowest achievement scores by cohort of referred students, and
the top 5 achievement scores by cohort that were not referred, totaling 30 eliminated
observations. The final sample size is 4,428 observations.

       Achievement scores can be constructed based on a variety of observed scores. We
observe the Oral Reading Fluency (ORF) test. We standardize ORF scores for every
period in every grade and compute the average score for each student. In addition
we have access to test scores on standardized tests that measure reading and math
skills in 3rd grade. Finally, we observe an average GPA score for each student in the
sample. As shown in Table 1 these measures are highly positively correlated.

                   Table 1: Correlation Matrix of Achievement Measures
                           ORF scores      PSSA scores       Average GPA        Achievement
        ORF scores            1                 -                  -                 -
        PSSA scores          0.74               1                  -                 -
        Average GPA          0.62             0.74                 1                 -
        Achievement          0.89             0.95               0.82                1
        The table above reports the correlation matrix between the components of the achievement
       measure (rows 1-3) and the achievement measure (row 4). The achievement measure is a
       weighted average of the students Oral Reading Fluency (ORF) tests, scores on standardized
       state tests in reading and math, and GPA average score, from 1st grade through 3rd grade.
       Achievement components and the achievement measure are standardized.



       We construct the achievement measure used in the estimation of the model as
a weighted average of the GPA, the scores on the standardized tests of math and
reading, and the ORF scores.24 While our achievement measure is unlikely to be
  23
     These 24 individuals are all non-FRL students. The average of their scores on the district test
was 116.6 and the average on the privately administered tests was 130.6.
  24
     The weights are determined by regressing a referral indicator on the available achievement scores.
We experimented with alternative weightings of achievement scores and found that our results are


                                                  24
the exact measure that is used by the district, we only require that our measure is
sufficiently strongly correlated with the latent measure used by the district.

    As previously noted, we use eligibility for free or reduced-price lunch as a measure
of economic disadvantage for students. We also create a poverty indicator for each
school which ranges between 0 and 2. To construct this variable, students eligible
for free lunch are coded as 2, students eligible for reduced-price lunch are coded as
1, and regular lunch students are coded as zero. The school income indicator is
then the school average of this variable over a ten year period. We use this variable
to classify schools into two discrete categories, high- and low-income schools. As
we discuss in detail in the next section, we can, therefore, test whether there are
significant differences in referral and admission decisions for each type. Table 2 reports
descriptive statistics for the full sample as well as the subsamples by FRL status and
race.

                  Table 2: Sample Statistics by FRL status and Race
                                                 Sub-sample by          Sub-sample by
                                                  Lunch status               Race
                                  All types     Non-FRL FRL            Non Black Black
        Sample size                 4428           961     3467          1872     2556
        FRL                         0.78            0         1          0.57     0.94
        Black                       0.58           0.16     0.70           0        1
        Achievement                 0.00           0.84    -0.23         0.40     -0.29
        School Income               0.47           0.89     0.32         0.72     0.30
        Fraction Referred           0.13           0.38     0.07         0.21     0.07
        Fraction Gifted             0.07           0.22     0.02         0.13     0.02
        Ratio Gifted/Referred       0.51           0.60     0.37         0.59     0.34
     The table reports descriptive statistics of the full sample (column 1), the sample of stu-
    dents with regular lunch status (column 2), the sample of students with subsidized lunch
    status (column 3), the sample of non-black students (column 4), and the sample of black
    students (column 5). School income is the fraction of students in the sample that attend
    a high-income school as defined in the text.


robust.



                                                25
   We find, as with many other urban districts, that there is a high proportion of
poor students and the majority of students are black. Achievement and school income
are negatively correlated with FRL status and race. Table 1 also shows that a large
majority of all African American students in our sample are FRL eligible while only
slightly more than half of non-black students are FRL eligible.

   Table 3 reports the demographics of the sample by referral and gifted status. We
find that FRL and black students tend to be underrepresented among referred and
gifted students. Not surprisingly, students referred for testing have higher achieve-
ment scores than students who are not referred. Similarly gifted students have sig-
nificantly higher achievement and IQ scores than non-gifted students.

         Table 3: Statistics for Non Referred, Referred and Gifted Students
                                Sub-sample by              Sub-sample Referred by
                                referred status                 gifted status
                            Non referred Referred          Non Gifted      Gifted
          FRL                  0.84          0.37             0.48          0.26
          Black                0.62          0.30             0.41          0.20
          Achievement          -0.21         1.43             1.09          1.76
          IQ                                                  110           129
          The table reports descriptive statistics of the sample of non-referred students
         (column 1), the sample of referred students (column 2), the sample of referred
         but non-gifted students (column 3), and the sample of referred gifted students
         (column 4).



   To set the stage for our econometric analysis, we provide some additional evi-
dence regarding the referral process. We partition the support of the achievement
distribution into seven intervals. Table 4 reports the frequency of referral for each bin
conditional on FRL status and race. We find that referral probabilities are monoton-
ically increasing in the our observed measure of prior achievement. There are some
pronounced differences in referrals probabilities by FRL status. There are much
smaller differences in referral probabilities by race.

                                               26
Table 4: Ratios of Referred Students by Achievement Bin
                       Regular                    FRL
 Achievement      total % Referred        total   % Referred
 <0                188     0.00           2092        0.00
 0≤ <0.33          101     0.09            460        0.05
 0.33≤ <0.66       111     0.14            354        0.09
 0.66≤ <1.00       128     0.26            272        0.15
 1.00≤ <1.33       122     0.42            152        0.30
 1.33≤ <1.66       118     0.67             93        0.47
 1.66≤             193     0.90             44        0.61
                      Non Black                   Black
 Achievement      total % Referred        total   % Referred
 <0                670     0.00           1610        0.00
 0≤ <0.33          222     0.05            339        0.06
 0.33≤ <0.66       227     0.09            238        0.12
 0.66≤ <1.00       213     0.18            187        0.19
 1.00≤ <1.33       170     0.34            104        0.38
 1.33≤ <1.66       156     0.57             55        0.62
 1.66≤             214     0.85             23        0.78
 The table above reports the frequency of referral by achievement
bins of four student sub-samples: Non-subsidized lunch students
(Regular), subsidized lunch students (FRL), Non-black students
(Non Black), and black students (Black).




                               27
   To illustrate some of the properties of the admission process, we partition the
support of the IO distribution into five intervals. Table 5 reports the frequency of
admissions for each bin conditional on FRL status and race.

                       Table 5: Ratios of Gifted Students by IQ
                                 Regular Lunch                FRL
               IQ score        total % Admitted         total % Admitted
               <110             44       0.00            88       0.00
               110≤ <115        30       0.00            32       0.00
               115≤ <120        51       0.20            38       0.58
               120≤ <125        48       0.38            23       1.00
               125≤             188      1.00            33       1.00
                                    Non Black                 Black
               IQ score        total % Admitted         total % Admitted
               <110             61       0.00            71       0.00
               110≤ <115        39       0.00            23       0.00
               115≤ <120        58       0.29            31       0.48
               120≤ <125        51       0.51            20       0.75
               125≤             191      1.00            30       1.00
               The table reports the frequency of admissions by five IQ bins of
              four student sub-samples: Non-subsidized lunch students (Regular),
              subsidized lunch students (FRL), Non-black students (Non Black),
              and black students (Black).




   The upper panel of Table 5 breaks down the sample by free or reduced lunch
status, the lower panel by race. We find that admission probabilities are increasing in
IQ scores. For students who are not eligible for FRL, the probability of acceptance is
equal to one if the IQ score is larger than 125. It drops to 38 percent if the IQ score
is between 120 and 125. It is 20 percent for students with scores between 115 and
120. For students eligible for FRL, the admission probability is one for all students
with scores larger than 120. It drops to 58 percent for students with IQ between 115
and 120. It is zero for student with IQ score below 115. These findings suggest that
students on FRL face lower admission thresholds, an issue we study formally in our


                                             28
empirical analysis.

    Finally, we consider admission by race in the lower panel of Table 5. We find that
there are some difference in the admission probabilities between black and non-black
students in the interval between 115 and 125. These differences are substantially
smaller that the differences we observe by FRL status.



6     Empirical Results

We begin by estimating our model allowing the fullest possible variation in policies
across types with respect to both profiling and affirmative action. We designate this
Model I. We then investigate the extent to which policy variation across types can be
restricted without significantly reducing the fit of the model. It is useful to begin by
summarizing the set of parameters to be estimated in Model I. The utility function
of the district is linear and has two parameters for each type. With affirmative action
varying across four types (race and FRL), there are then 8 parameters in the utility
function. With full profiling, the distribution parameters differ across types. For
each type, we have means and covariances for ability and achievement. This yields
five parameters per type for a total of 20 parameters. In addition, there are eight
measurement error variances for achievement and IQ by type. Hence, the most general
specification, Model I, has 36 parameters.

    Model specifications that impose common parameters in the underlying distribu-
tions of ability, IQ and achievement are clearly rejected by the data. Hence, we con-
sider restrictions regarding the use of affirmative action while retaining type specific
distributions of ability, achievement and measurement and, thus, allow for profiling.
We consider four models that vary in the use of affirmative action. Model I allows
for 8 different district utility parameters, thereby allowing for affirmative action by

                                          29
FRL status and race. Model II allows for affirmative action by FRL status, but not
race. This imposes 4 restrictions on the parameter space. In addition, it imposes
the additional restriction that the slope parameters of the district utility function are
the same, implying equal marginal benefit to ability across types. Model III allows
for affirmative action by race, but not FRL status. This imposes 4 restrictions on
the parameter space. In addition, it imposes the additional restriction that the slope
parameters of the district utility function are the same, implying equal marginal ben-
efit to ability across types. Finally, Model IV does not allow for affirmative action
imposing 6 restrictions on the parameters of the utility function.

      Table 6 summarizes these model specifications and reports the relevant log-
likelihood statistics. Since Models II-IV are nested by Model I, we can use standard
likelihood ratio tests to evaluate the different specifications. The results in Table 6
lead us to choose Model II as our preferred model specification. Model II imposes five
restrictions relative to Model I. The difference in likelihood function values between
these two models implies a chi-squared statistic of 1.6 with a p-value of 0.9. Models
III and IV are very strongly rejected (p < .001) relative to either Model I or Model
II.

      Our choice of Model II carries the implication that preferences do not differ be-
tween black and non-black students. Profiling with respect to race enhances prediction
of performance by race, but does not imply preferential treatment by race. Hence,
we conclude that the district provides no preferential treatment by race. By contrast,
we do find preferential treatment (affirmative action) with respect to FRL status,
especially at the admission stage.

      Next we discuss the estimation results in further detail. Table 7 reports goodness
of fit statistics conditional on FRL status and race for the four models. Table 7 shows
that the first two models all fit the data almost equally well. Model III is slightly

                                            30
                             Table 6: Model Summary
 Model        Profiling         Affirmative Action                 Log          Free
                              Admission     Referral            Likelihood     Param.
                             (Intercept)    (Slope)
            FRL     Race     FRL Race FRL Race

 I          Yes      Yes      Yes     Yes        Yes    Yes       -8807.4         36

 II         Yes      Yes      Yes      No        No     No        -8808.2         31

 III        Yes      Yes      No      Yes        No     No        -8845.8         31

 IV         Yes      Yes      No       No        No     No        -8873.0         30

 This table summarizes four model specifications and reports the relevant log-likelihood.
Columns 1-2 indicate profiling by subsidized lunch status and race respectively. Columns
3-6 indicate affirmative action based on subsidized lunch status and race. Columns 3-4
signalize affirmative action through the intercept of the utility function while columns
5-6 pick out affirmative action through the slope of the utility function. The last column
shows the number of free parameters estimated by specification.




                                            31
                                 Table 7: Goodness of Fit
                                    Data     Model I Model II Model III Model IV
                                                    Non Black Students
 Not Referred                        78.6      78.3        78.7       78.8  78.8
 Referred not Admitted                8.9       9.6         9.2        9.5   9.2
 Referred Admitted                   12.5      12.1        12.1       11.8  12.0
 IQ Referred not Admitted           111.8     112.8      112.6       112.6 110.5
 IQ Referred and Admitted           130.0     130.4      130.2       130.3 128.5
                                                      Black Students
 Not Referred                        93.2      93.1        93.1       93.2  93.4
 Referred not Admitted                4.5       4.6         4.6        4.7   4.6
 Referred Admitted                    2.3       2.3         2.2        2.1   2.0
 IQ Referred not Admitted           106.4     106.5      106.8       105.6 107.3
 IQ Referred and Admitted           125.3     126.3      126.5       125.4 127.9
                                                Non-FRL Lunch Students
 Not Referred                        62.4      62.4        62.6       63.0  62.8
 Referred not Admitted               15.1      16.0        16.2       16.2  15.7
 Referred Admitted                   22.5      21.6        21.2       20.9  21.5
 IQ Referred not Admitted           112.8     113.4      113.5       111.7 110.2
 IQ Referred and Admitted           130.8     131.4      131.4       130.1 128.8
                                                      FRL Students
 Not Referred                        93.8      93.6        93.8       93.8  94.0
 Referred not Admitted                3.9       4.2         3.9        4.1   4.0
 Referred Admitted                    2.2       2.2         2.3        2.1   2.0
 IQ Referred not Admitted           106.1     107.0      106.4       107.6 108.1
 IQ Referred and Admitted           124.2     124.3      124.4       127.2 127.3
                                                       All Students
 Not Referred                        87.0      86.8        87.0       87.1  87.2
 Referred not Admitted                6.3       6.7         6.6        6.7   6.5
 Referred Admitted                    6.6       6.4         6.4        6.2   6.3
 IQ Referred not Admitted           109.6     110.3      110.2       109.7 109.2
 IQ Referred and Admitted           129.1     129.5      129.4       129.3 128.4
 Black in Admitted                   20.4      20.5        20.2       19.5  18.8
 FRL in Admitted                     26.5      26.9        28.2       26.7  25.3
 The table reports goodness of fit statistics conditional on subsidized lunch status (FRL) and
race for the four models. The first column (Data) shows descriptive statistics of four sub-samples
of students and the full sample. Columns 2-5 show the goodness of fit for each specification using
simulated data from the parameter estimates.




                                               32
worse. By contrast, the fit of the Model IV is significantly worse for black and FRL
students.

   We now turn to the parameter estimates. To save some space, Table 8 reports the
estimates and estimated standard errors only for our preferred specification, Model
II. Beginning with mean achievement estimates in the top panel, we see that students
on FRL have lower achievement than their non-FRL, same-race counterparts. We see
as well that non-black students have higher achievement than black students. The
standard deviations of achievement exhibit some variation across race and FRL, with
variance of non-white, non-FRL students being somewhat higher than for the other
three student types.

   Our estimates of the parameters of ability are shown in the second panel. The
means of ability exhibit a striking contrast to the means of achievement. For students
not on FRL, non-black students have a higher mean than black students, but the
relative difference is substantially smaller than for achievement. The same holds true
for mean ability estimates for those on FRL. The contrast between the variation in
means of achievement by race and FRL to the variation in means of ability by race
and FRL provides insight into our finding of significant scope for profiling by race
and FRL. Other parameter estimates vary less across student types. The estimated
correlations between achievement and ability are similar in magnitudes across types
the four types, with the value regular lunch black students (.83) being somewhat
lower than the other three groups. The standard deviations of ability are somewhat
lower for non-FRL than for FRL students. Table 8 also reveals, not surprisingly, that
there is substantial error in measurement of both ability and achievement.

   We provide in Figure 1 an illustration of how differences in distributions by type
provide scope for profiling. Figure 1 plots the conditional distributions of IQ scores for
a given value of achievement for black and non-black FRL students. The achievement

                                           33
     Table 8: Parameter Estimates: Model II
                  µa,rw       0.92     µa,f w      0.00
                             (0.04)               (0.00)
                   µa,rb      0.45     µa,f b      -0.34
                             (0.07)               (0.02)
 achievement      σat,rw      0.98    σat,f w      0.91
 distribution                (0.03)               (0.02)
                  σat,rb      0.89     σat,f b     0.84
                             (0.05)               (0.01)
                   σe,rw      0.52     σe,f w      0.57
                             (0.02)               (0.03)
                   σe,rb      0.47     σe,f b      0.53
                             (0.05)               (0.02)
                   µb,rw    111.52     µb,f w     84.58
                             (1.48)               (4.25)
                   µb,rb    103.38     µb,f b     73.74
                             (4.50)               (4.21)
 ability           σb,rw     14.43     σb,f w     18.02
 distribution                (1.25)               (2.26)
                   σb,rb     15.81     σb,f b     20.24
                             (3.28)               (1.92)
                  σq,rw       6.24     σq,f w      4.81
                             (0.41)               (0.90)
                   σq,rb      6.13     σq,f b      3.47
                             (1.52)               (0.97)
                  ρab,rw      0.90    ρab,f w      0.93
 correlations                (0.02)               (0.02)
                  ρab,rb      0.83     ρab,f b     0.91
                             (0.05)               (0.02)
                   ∆rw      -121.44    ∆f w      -115.67
                             (0.41)               (0.41)
                   ∆rb      -121.44    ∆f b      -115.67
 value                       (0.41)               (0.41)
 function          ζ1,rw      0.19     ζ1,rb       0.19
                            (0.065)              (0.065)
                   ζ1,f w     0.19     ζ1,f b      0.19
                            (0.065)              (0.065)
 The table reports parameter estimates for Model II. Boot-
strapped standard errors from 50 replications are shown in
parentheses.

                            34
                                          Figure 1:


                                  IQ Distribution Comparison
                         Conditional on Non-Black-FRL Referral Threshold
        .05
        .04
        .03
        .02
        .01
        0




              75   80   85   90   95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 150
                                                IQ
                             Non Black FRL                      Black FRL

This figure shows for Black and non-Black FRL students the distribution of IQ conditional on achievement
 after integrating out ability. Parameters are from Model II and achievement is set equal to .99.




                                              35
level is set to 0.99 which is the referral threshold for non-black FRL students. Figure
1 illustrates our finding that, among relatively high-achieving FRL students, the
IQ scores of black students are higher than that of non-black students, or stated
differently, black students have lower achievement relative to ability than non-black
students.

   From the last panel of Table 8, we see that the intercept of the district utility
function for FRL students is higher than for non-FRL students, implying affirmative
action in favor of FRL students. The difference in intercepts is quite substantial,
equivalent to adding approximately one third standard deviation to ability of FRL
students. We established above in our comparison of Model IV to Model II that this
difference is highly significant.

   Finally, we have investigated whether different schools use different referral and
admission policies. To conduct this analysis, we consider two sets of schools: high-
income and low-income schools. We then allow different utility functions for the
two school types, and hence different referral and admission thresholds. There are
very few non-FRL students in poor schools, too few to permit meaningful testing
of whether low-income schools treat non-FRL students differently than high-income
schools. We, therefore, investigate whether preferences for gifted participation of FRL
students differ between low-income and high-income schools by allowing the intercept
of the district utility function to differ between high- and low-income schools. We
obtain a difference in intercepts of 1.5, with low-income schools provide somewhat
higher affirmative-action benefits to FRL students than high-income schools. This
difference is relatively modest, equivalent to adding .1 standard deviation to ability
of FRL student in low-income schools, and not significant by conventional standards
(p=.09). Hence, we conclude that there is limited, if any, heterogeneity in treatment




                                          36
of FRL students between high- and low-income schools.25



7        Policy Analysis

In 2003, the U.S. Supreme Court considered two affirmative action cases against the
University of Michigan, naming then-president Lee Bollinger, as defendant. One,
Grutter v. Bollinger (2003), challenged the admission policy of the law school. The
other, Gratz v. Bollinger (2003), challenged the undergraduate admission policy. The
court upheld the former, seeing it as narrowly construed and employing race only as
a possible favorable factor, while striking down the latter as being too closely akin
to a quota system. The court decision with respect to Michigan’s undergraduate
admission policy prompted many colleges and universities to change their admission
policies to reduce or eliminate race as a distinct admission criterion.

       The Gratz v. Bollinger decision prompted research investigating the extent to
which race-blind policies, coupled with selection employing correlates of race, might
preserve racial diversity in higher education.26 Here we use race-blind to mean that
criteria for student admission do not vary by race. These analyses suggest that, at the
college level, banning affirmative action while permitting of use of correlates of race
results in a very significant reduction in minority attendance, especially at top-tier
institutions.

       It is likely that the Gratz v. Bollinger decision also induced many school districts,
possibly including the one that we study, to adopt race-blind referral and admission
policies. Subsequent Supreme Court decisions directly focused on K-12 education
reinforce the need for school districts develop race-blind policies. In 2007, the Court
  25
       This sensitivity check is based on the 2004/05 cohort.
  26
       See, for example, Chan & Eyster (2003), Epple et al. (2008) and Loury et al. (2008).



                                                  37
decided two cases involving K-12 education, one in Seattle (Parents Involved in Com-
munity Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1) and the other in Louisville (Meredith
v. Jefferson County Board of Education). In those cases, the Court invalidated the
districts’ racial desegregation plans, ruling that students could not be assigned to
schools solely to achieve racial balance. Not surprisingly, the Court was closely di-
vided. Casting the pivotal vote, Justice Kennedy sided with the conservative wing of
the Court to form a majority to ban use of race in determining school assignments.
In his opinion, however, Justice Kennedy pointedly left the door open to use of cor-
relates of race to achieve race-conscious objectives.27 In 2006, voters in Michigan
approved a ban on affirmative, which in turn was upheld in the April 2014 Supreme
Court decision in Schuette v Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action. That decision
has prompted increased focus on use of socioeconomic factors as an alternative to use
of race in fostering affirmative action objectives.28

       The following important policy question then arises: How closely can race-
conscious but race-blind policies achieve the objectives of racial integration of gifted
K-12 academic programs? Our model permits us to provide an analysis of the effect
on racial diversity of affirmative action based on race. We can compare this approach
to the effect of affirmative action based on a correlate of race—FRL status. We,
therefore, consider two policy alternatives. Policy 1 employs affirmative action with
respect to both FRL and race. This is accomplished by extending the admission
threshold for FRL students to all African American Students. Policy 2 eliminates
  27
     In Fisher v University of Texas (June 24, 2013), the Supreme Court strongly emphasized that
placing any explicit weight on race in admissions should be a last resort, but, in its remand to the
lower court, the Supreme Court again seemed to accept use of correlates of race to achieve race-
conscious objectives: ”The reviewing court must ultimately be satisfied that no workable race-neutral
alternatives would produce the educational benefits of diversity.”
  28
     The President of the American Association of State Colleges and Universities commented that
”Most of us have already started to look at other variables than race, especially first-generation
students, and low-income students.” (NYT, 4/22/2014).



                                                 38
                           Table 9: Policy Analysis
                                     Data   Model II Policy 1 Policy 2
                                             Non Black Students
 Not Referred                         78.6      78.7       78.7    81.0
 Referred not Admitted                 8.9        9.2       9.3     8.1
 Referred Admitted                    12.5      12.1       12.0    10.9
 IQ Referred not Admitted            111.8     112.6      112.5   114.0
 IQ Referred and Admitted            130.0     130.2      130.1   131.2
                                               Black Students
 Not Referred                         93.2      93.1       92.1    95.6
 Referred not Admitted                 4.5        4.6       5.2     3.0
 Referred Admitted                     2.3        2.2       2.8     1.4
 IQ Referred not Admitted            106.4     106.8      105.5   111.1
 IQ Referred and Admitted            125.3     126.5      125.3   130.6
                                           Non-FRL Lunch Students
 Not Referred                         62.4      62.6       59.9    62.6
 Referred not Admitted                15.1      16.2       17.6    16.4
 Referred Admitted                    22.5      21.2       22.5    21.0
 IQ Referred not Admitted            112.8     113.5      112.0   113.5
 IQ Referred and Admitted            130.8     131.4      130.6   131.3
                                                FRL Students
 Not Referred                         93.8      93.8       93.8    96.9
 Referred not Admitted                 3.9        3.9       3.9     2.1
 Referred Admitted                     2.2        2.3       2.3     1.1
 IQ Referred not Admitted            106.1     106.4      106.3   112.0
 IQ Referred and Admitted            124.2     124.4      124.5   129.8
                                                 All Students
 Not Referred                         87.0      87.0       86.4    89.4
 Referred not Admitted                 6.3        6.6       6.9     5.2
 Referred Admitted                     6.6        6.4       6.7     5.4
 IQ Referred not Admitted            109.6     110.2      109.5   113.0
 IQ Referred and Admitted            129.1     129.4      129.0   131.1
 Black in Admitted                    20.4      20.2       24.1    14.7
 FRL in Admitted                      26.5      28.2       27.0    15.5
 The table reports statistics conditional on subsidized lunch status (FRL) and
race for the four models. The first column (Data) shows descriptive statistics
of four sub-samples of students and the full sample. Columns 2 show the same
statistics for the base line equilibrium, Columns 3-4 consider the policies discussed
in detail in the text.



                                         39
affirmative action entirely. Table 9 summarizes the impacts of these counterfactual
policy experiments.

    Our model predicts that adoption of Policy 1 would increase gifted enrollment
of African American students in this cohort from 20.2 to 24.1 percent. By con-
trast, under Policy 2, enrollment of African American students would drop to 14.7
percent. Thus, eliminating affirmative action would reduce African American stu-
dent enrollment by approximately 39% relative to a policy of affirmative action for
African American students. The current policy, providing no affirmative action for
African American students but retaining affirmative action for FRL students reduces
African American student enrollment by 16% relative to Policy 1. Thus, affirmative
action with respect to FRL is extremely important in preserving enrollment of African
American students in the district’s gifted program.



8     Conclusions

U.S. educational institutions at all levels invest extensive resources in providing ad-
vanced programs to help high-ability students reach their potential. The challenge
that arises in deciding admission to these programs is that ability is unobserved. Ob-
taining measures of ability that are not affected by family resources and vagaries of
circumstance has proven to be extraordinarily challenging. Despite extensive research
and design efforts, measures of ability such as IQ exhibit systematic variation across
demographic groups. Educational institutions confront the challenge of using avail-
able evidence to assess suitability of students for admission to selective programs,
distinguishing ability from influences attributable to family resources and circum-
stance. While not uncontroversial, differential treatment based on income has gained
a considerable measure of acceptance. Race-based criteria have proven to be much


                                          40
more controversial.

   The Supreme Court has endorsed a holistic approach, one that considers a broad
set of factors in decisions about the admission of a student to selective programs
and institutions, i.e., the Court encourages profiling. Going somewhat farther in
his decision for the majority in Gratz versus Bollinger, Justice Kennedy explicitly
declined to reject use of non-race factors to achieve race-conscious ends, a view he
reaffirmed in a concurring opinion in the Seattle and Louisville cases. It is natural to
wonder whether it is possible to formalize the distinctions being made by the court,
and, if so, whether it is possible to test empirically whether a policy does or does
not conform to court guidelines. In this light, we have pursued four objectives in
this paper. One objective is to develop a framework sufficiently broad not only to
encompasses merit, profiling, and affirmative action, but also to permit statistical
testing of the roles that these factors play in practice. A second is to demonstrate,
via econometric analysis, the practical relevance of this framework in application. A
third is to extend the analysis of these policy issues to an important domain that
has been understudied, selective programs for high-ability students in primary and
secondary education. A fourth objective is to make a substantive contribution to
policy by statistical testing of the extent of use of profiling and affirmative action
in an operational setting, and by counterfactuals that investigate the consequences,
either of curtailing or extending, the use of profiling or affirmative action.

   We believe our application succeeds in these objectives. Of particular interest
are the findings of our counterfactual analysis of race-based affirmative action. Long
(2007), in his review of the evidence with respect to race-based affirmative action in
colleges and universities, concludes, and we agree, that: ”The pressures—and in some
cases, legal requirements—to replace affirmative action are very real. All the same,
the stark evidence of the inefficacy of replacement programs remains.” By contrast,


                                           41
for the central school district we study, we find that profiling by race and income,
coupled with affirmative action by income, can achieve more than 80 percent of the
level of African American enrollment that could be achieved by race-based affirmative
action.

    Two questions naturally arise: Why the sharp contrast to findings with respect to
elimination of race-based affirmative action in our setting as compared to findings for
colleges and universities? To what extent is it likely to generalize to other central city
school districts? The answer to the first question is that middle- and upper-income
households with children tend to locate in suburban school districts, leaving relatively
low-income households in the central city districts. African American households are
disproportionately represented among low-income households. Hence, in central city
districts, policies that courts have thus far found admissible (profiling by race and
income and affirmative action by income) can go a long way toward achieving out-
comes that would be achieved by adding race-based affirmative action to the district’s
decision criteria. The answer to the second question is that our findings are indeed
likely to generalize to other central city school districts; the propensity of middle- and
high-income households with children to locate in suburban districts is a phenomenon
observed in every large metropolitan area in the United States.

    The methods developed in this paper offer much scope for future research. Our
framework may also be applicable in other settings in which costly screening pro-
cedures are used with the goal of increasing minority participation.29 For example,
costly search for qualified minority applicants as an alternative or complement to affir-
mative action is quite common in post-secondary and post-graduate education (e.g.,
minority recruitment fairs hosted by colleges). Minority job fairs often require par-
  29
     We are grateful to an anonymous referee for pointing out the potential relevance of our framework
in these domains.




                                                 42
ticipating candidates to submit a specified set of materials that are then reviewed by
participating employers as they decide which candidates will be invited for interviews.




                                          43
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A. (2005). College admission with affirmative action. International Journal of
      Game Theory, 33, 535–49.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Angrist, J., & Pathak, P. (2011). The elite illusion: achievement effects at
      boston and new york exam schools. NBER Working Paper 17264.

Anwar, S. & Fang, H. (2006). An alternative test for racial prejudice in motor vehicle searches:
      theory and evidence. American Economic Review, 96 (1), 127–151.

Arcidiacono, P. (2005). Affirmative action in higher education: how do admission and financial aid
      rules affect future earnings?. Econometrica, 73 (5), 1477–1524.

Arrow, K. (1973). The theory of discrimination. In Ashenfelter, O. (Ed.), Discrimination in Labor
      Markets. Princeton University Press.

Baker, A. (2012). Charges of bias in admission test policy at eight elite public high schools. New
      York Times, Sept 22.

Barlevy, G. & Neal, D. (2012). Pay for percentile. American Economic Review, 102 (5), 1805–31.

Becker, G. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago University Press.

Carneiro, P., Hansen, K., & Heckman, J. (2003). Estimating distributions of treatment effects with
      an application to the returns of schooling and measurement of the effects of uncertainty on
      college choice. International Economic Review, 44(2), 361–422.

Chan, J. & Eyster, E. (2003). Does banning affirmative action harm college quality?. American
      Economic Review, 93 (3), 858–873.

Chung, K. (2000). Role models and arguments for affirmative action. American Economic Review,
      90, 640–48.

Coate, S. & Loury, G. (1993). Will affirmative action policies eliminate negative stereotypes?.
      American Economic Review, 83, 1220–40.

Commission, E. (2011). Dialogue conference: profiling systems for effective labour market integra-
      tion. Executive Summary, Brussels.

Court, U. S. (2003a). Gratz and versus and bollinger, 539 u.s. 244..


                                                44
Court, U. S. (2003b). Grutter versus bollinger, 539 u.s. 306..

Court, U. S. (2003c). Meredith v. jefferson county board of education, 548, us 938,..

Court, U. S. (2007). Parents involved in community schools v. seattle school district no. 1, 551 u.s.
      701..

Cullen, J., Long, M., & Reback, R. (2012). Jockeying for position: strategic high school choice under
      texas’ top ten percent plan. Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J., & Schenach, S. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive and non-
      cognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78 (3), 883–931.

Epple, D., Romano, R., & Sieg, H. (2006). Admission, tuition, and financial aid policies in the
      market for higher education. Econometrica, 74(4), 885–928.

Epple, D., Romano, R., & Sieg, H. (2008). Diversity and affirmative action in higher education.
      Journal of Public Economic Theory, 10 (4), 475–501.

Hickman, B. (2010a). Effort, race gaps, and affirmative action: a game-theortic analysis of college
      admissions. Working Paper.

Hickman, B. (2010b). Effort, race gaps, and affirmative action: a structural policy analysis of u.s.
      college admissions. Working Paper.

Knowles, J., Persico, N., & Todd, P. (2001). Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: theory and
      evidence. Journal of Political Economy, 109, 203–229.

Kojima, F. (2012). School choice: impossibilities for afformative action. Games and Economic
      Behavior, 75, 685–93.

Long, M. (2004a). College applications and the effect of affirmative action. Journal of Econometrics,
      121, 319–42.

Long, M. (2004b). Race and college admissions: an alternative to affirmative action. Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 86 (4), 1020–33.

Long, M. (2007). Affirmative action and its alternatives in public universities: what do we know?.
      Public Administration Review, 67 (2), 315–30.

Loury, G., Fryer, R., & Yuret, T. (2008). An economic analysis of color-blind affirmative action.
      Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2), 319–55.

                                                 45
Lundberg, S. (1991). The enforcement of equal opportunity laws under imperfect information:
      affirmative action and alternatives. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (1), 309–26.

Martin, J. (1998). What works among active labour market policies: evidence from oecd countries’
      experiences. OECD Labour Market and Social Policy Occasional Papers, No. 35.

Moro, A. & Norman, P. (2003). Affirmative action in a competitive economy. Journal of Public
      Economics, 87, 567–94.

Moro, A. & Norman, P. (2004). A general equilibrium model of statistical discrimination. Journal
      of Economic Theory, 114, 1–30.

Neal, D. & Johnson, W. (1996). The role of pre-market factors in black-white wage differences.
      Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), 869–895.

Phelps, E. (1972). The statistical theory of racism and sexism. American Economic Review, 62,
      659–661.

Reardon, S., Baker, R., & Klasik, D. (2012). Race, income, and enrollment patterns in highly
      selective colleges, 1982-2004. Stanford University Working Paper.

Schenach, S. (2004). Estimation of nonlinear models with measurement error. Econometrica, 72 (1),
      33–75.




                                               46
A      Proof of Proposition 1

Optimal admission for referral policies for IQ testing satisfies:
                                                                                           
            =1           Z ∞Z ∞                                                         >0
                                                                                          
  α(a)  ∈ [0, 1]     as          β(a, q) v(b) − c   f (b, q|a) db dq                          (14)
                                                                                           
                                                                                     =0
                        0  0                                                               
          =0                                                                           <0

Optimal admission satisfies:
                                                                              
                         =1             Z                                  >0
                                                                              
              β(a, q)  ∈ [0, 1]    as   v(b) f (b|a, q) db                                      (15)
                                                                              
                                                                          =0    
                                                                              
                         =0                                                <0

Rearranging the FOC gives the result.



B      Proof of Proposition 2

If vm (b) ≥ vM (b) and fm (a, b, q) = fM (a, b, q) = f (a, b, q), then we have
                                          Z   ∞   Z   ∞
                            Vm (a, q) =                   vm (b) f (b|a, q) db                    (16)
                                          0       0
                                          Z   ∞   Z   ∞
                                     ≥                    vM (b) f (b|a, q) db
                                          0       0
                                     = VM (a, q)




                                                  47
and hence q̄m (a) ≤ q̄M (a). Similarly
                                   Z   ∞       Z       ∞
                     Wm (a) =                               vm (b) f (b, q|a) db dq   (17)
                                    q̄ (a)     0
                                   Z m∞        Z       ∞
                               ≥                            vm (b) f (b, q|a) db dq
                                    q̄ (a)         0
                                   Z M∞        Z       ∞
                               ≥                            vM (b) f (b, q|a) db dq
                                    q̄M (a)        0
                               = WM (a)


which proves the result.



C     Proof of Proposition 3

If vm (b) = vM (b) and Fm (b|a, q) ≤ FM (b|a, q), then we have
                                         Z     ∞   Z       ∞
                         Vm (a, q) =                           v(b) fm (b|a, q) db    (18)
                                           0           0
                                         Z     ∞   Z       ∞
                                   ≥                           v(b) fM (b|a, q) db
                                           0           0
                                   = VM (a, q)


where the inequality follows from the fact that v(b) is monotonically increasing in b.
Hence qm (a) ≤ qM (a).




                                                       48
D     Proof of Proposition 4

The expected value of admitting a student type (a, q) is given by:
                             Z    ∞   Z   ∞
               V (a, q) =                     v(b) f (b|a, q) db = ζ0 + ζ1 µb/a,q   (19)
                              0       0


The covariance matrix is given by:
                                                                    
                                                  σb2    σab   σb2
                                                      
                            Σb a q = σab σa2                                       (20)
                                                      
                                                 σab 
                                                      
                                        2      2     2
                                       σb σab σb + σq

Hence the conditional expectation of b given (a, q) is given by the following equation:

                                                    −1          
                             h       i σ2     σ ab         a − µ a
                                        a
              µb/a,q   = µb + σab σb2                           
                                            2      2
                                       σab σb + σq         q − µq
                       = µb − (Aµa + Qµq ) + Aa + Qq                                (21)


where the constants A and Q are defined as:

                                          σab (σb2 + σq2 ) − σb2 σab
                            A =
                                           σa2 (σb2 + σq2 ) − σab
                                                                2

                                                   2
                                              −σab   + σb2 σa2
                            Q =                                                     (22)
                                          σa2 (σb2 + σq2 ) − σab
                                                               2



The school is indifferent between admitting and not-admitting a student to the gifted
program if the expected value added of the program is zero:


            0 = V (a, q) = ζ0 + ζ1 (µb − (Aµa + Qµq ) + Aa + Qq)                    (23)




                                                    49
Equation (23) defines a linear function q̄(a) which fully characterizes the admission
policy β(a, q):


                                     q̄(a) = τ0 − τ1 a                                        (24)


where:

                                   − ζζ10 − µb + (Aµa + Qµq )
                         τ0 =
                                                         Q
                                A
                         τ1   =                                                               (25)
                                Q

Substituting the optimal admission rule into the expected value of referring a student
type (a) for testing, we obtain:
                                 Z     ∞   Z   ∞
                       W (a) =                     v(b) f (b, q|a) dq db                      (26)
                                   0       q̄(a)


Now f (b, q|a) = f (b|a) fε (q − b). The mean and variance of the condition distribution
of b given a are given by

                                                         σab
                              µb/a = µb +                    (a − µa )                        (27)
                                                         σa2

and

                                                              2
                                      2                      σab
                                     σb/a = σb2 −                                             (28)
                                                             σa2

Hence, we have:

                                                               (b−mub|a )2                2
                                            1      −                           1    −
                                                                                      (q−b)
                                                                  2σ 2                   2
            v(b) f (b, q/a) = (ζ0 + ζ1 b) √       e                 b|a      √     e 2σq      (29)
                                           2πσb|a                             2πσq


                                                    50
Substituting (29) into (26), we obtain:

                                                                                   (b−mub|a )2
                           ∞
                                    τ0 − τ1 a − b                          −
                       Z
                                                                   1                  2σ 2
          W (a) =           [1 − Φ(               )] (ζ0 + ζ1 b) √       e              b|a      db   (30)
                         −∞              σ                       2πσb|a

ā is then the unique solution to the equation W (a) = c . A student is referred if
and only if a ≥ ā. Letting the structural parameters of the underlying distribution
of (a, b, q) and the parameters of the utility function to be functions of j then proves
the result.



E         Proof of Proposition 5

Consider the model with one type.30 Achievement is measured with error:


                                             ã = a + a                                              (31)


First, consider the case in which the variance of the measurement error in achieve-
ment, denoted by σ2a , is known. In that case, µa , σa2 are identified from the observed
distribution of achievement.

       Next consider the distribution of IQ condition on being referred and conditional
on ã. This distribution is given by:
                                                   R
                                                        f (a, q|ã) da
                               f (q|R = 1, ã) = R R ā                                               (32)
                                                    ā
                                                        f (a, q|ã) da dq

The left hand side of the equation is non-parametrically identified. Under the normal-
ity assumption, f (a, q|ã) is also normally distributed. Hence, the right hand side is a
function of the three structural parameters (µq , σq2 , σaq ) and the nuisance parameter
  30
       The identification argument easily extends to the case of multiple types.

                                                   51
ā. All of these parameters are thus identified under the joint normality assumption
(as well as more flexible functional forms).

      Next, we assume, that


                                      q = b + q                                      (33)


Hence µb = µq and σab = σaq are identified as well. That leaves us with three
parameters: σb2 = σq2 − σ2q , and the parameters of the value function ζ0 and ζ1 .

      Consider the probability of being admitted to the gifted program, which is given
by:
                                         Z
                   P r{A = 1|ã, q} =        1{τ0 + τ1 a ≤ q} f (a|ã, q) da          (34)


where the functional forms of τ0 and τ1 are given in the proof of Proposition 4. The
left hand side of the equation above is non-parametrically identified. Consider the
right hand side which the same probability predicted by our model. First, note that
the joint distribution f (a|ã, q) has already been identified. Second note that τ1 is
function of only σb2 . τ0 is a function of the ratio ∆ = ζ0 /ζ1 and σb2 , given that all
other parameters that affect τ0 and τ1 have been identified. We can thus conclude that
the ratio ∆ = ζ0 /ζ1 and σb2 are identified of the conditional admission probabilities.

      Next, consider the referral probability, which is given by:
                                                   Z
                            P r{R = 1|ã, q} =            f (a|ã) da                 (35)
                                                     ā




                                             52
where ā is the unique solution to

                                                              (b−mub|a )2
         ∞
                 τ0 − τ1 a − b                            −
     Z
                                                  1              2σ 2
         [1 − Φ(               )] (ζ1 (b + ∆)) √        e          b|a      db − c = 0   (36)
      −∞              σq                        2πσb|a

Given that c is a known parameter, it is straight forward to show that ā = ā(ζ1 ). We
thus conclude that ζ1 is identified of the observed referral probabilities.

    Finally, note that the error variance of prior achievement is identified by the depen-
dence of P r{R = 1|ã} and P r{A = 1|ã, q} on σ2a . If the measurement error variance
is zero, then there is a deterministic relationship between referral and admission deci-
sions and observed achievement and IQ scores. As the amount of measurement error
increases, the correlation between ã and R and A decreases. If the measurement
error variance is infinite, the referral probability is not a function of the observed
achievement



F        A Monte Carlo Study

We conducted a Monte Carlo study to get some additional insights into the small
sample properties of our ML estimator. We generated 50 samples with sizes equal to
5000 observations. Table 10 summarizes the findings of the Monte Carlo exercise. It
reports the true parameter values under which the data were generated, the mean of
the estimates, the standard deviation of the estimates and the sample mean of the
estimated asymptotic standard errors.

    We find that the small sample bias of most parameters are small.




                                           53
                       Table 10: Monte Carlo Results
           True Value    Guess      Mean Std Dev. Asymp. Errors
 µa               0.00     0.00      0.00    0.01      0.01
 µb             100.00 105.00       99.97    1.09      0.99
 σb              13.00    12.00     13.06    0.60      0.58
 σIQ error        7.00     7.50      6.99    0.32      0.28
 σea error        0.35     0.40      0.35    0.01      0.01
 σea              1.00     1.00      1.00    0.01      0.01
 ρa,b             0.65     0.70      0.65    0.03      0.03
 ∆ = ζζ01      -116.67 -100.00 -116.68       0.23      0.24
 ζ1                300      250 299.48      36.16     36.14
 Simulations: 50. Simulations size: 7500
 The table summarizes the findings of an identification exercise using a Monte Carlo
study. It reports the true parameter values under which the data were generated,
the mean of the estimates, the standard deviation of the estimates and the sample
mean of the estimated asymptotic standard errors.




                                        54
