                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND STRUCTURAL REFORMS

                                           Sebastian Galiani
                                              Ivan Torre
                                           Gustavo Torrens

                                         Working Paper 21237
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21237


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015




We would especially like to thank the Ronald Coase Institute for its financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21237.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Sebastian Galiani, Ivan Torre, and Gustavo Torrens. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Organizations and Structural Reforms
Sebastian Galiani, Ivan Torre, and Gustavo Torrens
NBER Working Paper No. 21237
June 2015
JEL No. D72,F53

                                                ABSTRACT

Different countries have been following different reform paths since the early 1990s. We develop a
simple dynamic model of policy reform that captures some of the determinants that underlie these
differences. The model emphasizes the interaction between domestic institutions and international
organizations that promote reform, on the one hand, and the political incentives for reversing reforms,
on the other. At equilibrium, there are three types of reform paths. A country can undergo a full-scale,
lasting reform; it can undertake a partial but lasting reform; or it can go through cycles of reforms
and costly counter-reforms. Domestic institutions, as well as the incentives provided by international
organizations, determine the equilibrium path. Unless the cost of reversal is high enough, an international
intervention that promotes reforms induces an increase in the probability of reversals. A benevolent
international organization that is fully aware of the possibility and social cost of reversals will always
increase social welfare if it embraces the following principle: promote the greatest partial reform that
is compatible with no reversal, or induce cycles of full-scale reform and complete reversal, depending
on which of those two paths will generate greater social welfare. A benevolent but politically myopic
international organization, however, may reduce social welfare because it does not take the fact into
account that an overly aggressive reform could trigger costly reversals that outweigh the benefits of
the reform. Deliberately making the costs of reversal high could be a risky way of improving the trade-off
between the extent of the reform and the probability of reversal. Our model suggests that international
organizations should also consider the possibility of providing defensive funding for dealing with counter-reform
shocks.


Sebastian Galiani                                       Gustavo Torrens
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
University of Maryland                                  Indiana University
3105 Tydings Hall                                       Wylie Hall, 100 S Woodland Ave
College Park, MD 20742                                  Bloomington, IN 47405-7104
and NBER                                                gtorrens@indiana.edu
galiani@econ.umd.edu

Ivan Torre
Sciences Po
28 rue des Saints Pères
75007 Paris
France
ivan.torre@sciencespo.fr
1   Introduction

In the early 1990s, many developing countries began to implement structural reforms. The
paths followed by those reforms have differed greatly across countries. For example,
Argentina underwent an aggressive structural reform process during the 1990s, but
eventually rolled back many of those reforms in the following decade after experiencing a
negative external shock and internal political instability. Brazil followed a less ambitious
reform path during the 1990s, and the election of a former trade union activist as president
in 2002 raised fears that its reforms might be reversed. Ultimately, however, there was no
roll-back, although the government did take on a more important role in the economy and
the privatization process slowed down. In the 1990s, Southern European countries
embarked on a reform process to bolster their bid to become part of the Eurozone. So far,
none of these countries has backtracked –and, in particular, none of them has renounced the
Euro– even after having been engulfed by a severe economic crisis and, in some cases, such
as Greece, coming under enormous internal political pressure for counter-reforms. Many
former communist countries in Eastern European started up a reform process in the 1990s
with a view to joining the European Union. Once they had entered the European Union, there
were fears that compliance with the reforms would diminish since the possibility of being
refused entry was no longer a threat. However, this has not proved to be the case so far.

Traditional schools of thought contend that the local institutional context is a fundamental
factor in accounting for these different paths. While there is little doubt that local institutions
play a very important role in determining the pace of structural reform, we argue that the
interaction between local institutions and international organizations should not be ignored.
When international organizations such the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World
Bank and the European Union offer to provide countries with funding for the
implementation of structural reforms, they become important players in the eyes of local
politicians and, consequently, the reform path is shaped not only by local institutions, but
also by the incentives provided by those organizations. Traditionally, the focus has also been
on factors that promote or block reforms. While this is key to an understanding of the
political mechanisms behind a given type of reform, we argue that, in order to explain why
structural reforms take the paths that they do, we must also understand the logic of counter-
reforms.

In order to study the determinants of reform paths, including the role played by international
organizations in that regard, we develop a dynamic model of reform that incorporates the
following features: (i) Reforms are socially beneficial, but produce winners (the pro-reform
coalition) and losers (the anti-reform coalition); (ii) The government has to provide reform
opponents with at least partial compensation in order to succeed in passing reforms, but
there are economic and institutional limits to the resources that it can mobilize for that
purpose; (iii) The political landscape is unstable and, consequently, the government may
come under the control of pro-reform or anti-reform coalitions, with the result that there are
windows of opportunity for the introduction of reforms, but there are also windows of
opportunity for their reversal; (iv) Reversing reforms is costly for everybody, including the
anti-reform coalition; (v) International organizations provide funding for reforms and for
helping the government to avert reversals.
                                                                                                 2
In the model there are two domestic groups, the pro-reform coalition and the anti-reform
coalition, and an international organization. In each period, the government, which is
controlled by one of the domestic coalitions, selects the level of structural reforms. When the
pro-reform coalition controls the government, it is possible to pass or sustain a previously
adopted level of reform, but only if a fraction of the anti-reform coalition is compensated for
the loses incurred during the period. There are two sources of funding for compensations.
First, the government can tax the pro-reform coalition up to a fraction of its gains in the
period. Second, the international organization provides funds to incentivize reforms. At the
begining of each period, the coalition that does not control the government has an exogenous
random chance of gaining political control. Everytime that this takes place, there is a window
of opportunity for reforms (when the pro-reform coalition gains control) or counter-reforms
(when the anti-reform coalition gains control) to be implemented. While reforms required
compensations, reversals are costly. A fixed cost of reversal must be paid by both domestic
coalitions. There are four key parameters in the model that capture domestic institutional
characteristics and international incentives to reform. The maximum tax that the
government can impose on the pro-reform coalition and the incentive schedule offered by
the international organization shape the revenue available for compensations. The fraction
of the anti-reform coalition that must be compensated shapes the expenditure on
compensations. Finally, the cost of reversal is the key parameter behind the anti-reform
coalition reversal decision.

Depending on the institutional characteristics of the country (i.e., domestic funds available
for compensations, the fraction of the anti-reform coalition that required compensation and
the cost of reversal), but also on the amount of funding provided by international
organizations and the terms and conditions attached to it, the equilibrium of the model
induces one of the following reform paths: first, a country may experience a full-fledged,
lasting reform that will never be reversed; second, a country may undergo a partial but
lasting reform; third, a country may go through cycles of reform and counter-reform.

As a benchmark, let us consider a situation in which there is no international intervention.
Whenever the pro-reform coalition controls the government, it tries to pass the most
ambitious reforms possible because current reform decisions do not affect future reversal
decisions. If the pro-reform coalition has to provide compensation to a significant proportion
of the anti-reform coalition, but it has the necessary funds to do so, the country may undergo
a full-fledged, lasting reform. Whenever the pro-reform coalition gains control, a
comprehensive reform can be implemented. The anti-reform coalition does not have an
incentive to introduce counter-reforms because it knows that compensations will cover a
significant portion of the “losers” and, hence, there is no point in incurring the costs involved
in reversing the reforms. When the pro-reform coalition must compensate a significant
proportion of the anti-reform coalition, but it does not have the required funds to do so, the
country experiences a partial but lasting reform. If there are not enough funds available to
buy off a large enough segment of the anti-reform coalition, then the pro-reform coalition
will not succeed in passing a full-fledged reform package. As a consequence, the pro-reform
coalition is forced to implement more modest reform measures, which may be disappointing,
but will also be less likely to be reversed. Finally, when the budget for compensation is large
relative to the proportion of the anti-reform coalition that must be bought off in order to pass
                                                                                               3
a reform, the country will be prone to cycles of reform and counter-reform. If the pro-reform
coalition has a large budget for paying out compensations and only a small fraction of the
anti-reform coalition must be co-opted in order to pass a reform bill, then the pro-reform
coalition will pass a very ambitious reform package. As a consequence, the majority of the
anti-reform coalition will be faced with an aggressive reform and receive no compensation.
In the short run, this is not an issue, but as soon as the anti-reform coalition has the chance
of regaining the control of the government, it will initiate a counter-reform process. Notice
that, ex ante, the pro-reform coalition may prefer to commit itself to select a more moderate
reform or to compensate a higher fraction of the anti-reform coalition than strictly
necessary, if this would avoid costly reversals. However, when the pro-reform coalition
controls the government, the reform chosen in any given period does not affect reversal
decisions in the future, which only depend on future expected levels of reform. The problem
is that the pro-reform coalition cannot credibly commit to implement a future level of
structural reform. In other words, the pro-reform coalition faces a commitment problem at
the time of selecting the level of structural reforms adopted.

When an international organization provides funds to promote and sustain reforms, more
ambitious reforms are passed, but reversals are also more likely. In other words, there is a
trade-off between the extent of the reform measures and their stability. Formally, we show
that the international intervention expands the region of the parameter space in which there
is a full-fledged, lasting reform in equilibrium and the region of the parameter space in which
there is a reversal in equilibrium. The logic is as follows. If the pro-reform coalition can use
external funds to compensate the anti-reform coalition, it is easier for it to pass a more
aggressive reform package. When a large part of the anti-reform coalition must be
compensated, reversal is not an issue and, hence, the reform remains in place indefinitely.
However, when only a relatively small proportion of the anti-reform coalition must be
compensated, the availability of international funds also makes the reversal of reforms a
more attractive option for the anti-reform coalition.

The model helps to explain the paths that reform efforts have followed in different countries.
Consider some examples. In the 1990s, Brazil launched a process of structural reform. The
government did not have the resources to compensate potential losers, who were powerful
and required generous compensation. Although international funds were available, the
amount of funding was not --given the size of the Brazilian economy and the political
strength of the potential losers-- enough to significantly accelerate the reform process. As a
consequence, Brazil implemented moderate, gradual reform measures. In 1999, the country
underwent a serious economic crisis and international financial institutions provided fresh
funds. A default on government debt was averted and the reforms were not reversed. In
2002, a left-wing party won the presidential election and fears of reversal spread. However,
there was no roll-back. In terms of our model, Brazil is an example of a country in which
partial, but lasting, reforms are in place. The reform measures were not reversed because
they were moderate and because the few losers received generous compensation. In
addition, the funds provided by the IMF and other institutions during the 1999 crisis may
also have helped to avoid a counter-reform.

At the beginning of the 1990s, Argentina had a very limited budget for compensating the
                                                                                              4
potential losers in a reform process, but the pro-reform coalition succeeded in passing some
reforms by compensating only a small proportion of the losers. Access to external funds from
international organizations allowed the government to deepen its reform process. The
proportion of losers who were not compensated was, however, very high and, as a result, the
risk of reversal was also high. To deal with this risk, several strategies for increasing the cost
of reversal were considered (e.g., full dollarization to reduce the probability that the hard-
peg scheme could collapse (see Galiani, Heymann and Tommasi, 2003)). Following a severe
economic crisis, in 2002 the country defaulted on its external debt and devalued the
currency; at that point, a reversal of the reform process slowly began to occur. In terms of
our model, Argentina is an example of a country that is prone to cycles of reform and counter-
reform. Moreover, its instability has been exacerbated by the availability of external funding
for reform efforts.

During the 1990s, Greece embarked on a reform program. By the end of the 1990s, Greece
was able to fulfill the “Maastricht criteria”, and it joined the eurozone in 2001. Although the
government’s ability to compensate reform-process losers with its own funds was quite
limited relative to the segment of losers that required compensation, membership in the
eurozone facilitated the reforms while at the same time significantly increasing the cost of
reversal. During most of the 2000s, Greece did not deepen the reform process that it had
undertaken in the 1990s. Then, the financial crisis of 2009 triggered a severe recession, and
the country’s economic situation took a serious turn for the worse when it was revealed that
the government had been wrestling with a hefty fiscal deficit for quite some time and had
been falsifying its accounts. In 2010 and 2011, the European Union provided a bailout to the
Greek government in exchange for harsh austerity measures and the enactment of sweeping
structural reforms (privatizations and limits on free health care, for instance). In 2015, the
anti-austerity Syriza party came to power by promising to repeal the bailout programs. So
far, Syriza has not fulfilled its election promises and, more than six years after the start of the
economic crisis, Greece is still part of the eurozone. In terms of our model, Greece is a country
that, in the absence of international intervention, would have extremely moderate but long-
lasting reforms. With the incentives provided by the European Union, however, more
ambitious reforms became possible, but this also created incentives for their reversal.
Nevertheless, the increase in reversal costs driven by the adoption of the euro and the
provision of bailout funds by the European Union have so far impeded counter-reforms.

The three reform paths of Argentina, Brazil and Greece are depicted in Figure 1, where we
have plotted the changes seen in two indices of reform based on the current and capital
accounts of the three countries using data from the IMF (2008).




                                                                                                 5
                                   Figure 1: Reform Indices




The model also generates interesting normative results. In particular, we explore the welfare
implications of the international interventions. If the international organization that is trying
to influence domestic policy is fully aware of the possibility of reversals, then the
intervention will always enhance the well-being of the country. However, if the international
organization does not take the possibility of reversals into account or miscalculates the
likelihood of such events, the intervention may induce an ambitious but temporary reform
process which may be reversed later on, thereby reducing the country’s well-being. Finally,
we show that an international organization that limits its role to that of providing funds to
promote reforms may have a worse effect than an internatioanal organization that does not
actively promote reforms but does assist the country with fresh funds when there is a risk of
reversal. In this sense, this extension of the model provides a political economy justification
for the approach followed by the IMF during the Brazilian crisis and the European Union
during the Greek crisis. At the same time, the extension casts some doubt on the wisdom of
the IMF’s actions during the Argentine crisis.

The literature on reform processes in developing countries is extensive. The political
economy of reform became a very popular research topic after the fall of the Berlin Wall and
the emergence of the Washington Consensus in the early 1990s. One crucial question shaped

                                                                                               6
this first wave of research on reforms: Why do countries fail to carry out efficiency-
enhancing policies? Thus, the focus was on understanding the mechanisms that block
reforms and discovering ways of overcoming them. Several theoretical models were
proposed that produce status-quo biases and implementation delays. In a seminal work by
Fernández and Rodrik (1991), the authors propose that it is not the existence of winners and
losers in itself that blocks reforms, but rather uncertainty as to who will actually be winners
and who will be losers. Whenever winners and losers cannot be identified beforehand,
support for a reform may be weaker than it would be under complete information. Moreover,
these authors show that the role of uncertainty is asymmetric since, if a reform is adopted
and proves to be unpopular, it can be repealed while, if a reform is not adopted, there is no
revelation of information. Thus, the status quo prevails. This provides a rationale for the
irreversibility of many policies that are considered to be inefficient and for the failure to
implement efficiency-enhancing reforms. Alesina and Drazen (1991) and Drazen and Grilli
(1993) study the sources of delays in the implementation of reform measures. In their
scenario, delays or inaction are the result of a distributional conflict. Different groups in a
society do not agree on who should pay the costs of reform even when everyone agrees that
a change is necessary. This triggers a “war of attrition” among different groups that does not
end until one group concedes defeat and ends up paying the lion’s share of the reform’s costs.
Similarly, Laban and Sturzenegger (1994) argue that macroeconomic stabilization is delayed
until the situation reaches a point where one group is being hit so hard that it accepts
conditions that it would have rejected before the crisis had become so serious. 5

As in Fernández and Rodrik (1991), uncertainty about the distribution of the effects of the
reform plays an important role in our model. The difference is that, in their model, winners
and losers cannot be identified ex-ante while, in our model, winners and losers can be
perfectly identified, but winners do not need to compensate all the losers, and the losers are
therefore not sure whether they will receive compensation or not. As in Alesina and Drazen
(1991) and Drazen and Grilli (1993), we also stress the importance of the influence that
distributional conflict exerts on the dynamic of reforms. However, our focus is not on delays,
but on the extent and stability of reforms, and especially on the effect that international
organizations’ actions may have on these dimensions of the reform process. As a
consequence, our model emphasizes the inherent political instability of developing
countries’ reform processes, the role played by windows of opportunity for reform and
counter-reform, and the costs associated with reversals. Thus, we build on this literature by
incorporating two issues that, to the best of our knowledge, have not been systematically
introduced into the study of the political economy of reform. First, most of the literature has
focused on domestic factors that block or promote reforms. The role of external agents in the
reform process has not been completely ignored, but it has not been fully integrated into
reform models either. Second, not many studies have focused on the possibility that reforms

5 Regarding the factors that move a reform process forward, the answers are less clear. Part of the literature

on status-quo bias and reform delay deals with the issue as to whether economic crises are catalysts for reform.
As Rodrik (1996) points out, this is partly a tautological question: reform only becomes an issue when policies
are perceived to not be working properly, and a crisis may actually be the result of that inadequacy. However,
Rodrik (1994) also suggests that only under severe economic conditions does the efficiency gain from reform
outweigh the political cost of redistributing resources in a society. In this sense, only under exceptional
circumstances can microeconomic reform “sneak in” along with macroeconomic stabilization policies.

                                                                                                              7
could be reversed.

Regarding the role of international organizations, Williamson (1994) points out that
international aid can help governments that are committed to a reform process to survive
long enough to introduce reforms but that, if international aid is channeled to governments
whose commitment to reform is dubious, then it may be counterproductive. In the same vein,
Rodrik (1996) discusses the mixed consequences that international aid may have on the pace
of reform. On the one hand, he argues that providing fresh funds to a government may
mitigate the short-term costs of structural reforms. On the other hand, those funds also
reduce the costs of doing nothing. In our model, a politically myopic international
organization that is not fully aware of the possibility of reversals may have a negative impact
on a country’s level of well-being. The mechanism, however, is not one in which international
aid ends up in the hands of governments that are not committed to the reform process.
Indeed, in our model, only the pro-reform coalition obtains funds from international
organizations, and it uses those funds to help it to pass more far-reaching reform measures.
The problem is that the pro-reform coalition could use these extra funds to pass an overly
aggressive reform by temporarily co-opting a small proportion of the anti-reform coalition,
which constitutes the perfect environment for a later reversal.

The literature on incentives for counter-reform includes a number of studies on the effects
that veto players can have on reforms and reversals. Cox and McCubbins (2001) argue that
veto players make reforms less likely, while Keefer and Stasavage (2003) argue that veto
players also make reversals less likely. The two findings share the same logic: the idea that
veto players defend the status quo. Gehlbach and Malesky (2010) show, however, that in the
presence of special interest groups, the existence of numerous veto players may facilitate
reform as well as making reversals less likely. As in Cox and McCubbins (2001), in our model
the anti-reform coalition plays the role of a veto player that can block a reform when the pro-
reform coalition controls the government. Moreover, the larger the proportion of the anti-
reform coalition that must be compensated in order for it to be possible to pass a reform, the
less ambitious the reform. Thus, we do not include a separate role for special interest groups
as in Gehlbach and Malesky (2010). In our model, the anti-reform coalition is also the player
that implements a counter-reform. This does not contradict Keefer and Stasavage (2003)
because the anti-reform coalition is not a veto player when it controls the government. 6

While the literature on veto players and reform employs an essentially static model to study
how both reforms and reversals alter the status quo, we develop a fully dynamic model
which is capable of generating cycles of reform and counter-reform in equilibrium. In this
sense, works that have formally considered the dynamic links between present reforms and
future reform outcomes are closer to our model. For example, Dewatripont and Roland
(1992) model the impact of dynamic political constraints on optimal economic reforms, and
Dewatripont and Roland (1995) show that the sequence of reforms is crucial because each
particular reform affects the constituency that supports further reforms. Finally, our
modeling strategy draws on dynamic models of institutional change (e.g., Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2005).

6   Indeed, when the anti-reform coalition is in charge of the government, it is an unrestricted agenda-setter.

                                                                                                                  8
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3
characterizes the equilibrium of the model. Section 4 deduces the welfare effects of
international interventions. Section 5 presents an extension of the model in which the
international organization has a choice between funding to promote reforms and funding to
avoid reversals. Section 6 concludes.

2    A Simple Model of Reforms

In this section we develop a simple model of reforms. We show that this model can produce
different paths of reform depending on the institutional characteristics of the country in
question and on the form taken by international interventions. We also explore the welfare
implications of those interventions.

Consider a country in which there are two coalitions: the pro-reform group P and the anti-
reform group A . The per-period utility function of a member of P is given by:

                                                     vtP = (1 − st ) rt ,                                               (1)

where rt ∈ [0,1] is a collective decision that we interpret as the extent of a reform and
st ∈ [0, st ] is the proportion of the payoff of P used to make transfers to A . The per-
period utility function of a member of A is given by:

                                             vtA = α 0 − α1rt + st rt + Ft (rt ),                                       (2)

where α 0 > 1 , α1 ∈ [0,1/2] are constants and Ft (rt ) ≥ 0 is the payment schedule provided
by a international agency that promotes reform. Note that excluding transfers vtP                                         is
increasing in rt , while vtA is decreasing in rt , i.e., before transfers are made, a higher
value     of     rt    benefits          P    ,   but      hurts      A .            Moreover,       for    α1 ∈ [0,1/2] ,
vtP + vtA − Ft (rt ) = α 0 − α1rt + rt   is increasing in rt , i.e., even without international transfers,
a higher value of rt increases the aggregate payoff. In other words, the reform is socially
beneficial. The expected utility of i = A, P is V i = Et                    {∑   ∞
                                                                                 u =t
                                                                                              }
                                                                                        β u − t vui , where β ∈ (0,1) is the
common discount factor and Et is the expectation operator taken over the probability
distribution of sequences of the form               {v }
                                                      i ∞
                                                      u u =t   .

The political setting is a simple one. At the beginning of each period, one and only one of the
coalitions controls the government. For the initial period t = 0 , A controls the
government. Whenever a period starts with A in charge, nature determines wt , an
independent identically distributed random variable that adopts only two possible values
 wt ∈ {0,1} . We interpret wt = 1 as a window of opportunity for P to make reforms.
                                                                                                                          9
Specifically, with probability p ∈ (0,1) , wt = 1 , st = s < 1 , P takes over and selects any
(rt , st )    provided that st rt + Ft (rt ) ≥ γα1rt , where γ ∈ (0,1) is the portion of coalition A
that must be compensated in order for it to be possible to pass the reform measure. With
probability (1 − p ) , wt = 0 , st = 0 , A holds power and selects rt .

Whenever a period starts with P in charge, nature determines ct , an independent
identically distributed random variable that adopts two possible values ct ∈ {0,1} . We
interpret ct = 1 as a window of opportunity for A to reverse reforms. Specifically, with
probability q ∈ (0,1) , ct = 1 and A has the chance of gaining power. If A decides to do
so, both coalitions must pay a cost k , A takes over, wt = 0 , st = 0 , and A selects rt .
If ct = 0 (which occurs with probability (1 − q ) ) or A does not take over, st = s < 1 , P
holds power and selects any               (rt , st )   provided that st rt + Ft (rt ) ≥ γα1rt .

We restrict our analysis to Markov strategies and characterize the perfect Markov
equilibrium. A Markov strategy for A is a function σ A = σ 1A , σ 2A , where                       (    )
σ 1A : {( A, wt = 0 )} → [0,1] and σ 2A : {(P, ct = 1)} → {P, A × [0,1]} . A must make a decision
under two sets of circumstances. When A is in charge and wt = 0 , st = 0 , A must
select rt ∈ [0,1] . When P is in charge and ct = 1 , A must choose between letting P
stay in charge or regaining power, in which case A must select rt ∈ [0,1] . A Markov
strategy for           P                                      (           )
                             is a function σ P = σ 1P , σ 2P , where σ 1P : {( A, wt = 1)} → [0,1][0, s ] and
σ 2P : {(P, ct = 0)} → [0,1][0, s ] . P must make a decision under two sets of circumstances.
When A is in charge and wt = 1 , P must select (rt , st ) ∈ [0,1]× [0, s ] . When P is in
charge and ct = 0 , P must select (rt , st ) ∈ [0,1]× [0, s ].

                                                                                      (
Let Σ i be the set of Markov strategies of coalition i , σ = σ A , σ P a profile of Markov     )
strategies and Σ = Σ A × Σ P . Any σ ∈ Σ induces a probability distribution over sequences
{v }
  i ∞
  t t =0     . Let V i :      Σ → ℜ be a function that assigns to every σ ∈ Σ the discounted
expected utility obtained by group i                               from the probability distribution over    {v }
                                                                                                               i ∞
                                                                                                               t t =0

induced by σ , i.e., V i (σ ) = Et               {∑    ∞
                                                       u =t
                                                                      }
                                                              β u − t vti . Summing up, a reform game is a tuple
G=      {A, P}, (Σi ,V i )i = A, P   , where    {A, P}            is the set of players, Σ i   is the set of Markov
strategies of player i and V i : Σ → ℜ is the discounted utility function of player i .
Then, a Markov perfect equilibrium of G = {A, P}, (Σ i , V i )i = A, P is a strategy profile
σ = (σ A , σ P ) such that, for every i , the action indicated by σ i in every possible
circumstance in which i is called into play maximizes i' s expected utility given the
strategies of the other players.

                                                                                                                 10
3      Equilibrium

In this section we characterize the Markov perfect equilibrium of the reform game when the
international agency uses the following schedule: Ft (rt ) = δrt with δ < γα1 . That is, the
international agency contributes a portion of the funding that will need to be paid out in
order to pass and sustain a reform rt .

Proposition 1: Equilibrium. Let                             {              2
                                                                               }
                                                    r = min [s / (γα1 − δ )] ,1 ,       s = min{s , γα1 − δ }   and
B = [1 − β (1 − p )] . The reform game has a unique Markov perfect equilibrium. In this
                    −1


equilibrium, before the first time wt = 1 , A selects rt = 0 . Thereafter:

1.      If k < k = B(1 − γ )α1r , then there are reforms and counter-reforms. Whenever wt = 1 or
ct = 0 , P sets rt = r > 0 and st = s , while whenever wt = 0 or ct = 1 , A sets rt = 0 .
Moreover, every time wt = 1 , there is a reform in period t , while every time ct = 0 , reforms
are reversed in period t and society pays a cost k .

2.     If k ≥ k = B(1 − γ )α1r , then there is an enduring reform the first time wt = 1 . In every
period rt = r > 0 and st = s .

Proof: see Appendix. ∎

The interpretation of Proposition 1 is straightforward. When the pro-reform coalition
controls the government, it passes a reform package. In order to do so, it provides partial
compensation to the anti-reform coalition, using its own funds as well as the funds provided
by the international agency to do so. When there are enough funds to fully compensate the
anti-reform coalition, there is a full-fledged reform. Otherwise, the reform is only partial.
Reforms can also either last indefinitely or be short-lived. When k > k , A finds that it is
too costly to reverse the reform and, hence, the reform lasts indefinitely. Conversely, if
k < k , whenever A has the chance, the reform implemented by P is reversed and the
country experiences cycles of reform and counter-reform. Thus, Proposition 1 predicts three
different reform paths. First a country may undergo oa full-fledged, lasting reform. Second,
a country may undergo a partial but lasting reform. Third, a country may go through a reform
process which is then reversed.

No international intervention. Figure 1 shows the three reform paths for δ = 0 , i.e., if there
is no international intervention. 7 When γ and s are high (formally, s ≥ γα1 and


7    Figure 1 assumes δ   = 0 , α1 = 1/4 , B = [1 − β (1 − p )]−1 = 4 , and k = 1/2 .
                                                                                                                 11
         k
γ ≥ 1−       ), there is a full and permanent reform (region FN in Figure 2). The pro-reform
        α1 B
coalition P must compensate a significant proportion of the anti-reform coalition A , but
it has the required funds to do so ( s ≥ γα1 ). Thus, whenever P gains control, a full reform
is implemented. The anti-reform coalition A does not have an incentive to reverse the
reform because compensations are generous and, hence, it is not worth to incur in reversing
costs.

                                                                       k      
When s is low relative to γ (formally s < min γα1 , γα1                        ), there is a partial
                                                                 (1 − γ )Bα 1 
and permanent reform (region PN in Figure 2). A relative low value of s with respect to
γ means that funds are not enough to pass a full reform buying off a proportion γ of the
anti-reform coalition A . As a consequence, P is forced to pass a more modest reform.
Indeed, as s /γ decreases, the reform becomes less ambitious (formally, for δ = 0 , r is
decreasing in s /γ ). A modest reform could be disappointing for the pro-reform coalition,
but it also provide low incentives to reverse it. Finally, if s is high relative to γ (formally
          k                            k
γα1                 < s and γ < 1 −        ), there are reforms and counterreforms (region R in
      (1 − γ )Bα1                     α1 B
Figure 2). A relative high value of s with respect to γ allows for an ambitious reform
only compensating a small fraction of the anti-reform coalition A . As a consequence, A
has very high incentives to reverse the reforms.

                                      Figure 2: No Intervention ( δ = 0 )




The impact of international intervention. Figure 3 depicts the effects that the availability of


                                                                                                   12
international funds has on reform paths. 8 Compared with a situation in which there is no
intervention, when δ > 0 , the region in which there is a full-blown, long-lasting reform is
bigger (the difference is indicated by CFN in Figure 3). As the pro-reform coalition P can
mobilize external funds ( δ > 0 ) for use in providing compensation to the anti-reform
coalition A , it is easier for P to pass a full reform package. When a significant proportion
                                          k
of A must be compensated ( γ ≥ 1 −            ), reversal is not a problem and, hence, the reform
                                         α1 B
will remain in place indefinitely. However, when only a relatively small proportion of A
                                   k
must be compensated ( γ < 1 −         ), the availability of international funds also affects the
                                 α1 B
reversal decision. Indeed, compared with a situation in which there is no intervention, when
δ > 0 , the region in which there is a reversal is bigger (the difference is indicated by CR in
Figure 3). The logic is as follows. When the pro-reform coalition P can mobilize external
funds ( δ > 0 ) for use in providing compensation to the anti-reform coalition A , it is easier
for P to pass a more ambitious reform. Since only a small portion of A receives
compensation, reversal becomes a more attractive alternative.

                                   Figure 3: International intervention ( δ > 0 )




Figure 3 illustrates the trade-off between the extent of the reform and reversal. International
funds promote more ambitious reforms, but also increase the chance of reversals. An
alternative way of seeing this trade-off is to compute the effect of δ on r and k .
Formally:




8   Figure 2 assumes δ   = 0.05 , α1 = 1/4 , B = [1 − β (1 − p )]−1 = 4 , and k = 1/2 .
                                                                                              13
                          0           ifδ > γα1 − s
                ∂r 
                  =  2(s )
                              2

                ∂δ                    ifδ < γα1 − s
                     (γα1 − δ )
                                 3


                              0             ifδ > γα1 − s
                ∂k 
                  =  B(1 − γ )2α1 (s )
                                         2

                ∂δ                          ifδ < γα1 − s
                        (γα 1  − δ )3




r is increasing in δ     for δ ≤ γα1 − s and r = 1 for δ ≥ γα1 − s . As the pro-reform
coalition P can mobilize more external funds ( δ higher) to compensate the anti-reform
coalition A , P is able pass a deeper reform ( r higher). When δ ≥ γα1 − s , the pro-
reform coalition P can amass enough funds to enable it to pass a full-fledged reform.
Beyond this point, extra funds do not produce any further reform and the pro-reform
coalition simply keeps the difference between available funds and the minimum required
compensation to pass a full-fledged reform. k is increasing in δ for δ ≤ γα1 − s , and
beyond that point it does not depend on δ . As the incentives for reform provided by the
international agency become more and more generous, the reform package implemented by
 P becomes more ambitious and, therefore, A becomes more willing to reverse it.

The effect of the cost of reversal. Figure 4 shows the effect of an increase in the cost of reversal.
As k increases, the region of full-fledged, lasting reform expands (indicated by CFN in
Figure 4), as does the region of partial but lasting reform (indicated by CPN in Figure 4). The
logic behind these changes is simple. When the cost of reversing a reform increases, the anti-
reform coalition A becomes more willing to accept reform and less willing to start a
process of reversal.

                                       Figure 4: The cost of reversal




                                                                                                  14
Summing up, countries in which those who stand to win from a reform must and are able to
compensate a significant number of those who stand to lose from it are likely to introduce
full-fledged, long-lasting reforms. Countries in which the winners would have to compensate
a significant number of the losers, but are unable to do so, will introduce more modest, but
stable, reforms. Finally, countries in which the winners are able to pass reform measures
without compensating a significant number of the losers will go through cycles of reform and
counter-reform. International interventions that promote reforms make reforms more
likely, but they also increase the chances of a reversal of those reforms. Increases in the cost
of reversal make reversal less likely.

4    Welfare Analysis

In the previous section, we looked at the effects of a international intervention on the
equilibrium of the reform game. In this section, we will evaluate the welfare effects of the
intervention. In order to do so, we employ the following utilitarian welfare function:

                                       W = E0   {∑   ∞
                                                     t =0
                                                                                 }
                                                            β t (vtA + vtP − δrt )

Note that we subtract the funds provided by the international agency. In other words, we
adopt the perspective of an international agency that can raise funds and use them to help to
promote reforms aimed at maximizing social welfare. Proposition 2 summarizes the optimal
intervention of such an agency.

Proposition 2: Welfare. Under the assumptions of Proposition 1, suppose that the
international agency selects δ in order to maximize W .

1. If k ≥ B(1 − γ )α1 , then there is never a reversal. The optimal transfer is δ ≥ γα1 − s , which
induces full-fledged, lasting reform ( rt = 1 ).
          B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                         2
2.   If                      ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1 , then there are reversals or not, depending on δ .
              (γα1 )2
Moreover, there exists k̂ such that:

                                                                          B(1 − γ )α1
             [                )
(a) For k ∈ kˆ, B(1 − γ )α1 , the optimal transfer is δ = δ max = γα1 − s
                                                                              k
                                                                                      , which induces

                                         k
a partial but lasting reform ( rt =              < 1 ).
                                     B(1 − γ )α1
                 B(1 − γ )α1 (s )2 ˆ 
(b) For all k ∈                   , k  , the optimal transfer is δ ≥ γα1 − s , which induces a full-
                      (γα 1 )2
                                        
fledged reform ( rt = 1 ) and periodic reversals ( rt = 0 ).



                                                                                                    15
                  B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                 2
3.      If k <                       , then there is always a reversal. The optimal transfer is δ ≥ γα1 − s ,
                      (γα1 )2
which induces a full-fledged reform ( rt = 1 ) and periodic reversals ( rt = 0 ).

Proof: see Appendix. ∎

The interpretation of Proposition 2 is straightforward. When the international transfers do
                                                       B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                                       2
not affect reversal decisions ( k ≥ B(1 − γ )α1 or k <                   ), the optimal policy is to
                                                                 2
                                                                      (γα1 )
induce a full-fledged reform. If the reform is long-lasting, it will produce a welfare gain in
every period, while if the reform is only temporary because there will be a reversal, there
will only be a welfare gain in the periods during which the reform survives. In any case,
international transfers are not affecting the nature of the equilibrium, since, with or without
transfers, there will be the same pattern of reform and counter-reform. International
transfers do nothing more than alter the breadth or depth of the reform. On the other hand,
         B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                         2
when                       ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1 , international transfers can influence reversal
                   (γα1 )
                   2


decisions. As a consequence, it is not always optimal to induce a full-blown reform because
                                                                       [            )
this may induce periodic reversals. In particular, if k ∈ kˆ, B(1 − γ )α1 , it is better to induce
the maximum possible reform that is compatible with no reversal rather than forcing a full-
fledged reform that will then be reversed. Figure 5 illustrates this point. Note that for
δ ≤ δ max , the relevant curve is W NR , while for δ > δ max , the relevant one is W R . 9




9    Figure 4 assumes α1 = 1/4 ,      γ = 1/2 , β = 7/8 , p = 1/7 , q = 1/7 , k = 1/4   and   s = 1 . This implies
                  2− 2
that    δ max =        and the associated maximum extent of reform that does not induce a reversal is given
                   16
by r   = 1/2 .
                                                                                                              16
                                 Figure 5: Welfare and Reversal 1




Politically myopic international agency. An interesting implication of Proposition 2 is that an
international agency that is not fully aware of the possibility of reversals may induce a
welfare loss for the country in question. That is, the country may be better off without any
intervention than when dealing with a welfare-maximizing but politically myopic
                                              B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                              2
international agency. Formally, suppose:                        ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1 . Then, under no
                                                        2
                                                           (γα1 )
intervention, δ = 0 , there will be a modest, but lasting, reform and the expected level of
welfare will be given by:

                                                             s  s
                                                               βp
                                                                1 − 
                                               α0         γα1  γ 
                              W (δ = 0, k ) =
                               NR
                                                   +
                                              1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]

If a politically myopic agency offers δ ≥ γα1 − s , then there will be a full-fledged reform, but
there will also be periodic reversals, and the expected level of welfare will be given by:

                                                      α0    βp(1 − α1 ) − 2β 2 pqk
                          W R (δ ≥ γα1 − s , k ) =        +
                                                     1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]

Note that W NR (δ = 0, k ) ≥ W R (δ ≥ γα1 − s , k ) if and only if:

                                                                       s  s
                                                 [1 − β (1 − p − q )]       1 − 
                                                                      γα1  γ 
                              2 βqk > 1 − α1 −
                                                           [1 − β (1 − p )]

                                                                                               17
Figure 6 illustrates a situation in which no intervention at all produces a higher level of social
welfare than a full-blown reform and periodic reversals does. 10 Note also the difference
between Figures 5 and 6. In both cases, a myopic international agency will induce too much
reform and reversals. In the case of Figure 4, the country will experience a welfare gain
relative to a situation of no intervention while, in the case of Figure 6, the country will be
better off without any intervention.

                                   Figure 6: Welfare and Reversal 2




Building reversal costs. Another interesting implication of Proposition 2 has to do with the
welfare effects of institutional changes that alter the cost of reversals. Under the optimal
intervention of a international agency, the expected level of welfare as a function of k is
given by:

                      NR    α0          βp(1 − α1 )
                     W = 1 − β + (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]                 ifk ≥ B(1 − γ )α1
                     
                            α
                 W = W NR = 0 +
                                               [
                                       βp B(1 − γ )α1k − α1k         ]           [
                                                                           ifk ∈ kˆ, B(1 − γ )α1   ]
                           1 − β  (1 − β  )B (1 − γ )α 1 [1 − β (1 − p )]
                      R    α0     βp(1 − α1 ) − 2β 2 pqk
                     W = 1 − β + (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]             ifk < kˆ
                     

Note that W is decreasing in k for k < kˆ , increasing for k ∈ kˆ, B(1 − γ )α1   [             ]       and that it


10   The only difference between Figures 5 and 6 is that Figure 5 assumes     k = 1/4   and Figure 6 assumes
k = 3/8 .
                                                                                                               18
does not depend on k for k ≥ B(1 − γ )α1 . Thus, an international agency that is fully aware
of the possibility of reversals and the effect of its own policies on the likelihood of reversals
will only recommend an institutional change that increases k if the country is able to build
reversal costs above k̂ .

5     Defending Reforms

In this section we consider the possibility that the international agency helps P to stop
a reversal. As in previous sections, the international agency provides incentives to reform
δrt in every period. In addition, when ct = 1 , the international agency offers extra
incentives ηrt , provided that P commits to compensate all members of A in the event
that there is no takeover. That is, if A does not take office, st = s < 1 , P holds power
and       selects      any           (rt , st , d t ) to       maximize            vtP = (1 − st ) rt   subject   to
st   rt + (δ + d tη )rt ≥ (γ − d t γ + d t )α1rt , where       d t ∈ {0,1} ( d t = 1 indicates that P accepts
the extra funds).

In such an environment, we can compare the following two extreme interventions. Under
the first intervention, the international agency sets δ = γα1 − s and η = 0 , i.e., there are
attractive incentives for reform, but there are no extra funds for use in stopping reversals.
Under the second intervention, the international agency sets δ = 0 and η = α1 (1 − γ ) , i.e.,
there are no incentives for reform, but there are funds that can be used to avert reversals.
The following proposition compares the expected levels of welfare associated with these
interventions.

                                         C (1 − γ )α1 (s )           B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                           2                          2
Proposition 3 Suppose that                                     <k<                        , where C < B . Then, the
                                              (γα1 )2                    (γα1 )2
second intervention induces a higher expected level of welfare than the first intervention if and
only if:
                                    s  s
                                       1 − 
                                  γα1  γ  (1 − α1 ) − 2βqk
                                                >
                                  1 − β (1 − p ) 1 − β (1 − p − q )
Proof: see Appendix. ∎

Proposition 3 suggests that helping countries to avert reversals could be a more valuable
contribution to their well-being than promoting reforms would be. This does not necessarily
imply that an international agency should not promote reforms at all. It simply establishes
that providing funds to help a country deal with a counter-reform cycle may be as valuable
as promoting reforms, especially for countries that are prone to reversals.

6     Conclusions


                                                                                                                  19
The paths of the structural reform programs that were launched in the 1990s have varied a
great deal across countries. We have developed a simple model to try to capture some of the
determinants of those paths. We have focused, in particular, on two issues that were
overlooked in the early literature on the political economy of reforms: the interaction
between domestic institutions and international organizations, and incentives for reversing
reforms. In terms of the domestic institutional environment, we have emphasized three
features: the ability to mobilize domestic funds for use in compensating losers ( s ), the
political strength of the coalition of losers ( γ ) and the inherent degree of political instability
(the pro-reform and anti-reform coalitions chances of controlling the government).
International organizations provide funds in exchange for reforms and, hence, affect the
balance between the total funds available for compensation of the losers and the proportion
of the losers that the government must buy off. This balance influences the extent of the
reform package and, hence, the nature of future incentives for reversal.

The model produces the following equilibrium paths. If the pro-reform coalition has to
compensate a large portion of the anti-reform coalition and if it has the required funds to do
so, the country will undergo a full-fledged, lasting reform process. If the pro-reform coalition
has to compensate a large portion of the anti-reform coalition but does not have the
necessary funding to do so, then the country will undergo a partial, but still lasting, reform.
Finally, if the budget for compensation is large relative to the portion of the anti-reform
coalition that must be temporarily co-opted in order for it to be possible to pass a reform,
the pro-reform coalition will pass a very ambitious reform package, the immense majority
of the anti-reform coalition will be faced with an aggressive reform and receive no
compensation and, therefore, as soon as it has the chance, it will initiate a counter-reform
process. Thus, the country will be prone to cycles of reform and counter-reform.

We have also proved that international interventions that promote reforms induce an
increase in the probability of reversals. Indeed, the countries in which it is easier to promote
reforms are countries that do not have sufficient funding to compensate losers, but they also
do not have to compensate a large proportion of the losers in order to pass a reform. In other
words, these are countries in which ambitious reforms will induce strong incentives to
reverse them, unless very high costs of reversal are built up.

A benevolent international agency that is fully aware of the possibility of reversals and the
costs associated with them will always increase social welfare. Such an agency should adopt
the following approach in order to optimally deal with the trade-off between the extent of
the reform and the probability of reversal. Consider only two alternative interventions:
provide just enough funding to induce the maximum partial reform that is compatible with
no reversal, or provide sufficient funding to induce a full-fledged reform, which could give
way to cycles of full-blown reform and complete reversal. Select the intervention that
produces greater social welfare. A benevolent but politically myopic agency could have a
negative welfare impact if it insists on providing funds that induce an overly aggressive
reform that will be followed by an unexpected costly reversal.

Building up high reversal costs could be a way of improving the trade-off between the extent

                                                                                                 20
of a reform and the probability of reversal. The cases of Argentina and Greece indicate that
this course of action should be approached with some caution, however. In the case of
Argentina, domestically built reversal costs were not enough to avert an almost complete
counter-reform. In the case of Greece, international reversal costs proved to be a better
barrier to counter-reform, but we should not forget that the generous bailout offered by the
European Union was a key incentive for staving off a counter-reform. Indeed, our model
suggests that international agencies should consider funding for heading off counter-reform
shocks as a valuable tool for defending the reforms that they have helped to put in place.


References

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2006), Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Abiad, A.; E. Detragiache and T. Tressel (2008), “Do Financial Reforms Boost the
Development of Financial Systems? Evidence from a New Database on Financial Reforms” ,
IMF Working Paper 08/266.

Abiad, A., and A. Mody (2005), “Financial Reform: What Shakes It? What Shapes It?”,
American Economic Review, 95:88.

Alesina, A., and A. Drazen (1991), “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?”, American Economic
Review, 81:5, 1170-1188.

Cox, Gary W., and Mathew D. McCubbins (2001), “The Institutional Determinants of
Economic Policy Outcomes” in Presidents, Parliaments, and Policy, Stephan Haggard and
Mathew D. McCubbins (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 21–63.

Drazen, A., and V. Grilli (1993), “The Benefit of Crises for Economic Reforms”, American
Economic Review, 83:3, 5985-5607.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland (1992), “Economic Reform and Dynamic Political
Constraints”, Review of Economic Studies, 59:4, 703–730.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland (1995), “The Design of Reform Packages Under
Uncertainty”, American Economic Review, 85:5, 1207–1223.

Fernandez, R., and D. Rodrik (1991), “Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence
of Individual-Specific Uncertainty”, American Economic Review, 81:5, 1146-1155.

Galiani, S., Heymann, D. and M. Tommasi (2003) “Great Expectations and Hard Times: The
Argentine Convertibility Plan” in Economia, 3:2, 109-147.

Giuliano, P., P. Mishra and A. Spilimbergo (2012), “Democracy and Reforms: Evidence from
a New Dataset”, IMF Working Paper 10/173.
                                                                                           21
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2008), “Structural Reforms and Economic
Performance in Advanced and Developing Countries”, IMF Occasional Paper.

Keefer, Philip, and David Stasavage (2003), “The Limits of Delegation: Veto Players, Central
Bank Independence, and the Credibility of Monetary Policy”, American Political Science
Review, 97:3, 407–423.

Laban, R., and F. Sturzenegger (1994), “Fiscal Conservatism as a Response to the Debt
Crisis”, Journal of Development Economics, 45, 305-324.

Quinn, D. (1997), “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation”,
American Political Science Review, 91:3, 531-551.

Quinn, D., and A.M. Toyoda (2008), “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Growth?”,
Review of Financial Studies, 21:3, 1403-1449.

Rodrik, D. (1994), “The Rush to Free Trade in the Developing World: Why So Late? Why
Now? Will It Last?” in Voting for Reform: Democracy, Political Liberalization and Adjustment,
S. Haggard and S. Webb (eds.), Oxford University Press, New York.

Rodrik, D. (1996), “Understanding Economic Policy Reform”, Journal of Economic
Literature, 34:1, 9-41.

Williamson, J. (1994) (ed.), “The Political Economy of Policy Reform”, Institute for
International Economics, Washington D.C.




                                                                                          22
Online Appendix to “International Organizations and Structural Reforms in
Developing Countries”

Reform indices - methodology

These indices build on a previous dataset compiled by the research department of the IMF
(2008) covering the period 1960-2005 which was analyzed by Giuliano et al. (2012). We
have extended the dataset to 2010 using the same methodology and have amended some of
the original data after double-checking it with secondary sources. Values have been
normalized on a 0-1 scale.

Capital account: Qualitative indicators of constraints on financial credits and personal capital
transactions of residents and financial credits to non-residents, as well as the use of multiple
exchange rates. The index is coded from zero (fully repressed) to three (fully liberalized).
The source for the data is Abiad et al. (2008), following the methodology in Abiad and Mody
(2005), based on various IMF reports and working papers, central bank websites and others.

Current account: Current account liberalization is defined using an indicator that describes
how compliant a government is with its obligations under Article VIII of the IMF Articles of
Agreement to avoid placing government restrictions on international trade in goods and
services. The index represents the sum of two subcomponents -- one dealing with
restrictions on trade in visibles and the other with restrictions on trade in invisibles
(financial and other services). It distinguishes between restrictions on residents (export
receipts) and on non-residents (import payments). Although the index measures restrictions
on the proceeds from transactions, rather than on the underlying transactions, many
countries actually use restrictions on trade proceeds as a type of trade restriction. The index
is scored between zero and 8 in half-integer units, with 8 indicating full compliance. Data are
constructed based on the methodology set out in Quinn (1997) and Quinn and Toyoda
(2007), drawing on information contained in the Fund’s AREAER database (Annual Reports
on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions).

Proof of Proposition 1. Suppose that A is in charge and wt = 0 . Then, st = 0 and A
selects rt in order to maximize vtA = α 0 − α1rt + δrt . Since δ < α1 , A selects rt = 0 and,
hence, vtA = α 0 . Let V A ( A, wt ) denote the value for A when the state is                 ( A, wt ) . Then

                                                 [                                ]
                            V A ( A,0 ) = α 0 + β pV A ( A,1) + (1 − p )V A ( A,0 )

Suppose that either A is in charge and wt = 1 or P is in charge and ct = 0 . Then,
st = s   and    P    selects   (rt , st )   in order to maximize              vtP = (1 − st ) rt   subject to
st rt + δrt ≥ γα1rt . There are two possible cases to consider. If s ∈ [0, γα1 − δ ) , then P
selects st = s and rt = [s / (γα1 − δ )] < 1 . If s ∈ [γα1 − δ ,1/2] , then P selects st = γα1 − δ
                                            2


                                                                   {                  }
and rt = 1 . Hence, vtA = α 0 − (1 − γ )α1r , where r = min [s / (γα1 − δ )]2 ,1 . Note that r is an

                                                                                                                 23
increasing and strictly convex function of δ for δ ≤ γα1 − s and r = 1 for δ ≥ γα1 − s .
Let V A (P, ct ) denote the value for A when the state is (P, ct ) . Then:

                                                               [
                V A ( A,1) = V A (P,0 ) = α 0 − (1 − γ )α1r + β qV A (P,1) + (1 − q )V A (P,0 )        ]
Suppose that P is in charge and ct = 1 . Then A must decide between regaining power
or not. Thus:

                                                       {
                                 V A (P,1) = max V A (P,0 ), V A ( A,0 ) − k   }
Solving these three Bellman equations, we find that, if A does not regain power, then:

                             α0         βp(1 − γ )α1r
               V A ( A,0) =       −
                            1 − β [1 − β (1 − p )](1 − β )
                                                    α − (1 − γ )α1r
               V A ( A,1) = V A (P,1) = V A (P,0) = 0
                                                         1− β

while if A regains power, then:

                             α0       βp[(1 − γ )α1r + βqk ]
               V A ( A,0 ) =      −
                            1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
                                        α
               V A ( A,1) = V A (P,0) = 0 −
                                                 [1 − β (1 − p )][(1 − γ )α1r + βqk ]
                                       1− β           (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
               V (P,1) = V ( A,0 ) − k
                 A            A




Comparing V A (P,0 ) when A does not regain power with V A ( A,0 ) − k                                         when   A
regains power, we can fully characterize the Markov perfect equilibrium. ∎

Proof of Proposition 2. We have already computed the expected discounted payoff at time
                                                   {          }
t = 0 for coalition A ( V A ( A,0) = E0 ∑t = 0 β t vtA ). Next, we compute the expected
                                          ∞



discounted payoff at time t = 0 for coalition            {∑   P    ( E0
                                                                            ∞
                                                                            t =0
                                                                                       }
                                                                                   β t vtP ) and the expected
discounted payments made by the international agency ( E {∑                        β δr }).
                                                                             ∞         t
                                                                       0    t =0             t



Suppose that A is in charge and wt = 0 . Then, st = 0 , A selects rt = 0 and, hence,
vtP = 0 . Let V P ( A, wt ) denote the value for P when the state is                       ( A, wt ) . Then:

                                               [
                                V P ( A,0) = β pV P ( A,1) + (1 − p )V P ( A,0)    ]
Suppose that either A is in charge and wt = 1 or P is in charge and ct = 0 . Then,

                                                                                                                      24
                                              {
st = s , P selects rt = r = min [s / (γα1 − δ )]2 ,1                        }    and st = s = min{s , γα1 − δ } and, hence,
vtP = (1 − s ) r . Let V P (P, ct ) denote the value for P when the state is                                   (P, ct ) . Then:

                                                                                 [
                         V P ( A,1) = V P (P,0 ) = (1 − s ) r + β qV P (P,1) + (1 − q )V P (P,0 )              ]
Suppose that         A does not reverse reforms when P                                       is in charge and ct = 1 . Then,
V P (P,1) = V P (P,0 ) and, solving the Bellman equations, we obtain:


                                  V P ( A,0 ) = E0       {∑   ∞
                                                              t =0
                                                                            }
                                                                     β t vtP =
                                                                                      βp(1 − s ) r
                                                                                  (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]
Since there is a reform the first time wt = 1 and, thereafter, international funds will be used
in every period, the expected discounted payments of the international agency are given by:


                                         E0   {∑     ∞
                                                     t =0
                                                          β tδrt =}              βpδ
                                                                        (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]
Suppose that           A       reverses reforms when                             P     is in charge and            ct = 1 . Then,
V (P,1) = V
  P           P
                  ( A,0) − k   and, solving the Bellman equations, we obtain:


                                V P ( A,0 ) = E0     {∑   ∞
                                                          t =0
                                                               β t vtP =}        βp(1 − s ) r − β 2 pqk
                                                                                (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
Since there is a reform every time wt = 1 and a counter-reform every time ct = 1 , the
expected discounted payments of the international agency are given by:


                                       E0   {∑   ∞
                                                 t =0
                                                              }
                                                        β tδrt =
                                                                                  βpδ
                                                                      (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
Summing up, welfare under no reversal is given by:

                                                   βp(1 − α1 )
                                              (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]    δ ≥ γα1 − s
                                        α    
                               W NR   = 0 +           s           s α1 
                                       1 − β  βp             1−
                                                   γα1 − δ  γα1 − δ 
                                                             
                                                                          δ ≤ γα1 − s
                                               (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]

while welfare under reversal is given by:


                                                                                                                                  25
                              β p(1 − α1 ) − 2β 2 pqk
                                                                               δ ≥ γα1 − s
                                 (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
                        α    
                   W =
                    R     0
                            +            s           s α1 
                       1 − β  βp               1−             − 2 β 2 pqk
                                     γα1 − δ  γα1 − δ 
                                               
                                                                               δ ≤ γα1 − s
                                       (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
The procedure for verifying the following results is therefore straightforward:

• W NR and W R are increasing in δ for δ ≤ γα1 − s , while they do not depend on δ
for δ > γα1 − s . When the international agency offers more generous incentives for reforms
( δ higher), the country reforms more ( r increases). Since vtA + vtP − δrt = α 0 − α1rt + rt        is
increasing in rt , a more ambitiosu reform process increases welfare in the periods in which
there is reform. If the increase in δ does not affect the reversal decision, either because
there will be no reversal or because there will be a reversal in any case, then a higher δ
induces a higher discounted expected level of welfare. When δ > γα1 − s , the country
reaches the maximum possible reform and, thereafter, any further increase in δ is just a
pure transfer from the international agency to the country, with no effect on outcomes or on
welfare.

• W NR       and W R   are strictly convex for 0 < δ < γα1 − 3s α1 and strictly concave for
γα1 − 3s α1 < δ < γα1 − s . Although        vtA + vtP − δrt = α 0 − α1rt + rt     is a strictly concave
function of rt , the reform is a strictly convex function of δ . For low values of δ , the
convexity of rt with respect to δ dominates, while for high values of δ , the concavity
of vtA + vtP − δrt dominates.

                                                         ∂W NR 1 − β (1 − p − q ) ∂W R ∂W R
• For each δ , W NR > W R and for δ ≤ γα1 − s ,                =                      >     .
                                                           ∂δ      1 − β (1 − p ) ∂δ    ∂δ
W NR > W R due to two reasons. First, vtA + vtP − δrt is increasing in rt . As a consequence,
whenever there is a reversal, there is a reduction in welfare. Second, there are costs
associated with a reversal of reforms. For δ ≤ γα1 − s , an increase in δ induces a more
ambitious reform and, hence, an increase in welfare. The effect is greater when there is no
reversal because the reform lasts indefinitely. Figure 5 illustrates W NR and W R as a
function of δ .

Up to this point, we have treated W NR and W R as if the reversal decision were
exogenous. However, from Proposition 1 we know that, in equilibrium, there will be a
reversal if and only k < k = B(1 − γ )α1r . Next, we study the optimal decision of a
international agency, whose goal is to select δ                     in order to maximize
         {∞    t   A    P
                                }
W = E0 ∑t = 0 β (vt + vt − δrt ) , taking into account the incentives that the country has to

                                                                                                    26
reverse reforms.

Suppose that k ≥ B(1 − γ )α1 . Then, from Proposition 1, in equilibrium, there will be no
reversal regardless of the extent of the reform. As a consequence, W = W NR , which adopts a
maximum for any δ ≥ γα1 − s .

                           B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                   2
Suppose that k <                                       . If δ = 0 , then r = [s / (γα1 )]2 and, from Proposition 1, in
                                 (γα1 )2


equilibrium, there will be reversal for any δ ≥ 0 . As a consequence, W = W R , which adopts
a maximum for any δ ≥ γα1 − s .

                        B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                           2
Suppose that                                       ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1 . If δ = 0 , then                r = [s / (γα1 )]
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                         and, from
                            (γα1 ) 2


Proposition 1, in equilibrium, there will be no reversal. Conversely, if δ ≥ γα1 − s , then
r = 1 and, from Proposition 1, in equilibrium, there will be a reversal. Thus, depending on
the decision of the international agency, there is a reversal or not. Since W NR and W R are
both increasing functions of δ , the international agency should consider only two possible
values of δ . It either selects δ ≥ γα1 − s , which induces periodic reversals, with an
expected discounted level of welfare given by:

                                                                        α0    βp(1 − α1 ) − 2β 2 pqk
                                 W R (δ ≥ γα1 − s , k ) =                   +
                                                                       1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]

                                 B(1 − γ )α1
or it selects δ max = γα1 − s                , the maximum value of δ that is compatible with no
                                     k
reversal, which induces no reversal and an expected discounted level of welfare that is given
          B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                          2
by: (for                    ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1 , it is the case that δ max ∈ [0, γα1 − s ) )
                (γα1 )
                    2




                                                                            s               s α1 
                                                                  βp                1−
                                                        α0             γα1 − δ max  γα1 − δ max 
                   W NR (δ = δ max , k ) =                  +
                                                       1− β              (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]
                   =
                         α0
                             +
                                               [
                                  βp B(1 − γ )α1k − α1k                     ]
                        1 − β (1 − β )B(1 − γ )α1 [1 − β (1 − p )]

It is a simple matter to verify that W R (δ ≥ γα1 − s , k ) is decreasing in k                                             and that
                                                                                        B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                                                                         2

W NR (δ = δ max , k )       is     increasing                in         k       for                          ≤ k < B(1 − γ )α1   and
                                                                                            (γα1 )2

                                                                                                                                  27
                        B(1 − γ )α1 (s )                              B(1 − γ )α1 (s ) 
                                          2                                              2
W R  δ ≥ γα1 − s , k =                      ≥ W  NR
                                                        δ = δ     , k =                    . Thus, there exists a
                              (γα    )2                      max
                                                                             (γα    )2     
                                  1                                            1        
                B(1 − γ )α1 (s )                 
                                                                                   (                )     (                )
                                 2
unique kˆ ∈                        , B(1 − γ )α1  such that W R δ ≥ γα1 − s , kˆ = W NR δ = δ max , kˆ . ∎
                     (γα1 )2
                                                  

Proof of Proposition 3. The first intervention is a specific instance derived from
                                 B(1 − γ )α1 (s )
                                                 2
Propositions 1 and 2. Assume k <                   . Then, δ = γα1 − s implies that there are
                                           2
                                                             (γα1 )
reforms and counter-reforms. Whenever         wt = 1 or ct = 0 , P sets rt = 1 > 0 and
 st = s , while, whenever wt = 0 or ct = 1 , A sets rt = 0 . Therefore, under this
intervention, the expected discounted level of welfare is given by:

                                                         α0    βp(1 − α1 ) − 2β 2 pqk
                              W (δ = γα1 − s ,η = 0 ) =
                                 R
                                                             +                             ,
                                                        1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]

while the expected discounted payment by the international agency is:


                                     E0   {∑   ∞
                                               t =0
                                                                  }
                                                      β t (γα1 − s ) =
                                                                                βp(γα1 − s )
                                                                         (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )]
                                                                                                      .


With the second intervention, before the first time wt = 1 , A sets rt = 0 and, hence,
                                                                                                              2
                                                                   s 
v = α 0 . The first time wt = 1 , P takes over and sets rt = r = 
  A
                                                                                                                    and st = s .
                                                                   γα1 
 t


Therefore, vtA = α 0 − (1 − γ )α1r and the Bellman equations are:

                                               [
                  V A ( A,0 ) = α 0 + β pV A ( A,1) + (1 − p )V A ( A,0 )                  ]
                  V   A
                          ( A,1) = V (P,0) = α 0 − (1 − γ )α1r + β [qV (P,1) + (1 − q )V A (P,0)]
                                      A                                                A



                                                                                                                  2
                                                                     s 
When ct = 1 , if A does not take over, P sets d t = 1 , rt = r =         and st = s .
                                                                     γα1 
Thus, vtA = α 0 . If A takes over, then A sets rt = 0 and, hence, vtA = α 0 . Therefore, the
Bellman equation is:

                                                {           [                                  ]
                          V A (P,1) = max α 0 + β qV A (P,1) + (1 − q )V A (P,0 ) , V A ( A,0 ) − k           }
Solving these Bellman equations, we find that there is no reversal if and only if



                                                                                                                               28
k>
     C (1 − γ )α1 (s )
                     2
                         , where C =
                                        (1 − βq )[1 − β (1 − p − q )] − βp < B . Supposing that this is the
          (γα1 )2
                                       (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p − q )] + β 2 pq
case, then the expected discounted level of welfare under this intervention is given by:

                                                                      s  s
                                                                       βp1 − 
                                                        α0         γα1  γ 
                           W (δ = 0,η = α1 (1 − γ )) =
                            NR
                                                            +                         ,
                                                       1 − β (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]

while the expected discounted payment by the international agency is:

                                                                                    2
                                                                              s 
                                                            β pqα1 (1 − γ )
                                                              2
                                                                                    
                                                                               γα1 
                                   {                   }
                                E0 ∑t = 0 β t α1 (1 − γ ) =
                                    ∞        t                               
                                                             (1 − β )[1 − β (1 − p )]
A simple comparision between the expected welfare under each intervention completes the
proof of Proposition 3. ∎




                                                                                                        29
