                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHO IS INTERNATIONALLY DIVERSIFIED? EVIDENCE FROM 296 401(K)

                                            Geert Bekaert
                                            Kenton Hoyem
                                             Wei-Yin Hu
                                           Enrichetta Ravina

                                         Working Paper 21236
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21236


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015




We thank Dan Amiram, Jonathan Reuters, Frank Warnock, and seminar participants at the American
Economic Association Annual Meeting, the Annual Conference in International Finance at Imperial
College, the Federal Reserve Board, the University of Texas at Dallas, the 27th Australasian Finance
and Banking Conference, the Norwegian Financial Research Conference, and the 2014 Retirement
Research Consortium for their helpful comments. Nicolas Crouzet, Katrina Evtimova, Jia Guo, Yihua
Lin and especially Andrea Kiguel provided excellent research assistance. This article reflects the findings
and opinions of the researchers and not necessarily those of Financial Engines or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Financial support from the Sandell Grant from the Boston College Center for
Retirement Research and the Social Security Administration is gratefully acknowledged.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21236.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Geert Bekaert, Kenton Hoyem, Wei-Yin Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who is Internationally Diversified? Evidence from 296 401(k)
Geert Bekaert, Kenton Hoyem, Wei-Yin Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina
NBER Working Paper No. 21236
June 2015
JEL No. G11,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the international equity allocations of 3.8 million individuals in 296 401(k) plans over
the 2005-2011 period. We find enormous cross-individual variation, ranging from zero to over 75%,
and strong cohort effects, with younger cohorts investing more internationally than older ones, and
each cohort investing more internationally over time. Access to financial advice, lower fees and more
international fund options are associated with higher international allocations, suggesting a role for
plan design and policy. Education, financial literacy and the fraction of foreign-born population in
the zip code also have positive effects on international diversification, consistent with familiarity and
information stories.


Geert Bekaert                                       Wei-Yin Hu
Graduate School of Business                         Financial Engines, Inc.
Columbia University                                 whu@financialengines.com
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027                                  Enrichetta Ravina
and NBER                                            Columbia University
gb241@columbia.edu                                  Finance and Economics Division
                                                    Uris Hall
Kenton Hoyem                                        3022 Broadway
Financial Engines, Inc.                             New York, NY, 10027
khoyem@financialengines.com                         er2463@columbia.edu
Introduction
The proportion of domestic stocks in most investors’ equity portfolios well exceeds their
country’s relative market capitalization in the world, making investors forego substantial
diversification benefits. This home bias phenomenon remains one of international
finance’s major puzzles. An ever-growing number of studies investigate the determinants
of home bias from both rational and behavioral perspectives (see Sercu and Vanpee,
2012, for a survey).
The country-level international under-diversification documented in the literature masks
much individual heterogeneity. Table 1 shows statistics for the international equity
allocation (as a percentage of the total equity allocation) of 3.8 million U.S. individuals in
296 different 401(k) accounts, over the 2005 – 2011 period. We stratified the data into
older people (born in 1960 or earlier) and younger people (born in 1980 or later), and
contrast average international allocations for either the 5 most diversified firms relative to
the 5 least diversified firms, or the most diversified state (Iowa) relative to the least
diversified state (Nevada). Irrespective of the salary group (we considered three groups),
people in Iowa have about 5 to 10% higher international allocations than people in
Nevada; the difference for diversified versus non-diversified firms is larger still, at 20-
30%. Moreover, older people are consistently less internationally “diversified” than
younger people.
Our analysis of this cross-individual dispersion provides a unique perspective relative to
the related international finance literature, which has primarily used cross-country data on
asset holdings to uncover various determinants behind home bias. Research has
documented both host and destination (target) country factors behind these biases, but the
focus has been mostly on destination country factors, such as corporate governance
issues, stock market development and investment restrictions. 1 To identify these
destination country factors, studies then focus on the related problem of foreign
investment bias, examining to what degree home biased countries under-invest in various
countries. Particularly popular are explanations based on information barriers (Ahearne,
Griever and Warnock, 2004; Brennan and Cao, 1997; Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp,
2009) and familiarity biases (Portes and Rey, 2005).
For comparison, Bekaert, Siegel and Wang (2013) document the cross-country dispersion
in home bias relative to a CAPM (relative market capitalization) benchmark for 35
countries, normalized to be between 0 (no home bias) and 1 (all equity holdings in
domestic stocks). The least home-biased developed country is the Netherlands with a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
  The determinants proposed by those studies include transaction costs (Glassman and Riddick, 2001), real
exchange rate risks (Fidora, Fratzscher and Thimann, 2007), information barriers (Ahearne, Griever and
Warnock, 2004), corporate governance issues (Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz and Williamson, 2003; Kho,
Stulz and Warnock, 2009), stock market development (Chan, Covrig and Ng, 2005), the need to hedge
local consumption streams (Aviat and Coerdacier, 2007), investment restrictions (Bekaert, Siegel, Wang,
2013) and lack of familiarity (Portes and Rey, 2005), to name a few.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2	  



                                                                                                              Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2417976
home bias over the 2001-2009 period of only 34.7%; while Spain, the worst, has a home
bias of 87.5%. It is straightforward to convert the numbers of Table 1 into relative home
bias numbers (we divide by the fraction of world market capitalization accounted for by
non-US markets, which is 64.4%, and subtract that ratio from 1). For a “1960” cohort
person with median salary at a poorly diversified firm normalized home bias is 92.45%;
whereas it is only 43.63% for a “1980” cohort person at a relatively well diversified firm,
indicating that the cross-individual dispersion of home bias within the US is of the same
order of magnitude as the cross-country dispersion in home bias.
Understanding this cross-individual dispersion may have profound implications for the
international diversification literature. First, pure destination country factors, such as
various investment restrictions in different countries or corporate governance problems,
which are difficult to measure to begin with, cannot explain the cross-individual variation
in international diversification for US individuals. Second, the cross-individual
dispersion suggest that individual heterogeneity in preferences or background risk may
play a large role in driving international under diversification and may be more important
than the “cost” of international investing or international risk factors such as transaction
costs and real exchange rate risk.2 Personal characteristics such as age, salary and wealth
may play a role. Familiarity bias (Huberman, 2001) or informational asymmetry between
local and non-local investors (Coval and Moskowitz, 1999) also have implications for the
incidence of “international” home bias for individuals in different locations within the US
(e.g. based on the number of foreign born people in a region), or working for different
firms (international versus domestic firms).3 Finally, cross-country studies miss a set of
potentially very important determinants of home bias, which may be policy relevant, such
as education levels or the quality of the 401(k) investment options available to the
individual.
Each individual in our sample can be characterized by personal characteristics, the area
where she lives, captured by the zip code, and the firm she works for. We therefore
proceed in three steps. We first analyze the importance of personal characteristics like
age, cohort, salary, and wealth indicators, as well as access to financial advice. From
these regressions, we identify zip code and firm fixed effects, and analyze these
separately. Fortunately, several of the firms in our sample are large firms with multiple
branches in different locations; in some cases spread out over the whole country. This
enables us to meaningfully differentiate location from firm effects.
One key fact emerging from the data is that there is an upward trend in the extent of
international diversification. We show that part of this, but only a small part, is the
potentially rational response to the slowly decreasing importance of the US market in the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
      There may of course be variation in the quantity, quality and diversity of the foreign investment options in
different 401(k) plans and we explicitly examine their effect in Section V.
3
  	   See Brown et al. 2015 for an application of the information advantage story to the local tilt of the equity
portfolios of state pension plans.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3	  



                                                                                                              Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2417976
world equity markets. We also find negative age and positive cohort effects. As is well-
known (see Ameriks and Zeldes, 2004), time, age and cohort effects cannot be separately
identified. We argue that the most plausible characterization of the data is a strongly
positive cohort effect coupled with a pure time effect, as opposed to assuming that
investors decrease their international allocations as they age and that this decrease is
counteracted by an overall trend towards more diversification. The cohort effect is
partially responsible for the trend towards more international diversification over time. In
addition, each cohort invests more internationally each year, which delivers the strong
upward trend in international diversification (see Figure 5). The trend and cohort effects
are consistent with the ongoing globalization process making people more comfortable
with foreign investments over time.
As alternative explanations for the cohort effects, we also analyze the role of past return
experiences by investigating various return sensitive variables, such as the Malmendier
and Nagel (2011) stock market experience effect, adapted to the international investment
setting by substituting the stock market return with the foreign minus the U.S. equity
return, or the foreign return alone (return chasing), based on the idea that people having
experienced higher relative or absolute international returns might be more likely to
invest internationally. Similarly, we explore the effect of investors’ inertia by checking
whether the cumulative returns of foreign vs. US equities experienced by the individual
between different dates explain the degree of international allocations. And finally, we
consider the role of periods of stress in the markets as possibly inducing investors to
become more home-biased. The analysis is reported in Section II and we conclude that a
simple cohort effect best explains the data.
Among the individuals’ personal characteristics, we find higher salaries and higher house
values (measured by the median house value in the zip code where the individual resides)
are associated with higher international allocations, while higher account balances are
associated with lower international allocations, albeit only the salary effect is
economically meaningful. These results are obtained after controlling for trends, the
cohort-birth year, the international diversification benchmark, and the percent of the
portfolio invested in target date funds (TDFs).
On the contrary, a very important and sizable variable correlated to the degree of
international diversification is access to financial advice. About 11% of the individuals in
our sample sign an investor agreement to receive online advice from Financial Engines,
and approximately one third of them access the advice website regularly. Individuals who
signed up for advice have international allocations that are 5.304 percentage points higher
than those who never signed up, and 2.246 percentage points higher than those who
signed up, but have not accessed the website recently. Interactions of access to advice
with the demographics indicate that advice is more strongly associated with higher
international allocations for older cohorts, the cohorts that based on our results would


	                                                                                         4	  
otherwise invest less in international stocks. Similarly, all else equal, advice is associated
with higher international allocations for individuals with lower account balances.
Additional demographic characteristics are captured in the zip code and the firm fixed
effect analysis. In studying the zip code effects, we find that higher education levels are
associated with significantly higher international equity allocations, both statistically and
economically, and that the same is true for financial literacy. For example, shifting the
proportion of people with a bachelor’s degree or higher in the zip code from the 5th to the
95th percentile of the distribution in the sample generates a 1.54 percentage points
increase in international allocations. Similarly, going from poor to high financial literacy
amounts to a 1.62 percentage point increase in international diversification over and
above the effect of education. We also find evidence potentially consistent with the
familiarity hypothesis. Zip codes with a higher percent of the population born in foreign
countries have higher international allocations, even controlling for the average (median)
house value per zip code, and for state GDP growth and levels, although the increase over
the 90% range in this variable is more modest, equaling 0.75%. Also consistent with the
familiarity or information hypotheses, is our finding that more export-oriented states
feature higher international allocations.
A firm‘s culture or the firm’s activities may make their employees more familiar and
comfortable with investing internationally. For this reason, we attempt to measure how
“international” a firm is, either directly or indirectly. We control for whether the
company is public, the country of incorporation of the parent, and the presence of foreign
subsidiaries. We also control for firm size, leverage, profitability and sales and
investment over assets. The firm fixed effects reveal that employees of profitable firms
invest less and employees in private firms and in firms with foreign subsidiaries invest
more in international equity.
Finally, one important dimension through which the firm affects the international
allocations of its workers is through training sessions, social interactions, the investment
options available, their quality and fees, and their evolution over time. To control for
these features we re-run our baseline specification adding fixed effects based on the
quarter the individual joined the firm interacted with the firm’s identity and further
interacted with the quarter-year of observation. The results indicate that most effects
remain robust across specifications but the, cohort effect is halved. Further analysis
controls directly for the fraction of international funds among the equity funds offered by
the plan, the expense ratios relative to the domestic equity funds in the plan, the relative
turnover, and fund age, the expense ratios of the international funds in the plan compared
to all the funds in their same category, the difference between historical alphas of
international versus domestic equity funds in the plan, and total plan size.4 The results
indicate a significant association between international diversification and plan features.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
         We obtained these detailed data for all the plans offered by the firms in our sample for 2012 only.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5	  
For example, shifting the fraction of international funds by the 90% range of this
variable, from 10.5% to 33.3%, is associated with an increase in international allocations
between 4.85 and 5.19 percentage points, depending on the specification. In addition,
improving expense ratios from the 95th percentile to the 5th percentiles is associated with
2.86 percentage point higher international allocations. To the extent that plan features are
determined by the employers and are not exclusively the result of the employees’
demands, the findings above indicate that improving the quality of the international
investment options offered by 401(k) plans in terms of number of funds available and
their fees, will generate more investment in international equity.
Hitherto, the large majority of the home bias studies are based on aggregate statistics,
whereas an individualized perspective on home bias is largely limited to the studies on
Swedish households by Calvet et al. (2007), Karlsson and Norden (2007) and Norden
(2010). Calvet et al. (2007) do not specifically focus on international diversification, but
the article mentions that Swedish households are relatively well diversified
internationally because popular Swedish mutual funds have a high international
allocation. Karlsson and Norden use a sample of 9,415 Swedish individuals for the year
2000 to study the likelihood of home bias, finding that wealth affects it negatively and
age positively. Norden (2010) shows that under-diversified people are worse off than
people who are well diversified internationally, but the advantage of the latter is
diminished by their proclivity to excessively churn their portfolio. Graham, Harvey, and
Huang (2009) use a UBS survey on 1,000 investors, to demonstrate that investors who
feel competent trade more often and have more internationally diversified portfolios.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section I describes the data and
some summary statistics. Section II investigates the effect of personal characteristics and
time effects on international diversification, whereas Section III focuses on geography,
and section IV on firm effects. Section V investigates the effect of plan quality and menu
design on the international diversification, while Section VI reports a number of
robustness checks, aimed primarily at showing that the account variation we rely on
mostly reflects portfolio variation at the individual level. Section VII concludes.


       I.   International Diversification at the Individual level
Data description
To implement this study we use a large proprietary dataset made available by Financial
Engines, the largest independent registered investment advisor, with an emphasis on
providing advice and investment management through 401(k) plans. The dataset includes
record-keeper information on demographic characteristics, balances, salary, 401(k)
contributions, household zip codes and the “style” of the asset allocation (see Sharpe,
1992) split up over 5 asset classes and company stock. The underlying style analysis


	                                                                                         6	  
applied to the funds in each plan uses 15 asset classes. Style analysis finds asset class
weights such that the residual return (the difference between the actual fund return and
the style return) has minimal variance, with the weights adding up to 1 and constrained to
be non-negative. Priors based on each fund’s investment objectives and the use of all
available data with exponentially declining weights help reduce estimation noise. One of
the aggregated asset classes is “International Stocks” and its underlying style analysis
model uses indices on European, Pacific and Emerging stock markets. We have data on
3.8 million individuals. Data are drawn every quarter, with a given individual being
sampled approximately every 6 months. For a limited number of companies, the data
sample starts in 2005, but the sample becomes much more complete during the second
half of 2006 and runs till the end of 2011. In addition, we have detailed information on
the plan investment options for a more recent subperiod, and on other features of the
401(k) plans, such as plan size, from IRS Form 5500. The final data set combines
proprietary data from Financial Engines on asset allocations, contributions and
demographics, information on 401(k) plans menus and features, financial information on
the companies from CRSP, Compustat and CapitalIQ, and Census and other sources of
socio-economic data matched through household zip codes.
An important consideration is whether individuals in our sample receive financial advice,
particularly because Financial Engines provides financial advice and asset management
services to the firms we have data on. There are two types of advice that are relevant for
our purposes. First, under the “managed account” model, Financial Engines simply
manages the portfolio on behalf of the client, charging a fee on assets under management.
We exclude these individuals as the international allocation in such accounts is high, but
set by Financial Engines. Second, Financial Engines also provides online advice, which
the client must himself implement. We have information on both when the individual
signed the Investor Service Agreement and when he last logged on, and control for this
form of advice in our regressions. Finally, our data include separate information on the
allocation to target date funds and we control for it in our analysis.	  
Our sample contains 296 firms. In Appendix Tables 1 and 2 we report some
characteristics of the firms and workers in our sample and compare them to the firms in
Compustat and the S&P500 Index, and to the population of full-time U.S. workers as
reported in the Current Population Survey (CPS). In terms of size, whether we look at
assets, sales or numbers of employees, the firms in our sample are substantially larger
than the Compustat firms. Average net income and capital expenditures in our firms also
exceed that of Compustat firms. For example, the median number of employees is about
4,500 in our sample, whether it is only 950 in the Compustat sample, while the average
number of employees per firm is more than 17,000 in our sample and about 7,600 in
Compustat. The presence of such large companies means that the employees of one firm
may be geographically dispersed across the country. Our firms have higher ROA’s but
their leverage ratios are similar to those of the companies in Compustat. Average annual

	                                                                                       7	  
returns are higher in our sample but they are very dispersed because of the crisis
occurring in the middle of our sample period. Compared to the firms in the S&P500, the
firms in our sample are smaller, with slightly smaller asset size but far fewer employees.
Our companies are mostly established companies, with the median age being 65 years
and the 90% range varying between 9 and 148 years. Finally, in Panel D we contrast the
characteristics of the private and public firms in our sample. The public firms in our
sample are larger in terms of assets, sales and number of employees. However, the
private firms are not small upstart companies. Their median age is 62 years and the
median number of employees is about 2,500. The average plan size is large, roughly USD
1 billion on average, but there are lots of small plans as well, so that the median size is
only about USD 300 million.
In Appendix Table 2, we compare worker characteristics in our sample with those of full
time workers in the overall population. The workers in our sample tend to have higher
salaries with the average and median salaries being around 15 to 20,000$ higher than in
the population at large. The average tenure is also about 5 years longer. Finally, the
workers in our sample are on average about 4 years older. Salary shows a smooth
concave pattern with respect to age, first almost linearly increasing, then flattening out
around the 51-55 age group, with salaries starting to decrease for people aged over 60.
We also report account values for our sample, which have a very skewed distribution
with the mean at $70,000 higher than the average annual salary, but the median value of
$25,786 actually lower than the median annual salary. Account values may reflect a
mixture of tenure, past salaries and contribution rates. Contribution rates vary between 0
and 17%, and are on average equal to 6%.


Measuring International Diversification
We start with some simple notation. Let wintt,i be the allocation to international equities
of individual i at time t and weqt,i her allocation to all equities (domestic and foreign
equities). Our main variable of interest is the extent of international equity diversification,
idivt,i = wintt,i/ weqt,i. The international home bias literature has used a wide range of
measures, including international holdings over GDP (Aviat and Coeurdacier, 2007), or
portfolio flows scaled by market capitalizations (Portes and Rey, 2005), but our focus is
on portfolio choice, so that the international equity allocation is the natural variable to
focus on. A number of articles (Ahearne et al, 2004, for example) have used relative
weights, controlling for what the allocation would have to be under, typically, a simple
World CAPM benchmark. Such relative weights also partially control for international
versus local valuation changes. We use such a CAPM benchmark weight in our empirical
analysis but focus on the actual extent of international equity diversification as our main
variable of interest. Bekaert et al. (2013) study several biases plaguing standard
measures, including size biases arising from the fact that countries with a relatively large

	                                                                                           8	  
market capitalization are mechanically less likely to be severely home biased on a
relative basis than countries with a small market capitalization. However, because we
focus on allocations from citizens of one country, we need not worry about such biases.
We would like to also characterize the international allocation to bonds, but we do not
have the data, as the bond asset allocation reported in our data set does not distinguish
domestic from international bonds (even though the original style analysis performed by
FE did have an international bond category). This also makes it natural to scale by
equity holdings, not by total holdings.
The focus on equity diversification has two additional advantages. First, by focusing on
international allocation among stock market participants, we avoid confusing
international non-diversification with stock market non-participation. Second, the focus
on equity allocation potentially circumvents issues raised by optimal asset location. A
high bond allocation and low equity allocation may reflect optimal asset location, given
that the effective tax rate on bonds is mostly higher than on equities. Under certain
assumptions, the relative equity allocation should be constant across different accounts,
even across taxable and tax deferred accounts (Huang, 2008), and therefore the idiv
variable can be meaningfully examined even in accounts with relatively low equity
allocations. Nevertheless, the robustness section of the paper replicates the baseline
results excluding individuals with high bond allocations, finding that the results continue
to hold. Another tax issue is that some foreign countries levy withholding taxes on
dividends and interest rates, eroding the advantage of holding international assets in the
non-taxable account. We also consider a robustness check eliminating investors that may
engage in such an asset location strategy focusing on accounts with high bond allocations
for people with relatively high salaries and account balances. Again, our main results
remain robust.
International Diversification across the US
Insert Figure 1 here: Cross-individual variation in International Diversification
In Panel A of Figure 1 we show a histogram of the international allocations over all of
our observations. The average allocation is 17.8%, and 37% of our observations lie
between 10 and 25%. In addition, 17% of the allocations are exact zeroes, while 3% of
our observations reflect allocations to international equity of over 50%.
The reason the average allocation of 17.8% is usually viewed as “under”-diversification,
is that foreign equity markets during our sample period represent on average 64% of
world market capitalization (computed using MSCI data; the MSCI index covers
approximately 85% of the free float-adjusted market capitalization in each country). We
denote the relative importance of foreign equity markets in world markets as idivt,bm.
Note that this benchmark is only optimal under the strict assumptions of the CAPM, but
we use it here as a reference point for our analysis.


	                                                                                        9	  
In panel B of Figure 1, we show the histogram for relidivt,i = idivt,i / idivt,bm. When
relidiv is larger than 1, the individual is over-diversified; if it is 1, the individual invests
according to existing relative market capitalizations, while 0 represents full home bias.
The statistic is bounded from above by 100 divided by the fraction of the world market
capitalization represented by foreign equity markets. This bound is 156%, when
evaluated with the average value of the foreign equity market fraction. Looking at Figure
1 (Panel B), we see that only slightly over 2% of the observations are higher than 90%,
representing almost full or over-international diversification. Slightly over 47% of the
observations show relative diversification less than 25%.
These data are consistent with aggregate data on international diversification. From
various editions of the ICI Factbook, we computed a proxy for the proportion of mutual
fund holdings in international equity funds to total equity funds. The estimates use the
assets under management in “world” equity open-end funds divided by the total of the
world and domestic equity categories from Table 3 of the Factbook. This fraction
increases from 23.3% in 2006 to 26.0% in 2011. These numbers likely slightly over-
estimate the international diversification proportion, as the “world” category also
includes global funds, which can invest both internationally and in the US. Overall,
these numbers appear consistent with ours.5
Insert Figure 2:Geography and International Diversification
Figure 2 shows the international diversification averages for each state. Aggregating at
the state level compresses the distribution considerably, but we still clearly see a spread
between relatively well–diversified states (Utah, Iowa, Hawaii) with idiv’s of over 20%,
and poorly diversified states (Alabama, West Virginia, and Nebraska) with idiv’s close to
15%.
Insert Figure 3: Firms and International Diversification
In Figure 3, we show the histogram after aggregating idiv and relidiv over firms. One
possibility is that the quality and diversity of a firm’s 401(k) plan options is the main
driver of the observed cross-individual variation in international allocations. For example,
Elton, Gruber and Blake (2004) study over 400 plans and find them “inadequate” in 62%
of the cases. More generally, if the inter-personal characteristics are not well diversified
within a firm, or firm features play a big role in home bias (either through location
effects, firm culture, industry, or plan features), then the distribution of international
allocations should remain relatively wide, compared to Figure 1. Alternatively, if pure
inter-personal characteristics are an important source of cross-individual variation in
international allocations, aggregating over individuals in a firm is likely to eliminate
much of the cross-sectional variation we observe in Figure 1. Figure 3 reveals that 84.5%
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
 Also, Jonathan Reuter, in a discussion of our work, mentioned a median international allocation,
excluding target date fund allocations, of 21.2%, using Brightscope data on 17,913 defined contribution
plans.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10	  
(69.90%) of average firm (relative) international allocations are in the 10-25% (25-50%)
range, a much tighter distribution than in Figure 1. This suggests that personal
characteristics may explain much of the observed inter-personal variation in international
allocations.
Insert Figure 4: Trends in International Diversification
Finally, Figure 4 focuses on potential time effects in international diversification by
graphing quarterly time fixed effects. In Panel A, we simply show time fixed effects in
idiv, and they exhibit a marked upward trend, roughly increasing from about 12% to 22%
in 2010, before dropping back to 18% in 2011, when European stock markets
experienced a downturn following the flare-up of the sovereign debt crisis in August of
that year. In Panel B, we graph the same time fixed effects, but super-impose the
proportion of world markets accounted for by non-US markets. Clearly, this proportion
increased over time as well, moving from about 60 to 65% over the sample period. Thus,
when investigating international allocations from the perspective of a simple World
CAPM benchmark, international allocations should have increased over time.
Alternatively, inertia coupled with different valuation changes for foreign versus
domestic markets may also cause individuals to become automatically more diversified
over time. In Panel C, we show the time effects in relidiv, which controls for the
variation in the international equity market capitalization proportion. The figure shows
that there is a trend in international allocations over and above what happens to the
underlying market capitalization benchmark. Nevertheless, we always include the
benchmark foreign equity proportion as an independent variable in our regressions, and
we will also verify whether relative returns in foreign versus domestic equity have a large
effect on international allocations. 	  
II. Personal Characteristics and International Diversification
II.1 Trends, Age and Cohorts Effects
Trends
In Figure 4, we noted a marked increase in international diversification over time. We
therefore first focus on this time effect. A positive time trend can be due to a pure
positive time effect, a positive cohort effect with older cohorts investing less in
international stocks, or a negative age effect coupled with a change in the age
distribution, or some combination of the above. As is well known (see Ameriks and
Zeldes (2004)), these three effects, when modeled as is usual by dummy variables, are
co-linear and cannot be separately identified. Yet, if the effects are persistent, identifying
them is important for predicting future trends in international diversification. In this
section, we explore the time effects in international diversification.
Table 2 reports some summary statistics on the personal characteristics that we refer to
throughout this and the next section. Our actual regression results are reported in Table 3.

	                                                                                          11	  
For each specification, we run three different panel OLS regressions, one with the listed
independent variables, one controlling for firm fixed effects, and one controlling for zip
code fixed effects (there are close to 30,000 different zip codes represented in our
sample). For each regression coefficient, we report OLS t-statistics in square brackets,
and indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels, using the usual 3, 2 and
one asterisk(s). In addition, to control for potential correlation among workers of the
same firm due to, for example, changes in plan features or economic shocks at the firm
level, we also run regressions clustering the standard errors at the firm level. For
example, a number of firms introduced automatic enrollment at different points during
the sample period and this likely affected the correlation of the investment choices of
their workers (see Madrian and Shea, 2001). The clustered standard errors are about 40
times larger than those in alternative specifications with firm or zip code fixed effects.
To examine the sources of this increase in the standard errors, we also considered
specifications with clustering at the individual level or at the firm-“tenure wave” level,
and regressions with firm-year or firm-tenure wave fixed effects. We define a tenure
wave as the group of people starting work at a firm in the same quarter-year, as they may
receive similar information regarding the 401(k) plans, face similar investment options
and return environments, and may even have personal contacts through investment
information sessions that may influence their investment decisions (Duflo et al., 2006).
The firm clustered standard errors deliver the largest standard errors among all these
specifications. The main sources of these increased errors are the correlation of an
individual’s allocations over time (see Kezdi, 2004, for a discussion of the potential
importance of such correlation), and the correlation between individuals joining the firm
at the same time. We indicate significance with clustered standard errors at the 1% level
with an underscore and a bold; and significance at the 5 or 10% levels with an underscore
only.
An important variable to control for in our regressions, and which may have bearing on
the presence of trends, is the use of managed accounts and financial advice. First, as
Financial Engines rolled out its managed accounts program, the pool of people in our
sample may have changed towards more or less sophisticated people. The former is true
if people consciously fail to sign up for managed accounts, thinking they are financially
savvy enough to manage their 401(k) assets themselves. This may in turn account for an
upward trend in international diversification. 6 Alternatively, people signing up for
managed accounts may realize that financial advice should result in better diversified
portfolios than what they can achieve without any help from a sophisticated quantitative
model. While the percent of people using managed accounts increased over time, we do
not find the characteristics of the workers who use managed accounts, and which we drop
from our sample, to be meaningfully different from those who do not. Panel C of
Appendix Table 2 shows that the two groups are virtually identical in terms of
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
         We thank Jonathan Reuter for pointing out this possibility.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12	  
observables such as age, salary and account balance, although people using managed
accounts have on average 4 years lower tenure than people who do not, since the
introduction of such accounts is a recent phenomenon. Second, around 11% of the
individuals in our sample sign up for financial advice and approximately a third of them
access it regularly. Because advice is an important determinant of international
diversification we dedicate a separate section to it (Section II.3). Third, because TDFs
control the international asset allocation within their portfolios, we include a variable
representing the percent of a person’s account balance that is invested in TDFs. Increased
popularity of TDFs may in fact contribute to the increase in international allocations over
time. As Table 2 shows, the average TDF allocation is 16.08%, with a number of plans
not featuring target date funds at all, and some individuals investing their full balance in
target date funds. Note that the major fund families (such as Vanguard and Fidelity) do
not vary the international equity fraction over time or with age (it is in fact 30%), so that
we do not need to interact this variable with age.
In addition, we control for the fraction of international assets relative to the world market
capitalization, the idiv benchmark, a possible source of a trend in international
diversification discussed in the previous section. We compute this fraction specifically
for each person, based on the time at which the information on the allocations was drawn,
and use it as an independent variable in all specifications.
Our first regression in Table 3 simply adds a linear and quadratic trend to these two
variables. All four independent variables are highly statistically significant with the
coefficients as expected. An additional percentage point invested in TDFs is associated
with a 0.08 percentage point higher international allocation. The effect is stable across
specifications and highly statistically significant. Similarly, as the importance of the U.S.
in the world markets decreases, we observe an increase of the average international
equity allocation in our sample, with the effect varying between 0.19 and 0.21 percentage
points. The trend coefficients are no longer statistically significant once we cluster the
standard errors but imply strong trends upward. We have also estimated a regression with
time dummies. While these time dummies are significant using OLS standard errors,
many become insignificant when clustered standard errors are used. Moreover, the fitted
temporal function generated by the specification with just a quadratic trend and the
capitalization benchmark is almost indistinguishable from the temporal function
generated by time dummies. We therefore prefer to use the parsimonious but
economically equivalent quadratic trend specification.7
We analyze a number of possible economic explanations for the trend in international
allocations. First, we examine the role of cohort and/or age effects. Second, we examine

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
 We rerun the regressions in Table 3 and in the other Tables in the paper using a Tobit specification to
account for the fact that 17% of the observations have zero international equity allocations. The results are
robust and a subset of them is reported in Appendix 5.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13	  
the return experience effect described in Malmendier and Nagel (2011), return chasing,
and simple valuation effects (foreign versus US returns) coupled with inertia.
Age and Cohort Effects
Age and cohort results are reported in Columns (4) to (9) of Table 3, Panel A and in
Panel B. The cohort variable starts at 40 (for people born in 1940 or earlier) and ends at
90 (for people born in 1990 or later). Age is measured in years. Given that the age and
cohort variables are 99% negatively correlated, Table 3 reports regression results where
either the cohort or age variable are added to our baseline “trend” regression, either in
linear form (Panel A) or quadratic form (Panel B). We have also run regressions with
cohort dummies, although, unless rather coarse cohort dummies (spanning a decade) are
used, statistical significance is compromised by using a large number of cohort dummies.
In addition, both age and cohort effects are well captured by a mildly quadratic function;
the parametric functions have the advantage of being parsimonious; and the adjusted R2
from specifications with a parametric function is as high as those from specifications with
dummies.8
The table reveals that the cohort and age effects do not eliminate the trend, but that while
the trend coefficients do not survive clustering of the standard errors, the age and cohort
effects are always highly statistically significant. We find a positive cohort and a
negative age effect. We postulate that the negative age effect is implausible on economic
and statistical grounds. First, the age effect cannot really contribute to a general upward
trend in international diversification, unless the age distribution has shifted over time
towards younger people. We examine the age distribution over time in our sample and
find it to be quite stable (results are available upon request). Not surprisingly, the trend
term becomes stronger in the age specification, which is reflected in similar quadratic
coefficients than in the cohort specification but linear trend terms that are substantially
larger. Second, the age effect implies that investors decrease their international
allocations as they age and that this decrease is counteracted by an overall trend towards
more diversification. This seems unlikely. Moreover, if the global trend does not persist,
the graying of the population would imply that home bias, over the long-run, would get
worse in the aggregate. To test this directly but informally, we ran a regression of the
change in idiv for each individual with multiple observations over the full sample onto a
constant, the change in the benchmark idiv and the change in the target date fund
allocation. A negative age effect would tend to make the constant negative in such a
regression. We obtain a highly significant positive constant. Of course, this may simply
reflect the overall positive trend, but despite substantial cross-heterogeneity in
international diversification, only 26% of the population decreases its international
diversification over time. Finally, the quadratic specifications in Panel B continue to yield
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
 We also ran a specification with firm-time fixed effects, where the latter where either at the annual or
quarterly level. The key results regarding age and cohort effects are robust to these specifications.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14	  
an overall negatively sloped age function, but we never see both coefficients reach
significance under clustered standard errors, with the coefficients varying quite a bit
across specifications.
A cohort effect is much more plausible, both economically and statistically. We find a
cohort coefficient of 0.16-0.17, with rather limited evidence for a quadratic specification.
The linear and quadratic functions are almost indistinguishable for most cohorts, with the
exception of the youngest cohort where the presence of a quadratic term would somewhat
mitigate the increase in international diversification. Because the quadratic coefficient is
mostly not significant under clustered standard errors, we proceed with the linear
specification. There are a couple of plausible economic explanations for a cohort effect.
The simplest one is the ongoing globalization process that is familiarizing particularly the
younger generation with global markets and global investments. If this is true, our results
are potentially consistent with one of the most common findings in the international
literature regarding the effect of familiarity on home bias. We come back to this
hypothesis when we investigate zip code effects. The potential long-run implications are
important, as a sticky cohort effect would suggest that home bias will gradually go away.
However, the results imply that an individual will increase its international allocation by
about 1.6% over a decade, making the aggregate trend implications of the cohort effect
rather modest. While the cohort variable explains about 10% of the total variation
explained by all independent variables, the average cohort varies too little within our
sample period to cause a marked increase in international allocations. The average cohort
was (19)62 in 2006 and (19)65 in 2011, implying only a 0.5% aggregate increase in idiv
over that time period.
Figure 5 shows the international allocations by (coarse) cohorts, with people born before
1950, people born in the fifties, sixties, seventies, and after 1980. There is a monotonic
relation from old (low idiv) to young (high idiv), but all cohorts also increase their
international allocation over time. What drives this overall diversification trend is
unclear. It may be due to the overall globalization phenomenon making people more
comfortable with international investing. The ongoing globalization process may also
affect international allocations by making the international opportunity set better over
time thereby enticing more international investment.9
Insert Figure 5 Cohorts and International Diversification
Return-Sensitive Variables
Another potential reason why cohorts matter is that investment behavior is affected by
past return experiences. Malmendier and Nagel (2011) show that recent stock market
experiences shape the risk taking and asset allocation of US individuals. To examine this

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
 Section V investigates the effect of plan menus, fund quality and expense ratios on international
allocations.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15	  
phenomenon, they create a weight function of past returns, depending on a parameter, λ,
which can imply quite general weight patterns of past returns since birth. They find λ to
be around 1.5, which means recent returns are weighted more heavily than returns in the
more distant past. Using SCF data and regressions that include, inter alia, age and time
dummies, they show that this experience variable has a positive effect on stock market
participation, risk tolerance and the proportion of risky assets held.
For our purposes, the relevant return is not the US stock market return, but the difference
between the foreign return and the US return. People having experienced first – hand
poor international returns relative to the experience in the US stock market (for example,
the roaring ‘90s) may be more reluctant to invest abroad and vice versa. We use the
return on the MSCI international index (excluding the US) minus the US return,
measured in dollars. The “MN experienced return” then becomes in essence a complex
interaction of age, time effects, and past relative returns. We estimate λtogether with
the coefficient on the MN variable using non-linear least squares. We run a number of
preliminary regressions with fixed λ, using a relatively fine grid, and start the estimation
at a λ that optimizes the R2 of the regression. We find the optimal λ to be 3.999 (see
Table 4). This is substantially higher than the estimate in Malmendier and Nagel (2011)
for the US stock market, but still implies declining weights for relative returns. Because
we only have international data since 1969 and there were virtually no international
investments before 1980, a declining weight function seems the only plausible economic
outcome. We find that the MN effect is statistically significant and it even remains so
when clustered standard errors are used. However, the coefficient is negative, not
positive, which is not consistent with the experience effect documented in Malmendier
and Nagel. To help interpret this finding, Figure 6 graphs the Malmendier–Nagel
experienced return variable as a function of age for different points in time. Interestingly,
the functions are mostly positive and decreasing with age; that is, younger people
experienced more positive relative foreign returns, which may help explain the cohort
effect we documented above. However, this effect is non-linear and depending on the
year, from age 40 to 50 the effect becomes quite small (and even negative for the 2005
and 2006 years, perhaps reflecting the experience of the nineties when the US stock
market performed very well). For lower λ's, we do find sometimes positive coefficients,
but they are mostly not statistically significant. On the contrary, the linear cohort effect
remains highly statistically significant and becomes larger. Note that the MN and the
cohort variable are 67% correlated: for this reason, we also run a specification with the
MN variable but excluding the cohort variable. In this specification, λ is estimated to be
slightly above 1.0, but the MN variable still features a negative coefficient (results are
available on request). Regressions replacing cohort by age effects yield results similar to
those reported in Table 4. Given these results, the pure cohort variable appears an easier
to interpret and more robust determinant of variation in international allocations.


	                                                                                         16	  
We also examined an alternative specification of the MN variable, simply using the
foreign return, rather than the foreign return minus the US return. In fact, the idea of
investors “chasing returns” in international markets is a standard one in the capital flow
literature, going back to at least Bohn and Tesar (1996). When we run the non-linear
least squares model with this variant, we find that λ is equal to 1.00, and the MN
variable has a positive and statistically significant effect on international allocations (see
Table 4). That is, people having experienced higher foreign returns allocate more
internationally. However, the coefficient is no longer significant with clustered standard
errors, while the cohort effect remains robust.
An alternative explanation of the time variation in international diversification is that
people exhibit inertia: they select an international allocation, perhaps when joining the
firm, and never or rarely change it. If that is the case, the time variation in idiv should be
partly explained by relative cumulative returns (foreign versus US) between the different
records of account balances. We compute these individualized cumulative returns using
daily MSCI returns.10 Column (3) of Table 4 shows that this variable has the wrong
negative sign and is not statistically significant under clustered standard errors. The
introduction of firm or zip code fixed effects in columns (4) and (5) does not change
these conclusions. Note that the regression still includes the benchmark idiv variable,
which remains highly statistically significant and also partially reflects valuation changes.
When we exclude this variable, the sign of the coefficient on the relative return duly
becomes positive, but it is not significant under clustered standard errors.
Finally, it is often suggested that in times of stock market crashes, investors become more
risk averse and become at the same time more home – biased. To test this conjecture we
rely on the indicator proposed in Baele et al. (2013), who use data on bond and stock
returns to measure the occurrence of stress periods in which stock markets decline and
liquid benchmark bonds increase in value. When we include as an explanatory variable
in the regression the monthly incidence of these “Flights to Safety” days they identify for
the US, we find that the coefficient on this variable is indeed negative and highly
statistically significant in the simple OLS regression and the zip code fixed effect
regression, but that it switches sign for the firm fixed effect regression and is not
significant with clustered standard errors.
Given the non-robust, hard to interpret, and/or insignificant results we find, we do not use
any of the return sensitive variables in the benchmark specification that we take forward.
II.2. The Effects of Income and Wealth
We now address whether income and wealth have an effect on international
diversification. We have data on salary and account balances. We also have data on
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10
  Notice that using daily MSCI returns to impute individual returns is a noisy measure because of
contributions.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17	  
tenure at the firm, but these data are less complete, and we decided not to use them in the
main specification because of their correlation with cohorts on the one hand, and the fact
that account values may also largely reflect a combination of tenure and salary on the
other hand. We also collected the median house value at the zip code level from Zillow,
which is, for many households, perhaps the best indicator of overall wealth. We express
all these variables in 2005 dollars using the CPI to deflate. Note that Zillow only covers a
subset of the zip codes in our sample, so that the sample size is significantly smaller than
the one used in Table 3.
As Table 2 shows, the distributions of salary, account values and house values are all
right skewed and we therefore take natural logarithms before using them as independent
variables. We consider both linear and quadratic specifications. The quadric term for
house value is not statistically significant, but the quadratic terms for salary and account
balances are and they are therefore kept in our final specification reported in Table 5.
We report again the usual three specifications, but when zip code fixed effects are used,
we must drop the house value as an independent variable because the cross-sectional
variation dominates the time-series variation in house values in our sample. Note that
most of our benchmark variables (% in TDF, international diversification benchmark, and
cohort) maintain their sign and significance, with the coefficients on the TDF and cohort
variables becoming slightly smaller, while the coefficient on the diversification
benchmark increasing substantially.
The coefficients on salary, account balances and house values are mostly statistically
significant, even under clustered standard errors. The effect of house value on
international diversification is positive. To get a sense of the economic magnitude, an
increase in house value of $50,000 at the $200,000 average house value, would generate
roughly a 0.17% increase in idiv (the derivative with respect to house values for these
magnitudes is the coefficient divided by 4). At the $58,000 average salary, an increase of
$10,000 in salary would roughly generate a 69 bp increase in the international allocation
coefficient (82 bp at the median salary of $47,625). For account balances, the negative
quadratic effect makes international allocations a negative function of account balances.
For the average account balance of $64,000, a $5000 increase would generate only a 8 bp
drop in international diversification (18 bp at the median account value of $23,434).
Finally, note that account balances and salary are positively correlated, so that their joint
effect may be somewhat smaller than the univariate effects.
Because we lose many observations with the Zillow database, we consider an alternative
data source for house values, namely the Census-Bureau/American Community Survey.
This survey provides the median house value per zip code over the 2008-2012 period.
Hence, there is no panel available as with the Zillow database. Moreover, median house
values over USD 1 million are reported as +1,000,000. Since this only affects 158 zip
codes we set them simply to 1,000,000. Our results, reported in columns (4) and (5) of


	                                                                                         18	  
Table 5, are very robust to using this variable instead of the Zillow database house value.
The coefficients on account values and salaries are very close to those reported in the
previous columns and the coefficient on house value now becomes somewhat higher at
0.84 with firm fixed effects, and 0.98 without, while retaining statistical significance.
We conclude that differences in house values and account balances only generate
economically small effects on international allocations, while we do detect more sizable
salary effects.
Finally, a major potential source of heterogeneity in asset allocations is variation in risk
aversion across individual investors. There is, however, not an obvious link between risk
aversion and the optimal allocation to international assets in a portfolio. Under the CAPM
benchmark, with a risk free asset, optimality simply suggests holding the market portfolio
and our benchmark idiv is the optimal international equity portfolio. In a 401(k) context,
where shorting and leveraging is not possible, the risky frontier may have different
international allocations for people with different risk tolerances. For example, high beta
foreign investments (such as, currently, emerging markets) may be more prevalent in
portfolios of more risk tolerant investors. Therefore, individual- and zip code-level
demographics might also capture variation in risk attitudes across individuals. Finally, it
is also possible that person-specific characteristics, experience or behavioral biases
account for the differences in investment behavior (Cesarini et al., 2009, Campbell et al.,
2013, Korniotis and Kumar, 2013).
II.3 Access to Online Advice
In this section we examine the effect of signing up for financial advice on international
allocations. The proportion of individuals in our sample that sign an investor agreement
to receive online advice from Financial Engines is 11.27%. This proportion varies across
firms, ranging from 0% to 55.1%, and it also varies over time, ranging between 7% and
10%.11
Panel A of Table 6 compares the characteristics of the employees who signed up for
online advice with FE to those who did not. Online advice employees have similar age,
around 45 years old, to those who do not sign up for advice, but have significantly higher
salary, $73,095 vs. $56,420, and account values, $124,977 vs. $58,735. Interestingly,
they are also less likely to invest in Target Date Funds, having 7.74% of their portfolios
in such funds vs. 16.83% for the non-advice employees.
For those who signed up for financial advice, we also have information on the date of the
last login onto the online advice website. Based on this, each time we observe an
individual, we flag those whose last login is within a year as receiving non-stale advice.
Among the individuals who signed up for advice, the advice is accessed within the past
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
  Over the sample period, Financial Engines’ recommendations increased from roughly 20% to 40% in
international equities, as a fraction of total equity exposure.”	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19	  
year on average 36.3% of the times. Summary statistics comparing those who have
accessed the website within the past year and those who have accessed it more than a
year before the observation date indicate that the two groups are quite similar in terms of
age, salary, account values, and reliance on TDFs (results available upon request).12
Regressions in Panel B of Table 6 replicate columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 controlling for
whether the individual has signed up for and has recently accessed online advice. Column
(1) indicates that, all else equal, individuals who signed up for advice have international
allocations that are 4.27 percentage points higher than those who do not. This result is
further confirmed in column (2) where we add a control for how recent the advice is:
someone who accessed the online advice website within the past year has all else equal
international allocations that are 5.304 percentage points higher than those who have not
signed up for advice and 2.246 percentage points higher than those who signed up, but
have not accessed the website recently. The regressions contain controls for firm fixed
effects, and clustering of the standard errors at the firm level. The effects of advice are
similar in economic magnitude and significance when we control for zip code fixed
effects instead (columns (3) and (4)).13 Notice that we cannot tell from our data whether
this different investing behavior is due to people accessing online advice being different
from otherwise similar people who do not, or to a direct effect of advice on international
allocations.
Controlling for financial advice slightly decreases the trend effect in the firm fixed effects
regressions and leaves it essentially unchanged in the regressions with zip code fixed
effects. The cohort coefficient is unchanged, with younger cohorts enjoying on average
13.4 to 14.2 basis points higher international equity allocations. Similarly, the
significance and economic magnitude of the coefficients on the other variables is
unchanged: a percentage point higher allocation to TDFs all else equal is associated with
a 5.6 to 6.7 basis points higher international allocations, the growing importance of
international markets in terms of capitalization generates a 32 basis points higher
allocation per percent increase in capitalization, and the effect of salary, account values
and house values is similar to that reported in Table 5.
Finally, columns (5) and (6) examine the interactions between signing up for online
advice and demographic variables. The coefficients indicate that signing up for advice is
all else equal more strongly associated with higher international allocations for older
cohorts, the cohorts that based on the findings in Table 5 and the current table would
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12
   Notice that this is a very coarse measure of advice as it flags as receiving advice those who have logged
on to the Online Advice website, without measuring whether they actually took advice, how long they
stayed on the website, and which type of information they perused. Thus, the advice dummy coefficient
measures the average correlation with international allocations across different intensities of advice. The
comparison of the coefficients of stale vs. non-stale online advice suggests that a more precise measure of
the degree of advice might generate a bigger effect.
13
   Unreported results indicate that the effect of online advice and its recency are similar in regressions that
do not include firm or zip code fixed effects.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20	  
otherwise invest less. This effect is statistically significant even after clustering the
standard errors at the firm level. Similarly, among those who sign up for advice, all else
equal advice is associated with increasing international allocations for individuals with
lower account values. To the extent that older cohorts have higher account balances,
these two effects may partially counteract each other.
We also rerun the regressions in Tables 3, 4, and 5 dropping those individuals who sign
up for advice at some point and the results are robust (available upon request).
Given the importance of the advice variables and their interactions with the
demographics, we include them in the baseline specification that we use in the following
sections.


III. The Geography of Home Bias
While personal characteristics and advice explain about 5.5% of the variation in
international allocations (not reported), adding zip code fixed effects increases the
adjusted R2 to well over 9% (see column (3) of Table 6 Panel B). To examine what these
location effects reflect, we re-run our benchmark specification, including the salary,
account balance, advice variables, and their interactions, but excluding the house value
variable, and extract the zip code fixed effects. We then run simple OLS regressions of
these zip code effects onto a number of “locational” variables at either the zip code or the
state level. Our independent variables can be grouped into three broad themes: wealth,
education, and familiarity/information. The first two are really personal characteristics
that we can only measure at the zip code level. First, we include the zip code median
house value in the regression. Because it substantially reduces our sample size (we only
have house values for 12,446 zip codes), we typically run our specifications with and
without this variable. Second, it is quite conceivable that education is correlated with
financial savvy and perhaps also helps to alleviate any undue apprehension about foreign
investments (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). Fortunately, we have the percentage of the
population over 25 years old in each zip code with a high school degree or higher, with a
bachelor's degree or higher; or with a master's degree or higher. The summary statistics
in Table 7, Panel A, reveal that educational attainment displays substantial variation
across zip codes. The 5%-95% range of the distribution is 36.7%-81.9% for a high school
degree, 0%-32.5% for a college degree, and 0%-24.00% for a master’s degree or higher.
We also create a financial literacy variable by computing the average performance on the
5 financial knowledge questions in the National Financial Capability survey. These data
are available only at the state level.
Finally, most of our other variables can be related to the familiarity/information
hypothesis. The first set concerns the percent of the zip code population that is foreign
born, for which we do not only have the total, but also the split over Latin America,


	                                                                                        21	  
Europe, Asia and the rest of the world. If familiarity plays a large role in international
allocations, it is conceivable that the presence of immigrants in a particular area directly
or indirectly increases familiarity with foreign culture, products and securities. These
variables also display substantial variation across zip codes, with the 90% range of total
foreign-born population varying between 0% and 26%. Also, in the international
literature, it is common to use distance from foreign markets as a control variable. Such a
measure requires knowing the relevant destination countries for most US investments.
Given the well-documented international foreign investment biases towards nearby
countries, we compute the distance to Toronto and to Mexico; in addition, we compute
the distances to London and Tokyo, the financial centers of the two largest investable
equity markets outside the US. Our next variable measures whether the employee is
living in a metropolitan area, a large rural area, a small rural area or an isolated area,
using data from Rural Urban Commuting Area codes (RUCA). It is conceivable that an
urban environment enhances familiarity with foreign “things”. For the purposes of the
summary statistics, we simply coded the variable as going from 1 (metropolitan area) to 4
(isolated), but we use separate dummies in the regression analysis.
Our last set of variables is at the state level. Familiarity relative to the foreign world can
be enhanced by the work environment, for example through work for a company that has
a lot of business with foreign countries. We therefore also include two measures of “trade
openness,” the sum of imports and exports at the state level divided by state GDP, and the
level of exports divided by state GDP, expressed in percent. Because the data on imports
are less complete than those on exports, most of our analysis uses the export variable.
Again, there is plenty of cross-state variation in these variables, with the 5th percentile of
the distribution of state openness being 8.7% and the 95th percentile being 38.6%. Note
that there is a large literature in international finance, starting with Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2000) that links home bias in goods to home bias in assets through equilibrium models
with transaction costs. However, Van Wincoop and Warnock (2010) show that such a
link is empirically rather unlikely. Instead, our motivation to include these variables rests
on a familiarity argument. Finally, a more direct measure of potential information flow
would be the logarithm of the number of international phone minutes per year per state.
Unfortunately these data are not available, and we use long-distance minutes as a proxy.14
To measure economic well–being, we include in the analysis GDP per capita and
cumulative GDP growth over the five-year period preceding our sample, and over the
2006-2011 period. These variables help mitigate concerns that any positive effect of the
foreign born population on international diversification is due to reverse causality: richer
areas or areas that are doing well economically are better diversified, and at the same
time attract more foreign immigrants.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14
     The data are gathered from the FCC Statistical Trends in Telephony report, see Bekaert et al. (2014), for
more details. The data are spliced with data on inter-state mobile phone minutes.
	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22	  
Before we consider the regressions results, it is worth repeating that in our data set
location effects need not be highly correlated with firm effects. While it is true that many
employees live close to the place where they work, our sample contains multiple firms
with a multitude of branches that are quite spread out geographically.
Table 7, Panel B, reports the regression coefficients for zip code effects extracted from a
regression that includes our baseline specification (target date fund, benchmark idiv,
trends, and cohort), plus the salary, account balance, advice variables and their
interactions. We verified that the results are robust to using zip code fixed effects derived
from a regression with only the baseline variables, which has slightly more observations.
The table reports 6 different specifications, but three of those simply add the house value
variable to an equivalent specification without the house value variable, which has many
more observations. The first two specifications use coarse indicators of education (%
bachelor’s degree or higher), immigration (total percent born abroad), and distance (total
distance). The third and fourth specifications are more granular with respect to education
(high school, college, higher degree), the origin of the foreign born population, and the
distance variable. In the 5th specification we replace the Zillow house values by the ones
drawn from the Census, increasing the number of observations considerably. Finally, in
the last specification, we take the specification of column (4) and replace the ratio of state
exports to GDP with state openness.
The key results can be easily summarized. First, we find a highly significant effect of
education levels on international allocations. A 1% increase in the percentage of people
in the zip code who hold a bachelor’s degree or higher is associated with a 0.047
percentage points higher international diversification in the zip code. The effects are even
higher if we separately look at the people with high school, bachelor’s and advanced
degrees. To get a sense of the economic variation the coefficients imply, we evaluate the
regression coefficients at the 90% range of the distribution reported in Panel A of Table
7. We use the coefficients from the base specification in column (3) without the house
values, but note that the coefficients are similar in the specifications with house values
(columns (2) and (4)-(6)). For a high school degree, the international allocation is
predicted to change over this range by about 1.44 percentage points (.0318*(81.9-36.7)),
for a college degree by about 2.06 percentage points (.0634*32.5), and for a higher
degree by about 1.52 basis points (0.0633*24.0). We also examine financial literacy
directly, and this variable has a coefficient varying between 2.36 and 4.39, significant at
the 1% level across all specifications. The financial literacy variable reflects the average
score on 5 financial knowledge questions so that the large coefficient implies a
substantial economic effect of financial literacy. Even considering a 90% range of only
0.4, going from poor to high financial literacy amounts to an increase in international
diversification that varies between 0.94 and 1.75 percentage points depending on the
specification. We should also note that general education is already controlled for, so


	                                                                                         23	  
that improving financial literacy per se has the potential to greatly increase international
diversification outcomes.
Second, we observe a substantial "foreign born" effect with a coefficient around 0.03,
statistically significant at the 1% level in all specifications. Economically, in this case,
given that the foreign population varies between 0% and 26%, the 90% range would be a
0.75% effect. When we look at the origin of the immigration, we find that the variables
are statistically significant for Latin American and European origin, but less consistently
so for Asian origin. The strongest effect comes from the European origin, with a
coefficient of 0.099.
Third, overall distance has the expected negative effect on international diversification,
but the effect is only statistically significant at the 10% level and loses significance once
house values are included in the regression. When we split this variable up in its
components it appears that the distance variables have the expected negative sign in the
larger sample when house values are not included in the regression and switch sign when
they are. The exception is the distance from Toronto for which the opposite is true. The
coefficients in Column (5), which include house values from the Census and thus come
from a larger sample, are consistent with those from the large sample and no house value
controls reported in Column (3). For long distance minutes, we find an unexpected
negative effect for the large sample, but a positive effect when we control for the Zillow
house prices. Going from 42 to 57 long distance hours (the 90% range) is associated with
an increase of 56 basis points in international diversification. Finally, we find a lower
international diversification in both urban and larger rural areas (versus isolated areas as
the benchmark). Further analysis which includes only urban, rural and isolated dummies
generates a positive and strongly statistically significant coefficient for the urban dummy,
indicating that the reason for the difference is due to other controls, like foreign born,
education and financial literacy being strongly correlated with the urban dummy
(available upon request).
Fourth, the GDP growth variables have a significant positive effect on international
diversification, and more so for lagged growth. On the contrary, GDP per capita at the
state level has a robust, albeit economically really small, negative effect on international
diversification. Fifth, trade openness generates strong and consistent positive effects on
international allocations, both when measured using exports and when measured using
both exports and imports for the shorter sample. The 90% range for the exports variable,
which is 11.1%, would induce an increase in international diversification varying
between 0.98% and 1.58% depending on the specification, while the 90% range for state
openness implies an increase in international diversification of about 1.59%.
Finally, Zillow house values have a marginally or no statistically significant effect on zip
code variation in international diversification, with wealthier zip codes experiencing
higher international allocations, except for the specification in Column (6) where the

	                                                                                         24	  
coefficient is negative although not statistically significant. In Column (5) we replicate
the results in Column (4) using house value data from the 2010 Census, which has much
wider coverage, but reflect the average house price over the period 2008-2012 rather than
over our sample period, like the Zillow index does. We find that controlling for Census
house average prices does not change the magnitude, sign and significance of the
coefficients from the regressions without house values, while restricting the sample to the
Zillow zip codes substantially changes some of the coefficients on the other variables and
quadruples the explanatory power of the regressions.
We conclude that there are relatively strong locational effects in international equity
allocations, related to education and financial literacy, immigration, GDP growth and
state trade openness.
           IV.     Firm Characteristics and International Diversification
Firm fixed effects substantially increase the adjusted R2 in the regressions we have run so
far (See Panel B of Table 6). The reason can be twofold. First, the firm people work for
affects their familiarity with and attitude toward foreign investments and goods, and the
characteristics of their human capital. Second, the quality of the investment options
offered and the information about retirement investing provided might vary across firms.
In the worst case scenario, a particular plan may not even have an international mutual
fund option. Alternatively, the options may be limited and/or have exorbitant fees,
making international diversification ultimately not optimal. In this section we analyze the
first reason, while we dedicate the next section to the effect of plan menus, the proportion
of international funds offered by the company’s plans, their fees and quality.
A firm‘s culture or the firm’s activities may make their employees more familiar and
comfortable with investing internationally. For this reason, we attempt to measure how
“international” a firm is, either directly or indirectly. We collect information from
CapitalIQ on the ultimate parent and the country of the ultimate parent (for private and
public firms) of the company. Using this information, we can create a dummy that is
equal to 1 if the ultimate parent is foreign. About 16% of the firms in our sample have a
foreign parent (see the summary statistics in Table 8, Panel A). We also quantify whether
the firm has foreign subsidiaries, using information from Orbis. We create a dummy
variable that is equal to 1 if the firm has foreign subsidiaries, and we also code a variable
that simply equals the fraction of subsidiaries that is foreign. As Table 8, Panel A,
shows, 56% of our firms have at least one foreign subsidiary. The cross-firm variation in
the fraction of foreign subsidiaries is vast, varying between 0 and 87.3%. A firm’s
activities may also make it more or less “foreign.” We therefore examine the openness,
((imports+exports)/output), of the industry the firm belongs to.
We supplement this information with a number of variables measuring different firm
characteristics, most of which do not have clear ex-ante predictions regarding their effect
on international diversification. First, we include a dummy variable to indicate whether

	                                                                                         25	  
the firm is private or publicly traded. Second, we include two measures of size, the
logarithm of the assets and the logarithm of the number of employees. We conjecture
that employees at public and large firms may be more likely to be familiar with foreign
investments, or they may have more elaborate and diverse 401(k) plans with more and
better international options. We also use a leverage measure (debt/assets) and sales
intensity measure (sales/assets). Third, we include measures of profitability (net income
as a percent of assets) and investment intensity (capital expenditures as a percent of
assets). Fourth, we include the logarithm of the age of the firm, where the logarithmic
transformation is necessary because some firms in our sample are very old. Table 8,
Panel A, reports summary statistics on these firm characteristics.
While we have panel data for some of these variables, most of them are very stable over
time so we run our analysis on the firm fixed effects, and we simply average the
independent variables. Again, we use the baseline specification, which includes target
date fund allocation, idiv benchmark, trend variables, cohort variable, salary and wealth
variables (account balances and house values), the advice variables and their interactions.
We examine 6 different regression specifications. The first regression eliminates the firm
characteristics from the analysis, as they halve the size of our sample and only include
controls for whether the company and its parent are public or private and the possible
foreign location of its headquarters and subsidiaries. We find that individuals employed
in private firms have significantly higher international equity allocations (column (1)).
Since 33% of the private firms in our sample have a public parent company, which is
often foreign, we also control for whether the parent is public or private and for the
presence of foreign headquarters. The Table shows that while working for a private firm
is associated with 3.9 percentage point higher international allocations, the effect
decreases to only 1.68 percentage points when there is a public parent company. The
coefficient on the Foreign Headquarters dummy is not significantly different from zero.
In the remaining regressions, we add firm characteristics such as size, age, profitability,
etc., in addition to a dummy for whether the firm has foreign subsidiaries. Notice that our
sample now loses about 170 firms for which not all the data are available; most of these
firms are private firms. The regression in Column (2) indicates that having foreign
subsidiaries is associated with 3.59 percentage point higher international allocations and
that the effect is statistically significant.15 Among the other firm characteristics only
profitability is significantly correlated with international allocations, with a negative
effect amounting to 17 basis points per percent of profitability. One possibility is that
workers in profitable firms invest disproportionally in company stock, crowding out
international investments. To examine this substitution effect further, we calculated the
aggregate allocation to company stock at the firm level. That is, we take the last
observation on company allocations per individual in each year and multiply this
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15
          	  Controlling for the fraction of foreign subsidiaries instead than the dummy yields similar results.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  26	  
allocation by the total account value to obtain a dollar allocation and aggregate this over
each firm-year. We then match firm-year aggregate company stock allocations to firm-
year profitability, leading to 513 observations for profitability and company stock
allocations. We do find a positive but small correlation between the two variables, at
10.9%, which is significant at the 1% level.
In columns (3) and (4) we add other controls aimed at measuring the international nature
of the firm the individual works for, namely industry fixed effects and industry openness,
respectively. The private and foreign subsidiaries dummies and the profitability measure
remain significant, both statistically and economically, while the new variables are not
statistically significant, although the industry dummies increase the R2 substantially.
Finally controlling only for firm characteristics and not for ownership or foreign
subsidiaries (column (5)), does not change the results.
           V.      Plan Quality and Menu Design
One important determinant of the degree of international diversification in people’s
portfolios, and more generally of the allocation to different asset classes, is the
availability of international investment options, their quality and fees.
To examine this issue, we take two different approaches. First, we replicate the main
results in Tables 3, 5, and 6, controlling for fixed effects based on the quarter the
individual joined the firm interacted with the firm’s identity and further interacted with
the quarter-year of observation. The rationale behind this approach is to control for the
host of conditions that a group of workers joining a given firm in the same quarter faces
at the time they join and over time (automatic enrollment, training sessions, social
interactions, the investment options available, their quality and fees, and their evolution
over time …).
Second, for a subsample of more recent data we control directly for the fraction of
international funds among the equity funds offered by the plan, the expense ratios relative
to the domestic equity funds, the relative turnover, alpha, and fund age, the relative
expense ratio of the international funds compared to their peers, and total plan asset size.
Note that one quality dimension we do not investigate is the potential heterogeneity in the
target date funds offered by the plans. Balduzzi and Reuter (2013) actually find large
heterogeneity in performance, asset allocation, market timing, and security selection
among target date funds with the same target date across fund families.
Panel A of Table 9 reports the results of including fixed effects based on the quarter the
worker joined the firm interacted with the identity of the firm and with the quarter-year of
observation. Column (1) replicates Column (4) of Table 3, while the following four
columns replicate Columns (2) and (5) of Tables 5 and 6, respectively. The Table shows
that the effect of TDFs, the international diversification benchmark and the trend effects
are robust across specifications and in most cases only slightly smaller compared to those


	                                                                                        27	  
obtained previously. The effect of target date funds varies between 3 and 3.4 basis points
as opposed to 5.7-6.8 basis points, and it is still strongly statistically significant. The
effect of the international diversification benchmark is relatively unchanged. The trend
effects are weaker and, as before, not statistically significant once standard errors are
clustered. The cohort coefficient is one-third the size it was, dropping from 16 to 5.5
basis points, but it maintains its statistical significance. The fixed effects we introduce
appear to capture some of the cohort effect in the data. The substantially lower quadratic
coefficients for the salary variable, implies that salary has a substantially weaker effect as
in the specifications with firm fixed effects only. However, the quadratic term for account
balances is now positive, rendering the account balance effect on international allocations
positive. The advice dummy and its recency continue to have a strong and statistically
significant effect on international equity allocations, inducing an increase in international
allocation of 2.415 percentage point if the advice is stale and 4.05 percentage point if it is
not. These effects are slightly smaller than before. Their interaction coefficients with
salary, account values, and house values, both from Zillow and the Census, have most of
the time the same signs, and similar significance to those reported previously, but smaller
magnitude (with the exception of the account value interactions, which are larger). In
addition, the R2 is now above 13% across specifications.
Appendix Table 3 repeats the regressions in Panel A controlling for quarter-year times
firm fixed effects, to account for the fact that we do not have tenure information for all
individuals, and thus to check the robustness of our results to a larger sample albeit using
a coarser type of fixed effects. The results are remarkably similar to those reported in
Panel A.
Finally, Panel B repeats the regressions above controlling directly for the fraction and the
quality of the international funds offered by the plans, based on the information on a
snapshot of the plans offered by the firms in our sample in 2012. As such, it captures the
most recent features of the plans, and, to the extent that there is correlation over time, the
historical ones.
For each plan, we calculate the ratio of the number of international over domestic equity
funds, the ratio of the median expense ratio of international equity funds over the median
expense ratio of the domestic ones, similar constructed ratios for turnover and fund age,
the expense ratios of the international funds in the plan compared to all the funds in their
same category, the difference between historical alphas of international and domestic
funds, and total plan size. The last rows of Panel A of Table 8 report the summary
statistics for these plan characteristics and show quite a wide variation in terms of the
fraction of the equity funds that are international, ranging from 10.5% to 33.3%, relative
expense ratios, going from half to more than double those of the domestic funds,
difference in historical alphas and rank in terms of expense ratios. On average, 20% of
the equity funds in the plans in our sample are international, their turnover and age is


	                                                                                          28	  
similar, albeit slightly lower, than the domestic funds in the same plan, and they have
slightly lower historical alphas both in terms of means and medians.16 As expected, the
international funds tend to have higher expense ratios than the domestic ones, with the
mean 29.4% higher and the median 12.1% higher.
Panel B indicates that shifting the fraction of international funds over the 90% range of
this variable, from 10.5% to 33.3%, increases international allocations by an amount
between 4.85 and 5.19 percentage points, depending on the specification. The effect is
similar in size to that of having an individual going from no online advice to non-stale
online advice and it is statistically significant across specifications. The Table also
indicates that if the gap between the median expense ratio of the international and
domestic funds in the plan is higher, the international allocations are all else equal lower.
Improving expense ratios and going from the 95th percentile to the median, with fees on
international funds 12.1% higher than the domestic ones in the plan, is associated with
international allocations 1.6 percentage points higher; going all the way to the 5th
percentile, with international fees 51.1% lower than those on domestic equity funds, is
associated with international allocations that are 2.86 percentage points higher. The effect
is significant at the 1% level once we cluster the standard errors. Relative turnover has
the expected negative sign, relative fund age and plan size have positive effects, while the
difference in historical alphas has an incorrect negative sign but the effect is
economically small. However, none of these effects is statistically significant once we
cluster the standard errors. Finally, plan quality in terms of the expense ratio of the
international funds in the plan compared to the universe of similar international funds has
a negative effect, which is significant at the 1% level with clustered standard errors. Panel
B also shows that adding such plan features to the regressions does not overall change the
magnitude and statistical significance of the other coefficients when compared to Tables
3, 5, and 6.
To the extent that plan features are determined by the employers and are not exclusively
the result of the employees’ demands, the findings above indicate that improving the
quality of the international investment options offered by 401(k) plans in terms of the
number of funds available and their fees, should generate more investment in
international equity.
Lastly, we add these plan characteristics to the analysis of the firm fixed effects presented
in Panel B of Table 8. Columns (6) and (7) show that these variables contribute
substantially to explain the fixed effects, as the R2 increases from 16.5% to 28%. Among
the plan features, expense ratios, both relative to the domestic equity funds in the plan
and to the universe of similar international funds, are the only ones to be statistically
significant and are associated, as expected, with lower international allocations. The other
plan features have the expected sign, but are not statistically significant. Moreover,
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16
              Alphas are calculated relative to the style analysis with 15 asset classes used by Financial Engines.

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  29	  
adding these plan quality variables to the analysis does not change the magnitude and
statistical significance of the foreign subsidiaries dummy and the profitability measure,
although the statistical significance of the private firm dummy disappears in the last
column.


           VI.        Robustness Checks
While we have already reported on a number of robustness checks along the way, here
we specifically focus on the problem that our data represent one 401(k) account per
person, which may not be representative of the full portfolio of the individual.
To investigate this issue, we focus on sub-samples of individuals for whom there is a high
chance that their wealth is dominated by their 401(k) account and that this 401(k) account
is their only account. Of course, our selection criteria will use variables that are
themselves correlated with international diversification. While this is not desirable, it
would make finding robust results all the more surprising.
Our first criteria simply use tenure and age, and is based on the fact that relatively old
workers with a relatively low tenure at the firm are more likely to already have a 401(k)
account from a previous employer, or to have an IRA account. Having examined the
joint distribution of age and tenure, our exclusion criteria are as follows:
For workers with tenure between 0 and 3 years, we exclude people of age 36 or older;
For workers with tenure between 4 and 5 years, we exclude people of age 41 or older;
For workers with tenure between 6 and 10 years, we exclude people of age 46 or older;
For workers with tenure between 11 and 15 years, we exclude people of age 51 or older;
For workers with tenure between 16 and 20 years, we exclude people of age 56 or older.
In the baseline specification, this sample still has more than 9 million observations. We
also create a sub-sample based on salary and account value, excluding individuals with a
salary of above 100,000 USD or an account balance of over 200,000 USD. Such
individuals are likely to have substantial taxable assets, making their 401(k) account less
representative of their overall allocation. This sample has over 14 million observations.
Finally, we create a sub-sample combining both criteria, which reduces the sample size to
about 8 million observations.
In Table 10, we show these results in columns (2) through (4) focusing on the benchmark
specification with only the target date fund variable, the idiv benchmark, trends and
cohort. In Panel A of Appendix Table 4, we add salary, account balances and house
values, while in Panel B of Appendix Table 4 we add the advice variables and their
interactions with cohort, salary, and account values. All regressions include firm fixed
effects, although the results below are robust to other specifications. In the first column,

	                                                                                        30	  
we repeat the benchmark full sample result, reported for convenience. Focusing first on
Table 10, we can see that the target date fund variable and the international
diversification benchmark remain statistically significant and of similar magnitude in all
the subsample specifications. The cohort effect is also very robust with the coefficients
only varying between 0.14 and 0.16, and its statistical significance survives clustering of
the standard errors by firm. On the contrary, the trend coefficients are less robust in terms
of magnitude and statistical significance. These results carry over to Panel A and B of
Appendix Table 4. There, the salary effect is stable, while the account balance effect
becomes more negative with the smaller samples, although it is not statistically
significant once the standard errors are clustered. The advice variable maintains its
statistical significance, while its interactions with the cohort, and account variables are of
similar sign and magnitudes as those in Table 6, with the interactions with salary being a
bit less robust. Finally, the effect of house value on international diversification remains
significant and positive and of the same magnitude as before.
We also investigate the bond allocation for our accounts. A high allocation to bonds may
indicate an asset location strategy and suggest a sizable taxable portfolio. The mean
allocation to bonds (conditional on equity market participation) is 18.64%, with the 90%
range going from 0% to 52%. As we explained before, our focus on idiv (foreign equity
over total equity) implies that high bond allocations may not necessarily be a problem.
However, to increase the representativeness of the sample, we also investigate a sample
excluding accounts with bond allocations of over 50%. This removes 1,142,168
observations from the sample. Again, Column (5) in Table 10 (and Panels A, B of
Appendix Table 4) shows that the results are quite robust.
By focusing on the relative equity allocation, we do not confuse stock market
participation biases with international under-diversification. Yet, it is also of interest to
investigate overall international allocations. Unfortunately, we do not observe the
allocation to international bonds, although we surmise it is relatively small. The last
column of Table 10 (specification (6)) reports results where we change the left hand side
variable to the proportion of overall assets that is invested internationally. This increases
the sample considerably, as portfolios with zero equity holdings are now included. Yet,
the main results remain largely intact. The cohort, target date fund, international
benchmark and the salary and account value coefficients become slightly larger, while
the effect of house values stays approximately the same and the effect of signing up for
online advice becomes smaller in absolute magnitude.
Finally, since we do not observe the actual holdings of our investors, it is possible that
some of them may invest internationally by holding US portfolios (stocks) that have more
exposure to international factors, e.g. multinationals, (Cai and Warnock, 2012). Both old
research by Jaquillat and Solnik (1978) and newer results by Rowland and Tesar (2004)
suggest that multinationals do not suffice to span the international diversification benefits


	                                                                                         31	  
from investing in local foreign companies. Since we do not have information on
multinational investments, and thus we cannot see directly whether investors use
multinational companies as a substitute for international investments, we exploit the fact
that our data set does split up the US equity portfolio in small and large companies.
Given that multinational companies tend to be large, we calculate the correlation between
the international equity allocation and the allocation to large US equities, and we actually
find it to be positive at 12.6%. It is therefore unlikely investors use large US companies
as substitutes for international diversification.




           VII.    Conclusions
We have examined the international equity allocations of 3.8 million individuals in 296
401(k) plans over the 2005-2011 period. A striking feature of the data is the enormous
cross-individual variation in these allocations, with non-negligible fractions of
individuals allocating 0% to international equities, but a minority also allocating more
than 75%. We examine various sources of variation in these allocations: pure temporal
trends, personal characteristics, such as salary and wealth, access to financial advice, zip
code effects and firm effects, including the quality and amount of the international funds
offered by the plans. We find a strong cohort effect, with younger cohorts investing more
internationally, but each cohort also investing more internationally over time. Access to
online advice and its recency are, all else equal, associated to sizably higher international
allocations. The fraction of international funds offered by the plan, and their relative fees
compared to the domestic funds in the plan and to the universe of similar international
funds have effects of similar size. In addition, we find a positive salary and a negative
account balance coefficient, but only the salary effect is economically meaningful. The
level of education measured at the zip code level has a strong positive effect on
international diversification, as does financial literacy. The fraction of foreign-born
population at the zip code level is also associated with higher international allocations. In
addition, individuals living in states with more exports, or working for companies that are
private, have foreign subsidiaries and are less profitable, have higher international
allocations.
The cohort effect coupled with more access to financial advice, education and better
international fund options might lead the home bias phenomenon to slowly disappear
over time. These results point to a potentially big role for public policy in correcting
individual investment mistakes and improving retirement outcomes.
A number of our results are also consistent with the familiarity hypothesis stressed in the
international finance literature, including the cohort effect, which may stem from
globalization making younger people more comfortable with international investing.


	                                                                                         32	  
However, there are clearly other forces at work as well and we only explain a small part
of the total cross-individual variation.
Because we only have data on the 401(k) allocations, which for many individuals may
not represent their full investment portfolio, it is conceivable that some people under-
invest in international equity in their 401(k) plan, but have international allocations
elsewhere. Taking taxes into account, asset location optimization would suggest skewing
the 401(k) portfolio towards bonds. We accommodate this critique partially by focusing
on the relative equity allocation. In addition, we have examined various subsamples that
minimize the incomplete portfolio problem, excluding people with very low tenure but
high age, and/or account balances and/or a salary, in order to focus on people for whom
the 401(k) account we observe is likely the biggest, if not the only, part of their financial
portfolio. We also investigate a sample excluding accounts with excessive bond
allocations, which may also suggest an asset location strategy. Our results remain robust
in all of these sub-samples.
So far, we have studied the international equity allocation conditional on equity market
participation. It may also be interesting to study the decision to participate in the
international equity market by itself, as international allocations are 0 in 17% of the
observations. This behavior is only partly correlated with general stock market non-
participation, and might be heavily correlated with other behavioral investment
biases/mistakes, such as excessive allocations to money market instruments and/or to
company stock. We defer analyzing this to future work.
Our results also have important implications for the international finance literature on
home bias. First, many of our results confirm the importance of familiarity and
information flow stories (Andrade and Chhaochharia, 2010; Van Nieuwerburgh and
Veldkamp, 2009), which must be researched in more detail. Second, the large cross-
individual variation linked to cohorts, education, financial literacy and access to financial
advice should lead to additional analysis of cross-country home bias focusing on
heterogeneity in investor population, which hitherto has not yet been fully examined.




References
Ahearne, A. G., W. L. Griever, and F. E. Warnock, 2004, “Information costs and home
bias: an analysis of U.S. holdings of foreign equities”, Journal of International
Economics, 62, 313-336.




	                                                                                         33	  
Ameriks, J., and S. Zeldes, 2004, “How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with
Age?”, Working Paper.
Andrade, S., and V. Chhaochharia, 2010, “Information immobility and foreign portfolio
investment,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 2429-2463.
Aviat, A., and N. Coeurdacier, 2007, “The geography of trade in goods and asset
holdings”, Journal of International Economics, 71, 22–51.
Baele, L., G. Bekaert,, K. Inghelbrecht, and M. Wei, 2013, “Flights to Safety”, Working
Paper.
Balduzzi, P., And J. Reuter, 2013, “Heterogeneity in Target-Date-Funds: Optimal Risk
Taking or Risk Matching?”, Working Paper.
Becker, S.O., and M. Hoffmann, 2010, “Equity fund ownership and the cross-regional
diversification of household risk,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 34 (1), 90-102.
Bekaert, G., S. Siegel, and X. Wang, 2013, “Home Bias Revisited,” Working Paper.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, C. Lundblad, and S. Siegel, 2011, “What Segments Equity
Markets?” Review of Financial Studies, 24 (12), 3847-3890.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, C. Lundblad, and S. Siegel, 2014, “Stock Market Valuation
across US States,” Working Paper.
Bohn, H., and L. Tesar, 1996, “U.S. Equity investment in foreign markets: portfolio
rebalancing or return chasing?,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
77-81.
Brennan, M. J. and H. H. Cao, 1997, “International portfolio investment flows”, Journal
of Finance, 52, 1851-1880.
Brown, J. R., J. M. Pollet, and S.J. Weisbenner, 2015, “The In-State Equity Bias of State
Pension Plans, “ Working Paper.
Cai, F. and F.E. Warnock, 2012, “Foreign exposure through domestic equities,” Finance
Research Letters, 8–20.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini, 2007, “Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Cost
of Household Investment Mistakes”, Journal of Political Economy, 115(5), 707-747.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini, 2009, “Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by
Individual Investors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 301-348.
Calvet, L., J. Campbell, and P. Sodini, 2009, “Measuring the Financial Sophistication of
Households”, American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 99(2), 393-398.
Campbell, J. Y., T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish, 2013, “Getting Better: Learning to Invest
in an Emerging Stock Market”, Working Paper.


	                                                                                      34	  
Cesarini, D., C. T. Dawes, M. Johannesson, P. Lichtenstein, and B. Wallace, 2009,
“Genetic variation in preferences for giving and risk taking,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124, 809-842.
Chan, K., V. Covrig, and L. Ng, 2005, “What determines the domestic bias and foreign
bias? Evidence from mutual fund equity allocations worldwide”, The Journal of Finance,
60, 1495-1534.
Cooper, J., and E. Kaplanis, 1994, “Home bias in Equity portfolios, inflation hedging and
international capital market equilibrium,” Review of Financial Studies, 7 (1), 45-60.
Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 1999, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preferences in
Domestic Portfolios”, The Journal of Finance, 54, 2045- 2073.
Coval, J., and T. Moskowitz, 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading
and Asset Prices”, Journal of Political Economy, 109, 811-841.
Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore, “Heterogeneity
and Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence,” in Handbook of Financial Econometrics.
Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, “Corporate
governance and home bias”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38, 87-110.

Duflo, E., W. Gale, J. Liebman, P. Orszag, and E. Saez, 2006, “Saving Incentives for
Low- and Middle-Income Families: Evidence from a Field Experiment with H&R
Block”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4), 1311-1346.
Elton, E., M. Gruber, and C. Blake, 2006, “The Adequacy of Investment Choices Offered
By 401(k) Plans”, Journal of Public Economics, 90 (6-7), 1299-1314.
Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher, and C. Thimann, 2007, “Home bias in global bond and equity
markets: The role of real exchange rate volatility”, Journal of International Money and
Finance, 26, 631-655.
French, K., and J. Poterba, 1991, “International diversification and international equity
markets,” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 81(2), 222-226.
Glassman, D., and L. Riddick, 2001, “What causes home asset bias and how should it be
measured?”, Journal of Empirical Finance, 8, 35-54.
Graham, J., C. Harvey, and H. Huang, 2009, “Investor Competence, Trading Frequency
and Home Bias”, Management Science, 55(7), 1094-1106.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, “How Distance, Language and Culture Influence
Stock Holdings and Trades”, The Journal of Finance, 56 (3), 1053-1073.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, “What Makes Investors Trade?”, The Journal of
Finance, 56 (2), 589-616.



	                                                                                          35	  
Huang, J., 2008, “Taxable and Tax Deferred Investing: An Arbitrage Approach,” Review
of Financial Studies, 21, 2173-2207.
Huberman, G., 2001, “Familiarity breeds investment”, Review of Financial Studies, 14,
659-680.
Jacquillat, B., and B Solnik, 1978, “Multinationals are poor tools for diversification,”
Journal of Portfolio Management, 4, 8-12.
Kang, JK, and R. Stulz, 1997, “Why is there a home bias? An analysis of foreign
portfolio equity ownership in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 46(1), 3-28.
Karlsson, A., and L. Norden, 2007, “Home sweet home: Home bias and international
diversification among individual investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 31, 2, 317-
333.
Kézdi, G., 2004, “Robust standard error estimation in fixed-effects panel models,”
Hungarian Statistical Review, Special English Volume #9, 95-116.
Kho, B., R. Stulz, and F. Warnock, 2009, “Financial Globalization, Governance and the
Evolution of the Home Bias,” Journal of Accounting Research, 47 (2), 597-635.
Korniotis , G., and A. Kumar, 2013, “Do Portfolio Distortions Reflect Superior
Information or Psychological Biases?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
48(1), 1-45.
Lewis, K, 1999, “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 37(2), 571-608.
Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2007, “Baby Boomer retirement security: The roles of
planning, financial literacy, and housing wealth”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1),
205-224.
Madrian, B., and D. Shea, 2001, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1149-
1187.
Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel, 2011, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomics
Experiences Affect Risk-Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 373-416.
Norden, Lars, 2010, “Individual Home Bias, Portfolio Churning and Performance”,
European Journal of Finance, 16(4), p. 329-351.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff, 2000, “"The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff,
editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000.
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 2005, “The determinant of cross-border equity flows”, Journal of
International Economics, 65, 269-296.


	                                                                                      36	  
Rowland, P., and L. Tesar, 2004, "Multinationals and the Gains from International
Diversification," Review of Economic Dynamics, 7, 789-826.
Sercu, P. and R. Vanpee, 2012, “The home bias puzzle in equity portfolios”, International
Finance: A Survey, 310-331.
Sharpe, W.F., 1992, “Asset allocation: Management style and performance
measurement”, Journal of Portfolio Management, 7-19.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp, 2009, “Information Immobility and the Home
Bias Puzzle”, Journal of Finance, 64 (3), 1187‐1215.
Van Wincoop, E., and F. Warnock, 2010, “Is Home Bias in Assets Related to Home Bias
in Goods?” Journal of International Money and Finance, 29, 1108-1123.




	                                                                                     37	  
                                                                                    Figure 1
                                                                 International Diversification across Individuals
    Panel A shows a histogram with the distribution of international equity allocations as a percent of total
equity allocations across individuals’ 401(k) portfolios. The figure in Panel B shows the distribution of this
ratio relative to an international diversification benchmark. The sample in both figures is restricted to stock
market participants (individuals with positive total equity allocations). All variables are defined in the
Appendix.

   Panel A – International Diversification
                                     40	  

                                     35	  

                                     30	  
          %	  of	  popula)on	  




                                     25	  

                                     20	  

                                     15	  

                                     10	  

                                       5	  

                                       0	  
                                                       0	                  (0,10]	           (10,25]	          (25,50]	          (50,75]	          >75	  
                                                                                         Intena)onal	  Equity/Total	  Equity	  
                                                                                                                                                                          	  

   Panel B – Over and Under International Diversification

                                     45	  
                                     40	  
                                     35	  
          %	  of	  popula)on	  




                                     30	  
                                     25	  
                                     20	  
                                     15	  
                                     10	  
                                       5	  
                                       0	  
                                               0	             (0,10]	       (10,25]	   (25,50]	   (50,90]	   (90,110]	   (110,125]	  (125,150]	   >150	  
                                                                            Interna)onal	  diversiﬁca)on	  rela)ve	  to	  benchmark	  
                                                                                                                                                                          	  

   	  

   	                                                                                                                                                                38	  
                                             Figure 2
                             International Diversification across States
Figure 2 shows maps with the distribution of international equity allocations as a percent of total equity
allocations across states at different points in time. State data averages ratios across individuals’ 401(k)
portfolios according to the zip code in which they reside.

Panel A - International Diversification across States in 2007




Panel B - International Diversification across States in 2010




	                                                                                                       39	  
                                              Figure 3
                              International Diversification across Firms
Panel A shows a histogram with the distribution of international equity allocations as a percent of total
equity allocations across firms. The figure in Panel B shows the distribution of this ratio relative to an
international diversification benchmark. The sample in both figures is restricted to stock market
participants (individuals with positive total equity allocations). Firm data averages ratios across employees’
401(k) portfolios. All variables are defined in the Appendix.

Panel A – International Diversification

       90%	  
       80%	  
       70%	  
       60%	  
       50%	  
       40%	  
       30%	  
       20%	  
       10%	  
        0%	  
                                 0	              (0,10]	            (10,25]	           (25,50]	            (50,75]	  
                                                                                                                               	  

Panel B – Over and Under International Diversification

       80%	  

       70%	  

       60%	  

       50%	  

       40%	  

       30%	  

       20%	  

       10%	  

        0%	  
                      0	     (0,10]	   (10,25]	   (25,50]	   (50,90]	   (90,110]	  (110,125]	  (125,150]	   >150	  
                                                                                                                               	  

	  



	                                                                                                                             40	  
                                                                                                                                      Figure 4
                                                                                                                       International Diversification over Time
Panel A shows the time fixed effects from an individual level regression of international diversification on
quarterly time dummy variables. Panel B plots the same time effects together with the international
diversification benchmark. Panel C shows the time fixed effects from an individual level regression of
relative international diversification (the ratio of international diversification to the benchmark) on
quarterly time dummy variables. The sample in all figures is restricted to stock market participants
(individuals with positive total equity allocations). All variables are defined in the Appendix.

Panel A: Trends in International Diversification

                                           22	  

                                           20	  
          Time	  dummy	  coeﬃcient	  




                                           18	  

                                           16	  

                                           14	  

                                           12	  

                                           10	  
                                                             2006Q2	  
                                                                          2006Q3	  
                                                                                       2006Q4	  
                                                                                                    2007Q1	  
                                                                                                                 2007Q2	  
                                                                                                                              2007Q3	  
                                                                                                                                              2007Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                             2008Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                            2008Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                           2008Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2008Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2009Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2011Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2011Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2011Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  

Panel B: International Diversification versus Benchmark

       67	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24	  
       66	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       22	  
       65	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20	  
       64	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18	  
       63	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16	  
       62	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14	  
       61	  
       60	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12	  

       59	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10	  
                                                                                  2007q1	  




                                                                                                                                           2008q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                        2009q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2010q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2011q1	  
                                           2006q2	  
                                                        2006q3	  
                                                                     2006q4	  


                                                                                                2007q2	  
                                                                                                             2007q3	  
                                                                                                                          2007q4	  


                                                                                                                                                           2008q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                          2008q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                         2008q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2011q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2011q4	  




                                                                                                                 Benchmark	                                                                   Interna>onal	  Diversiﬁca>on	  (RHS)	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      41	  
Panel C: Trends in Relative International Diversification	  

                                                  34	  

                                                  32	  
       Time	  dummy	  coeﬃcient	  



                                                  30	  

                                                  28	  

                                                  26	  

                                                  24	  

                                                  22	  

                                                  20	  

                                                  18	  
                                                            2006Q2	  
                                                                         2006Q3	  
                                                                                      2006Q4	  
                                                                                                   2007Q1	  
                                                                                                                2007Q2	  
                                                                                                                              2007Q3	  
                                                                                                                                           2007Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                        2008Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                     2008Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                  2008Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                               2008Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2010Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2010Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2010Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011Q1	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011Q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2011Q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2011Q4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  

                                                                                                                                 Figure 5
                                                                                                                 Cohorts and International Diversification
The graph shows international diversification allocations over time by cohort group (people born before
1950, between 1950 and 1959, between 1960 and 1969, between 1970 and 1979 and 1980 or later). The
sample is restricted to stock market participants (individuals with positive total equity allocations).


                                                  30	  
       Interna)onal	  Diversiﬁca)on	  (%)	  




                                                  25	  

                                                  20	  

                                                  15	  

                                                  10	  

                                                    5	  
                                                                                                   2007q1	  




                                                                                                                                                        2008q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010q1	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011q1	  
                                                            2006q2	  
                                                                         2006q3	  
                                                                                      2006q4	  


                                                                                                                2007q2	  
                                                                                                                              2007q3	  
                                                                                                                                           2007q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                     2008q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                  2008q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                               2008q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2010q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2010q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2010q4	  


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011q2	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2011q3	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2011q4	  




                                                                          <1950	                                            1950-­‐1959	                                                1960-­‐1969	                                                  1970-­‐1979	                                                 >1980	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  

	  

	  



	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42	  
                                                                     Figure 6
                                                     Malmendier and Nagel Experienced Returns
Following Malmendier and Nagel (2011), the experienced returns variable is the weighted average of past
returns with weights that depend on an individual's age at time t, how many years ago the return was
realized and a parameter lambda that controls for the shape of the weighting function. This paper defines
past returns using international stock returns in excess of US stock returns. The figure below shows
experienced returns for λ= 3.999.

                             8%
       Experienced Returns with lambda =




                             6%


                             4%
                     3.999




                             2%


                             0%


                        -2%
                                           16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76 81 86 91 96 101 106
                                                                      Age
                                               2005    2006    2007   2008    2009    2010    2011
                                                                                                             	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	                                                         	  




	                                                                                                      43	  
                                                    Table 1
                                  International Under-Diversification in the US
This table reports statistics for the degree of international diversification, i.e. the international equity
allocations as a percent of total stock allocations in individuals’ 401(k) portfolios. Firms (states) are ranked
according to the average international diversification: diversified firms (state) represent the 5 firms (1 state)
with the highest average diversification and under-diversified firms represent the bottom 5 firms (1 state).
This subsample is then split into older people (born in 1960 or earlier) and younger people (born 1980 or
later). Finally, within each cohort, individuals are split in three groups (low salary, intermediate salary and
high salary). The reported numbers are the average international diversification for each subset.

                           Diversified    Under-diversified                        Diversified     Under-
                           Firms          Firms                                    State           diversified State
Cohort 1960                                                    Cohort 1960
Low salary                    33.1                 3.70        Low salary               22.2               13.3
Intermediate                                                   Intermediate
                              30.7                 4.86                                 19.7               11.2
salary                                                         salary
High salary                   33.7                 6.76        High salary              19.1               13.6
Cohort 1980                                                    Cohort 1980
Low salary                    39.0                 10.2        Low salary               31.2               21.0
Intermediate                                                   Intermediate
                              36.3                 11.8                                 27.7               19.1
salary                                                         salary
High salary                   37.4                 13.7        High salary              25.8               19.3
                                                    Table 2
                                Summary Statistics for Stock Market Participants
This table reports the mean, median, std dev, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of observations for the
individual level data. The sample includes individuals with a positive equity allocation in their 401(k)
portfolio. All variables are defined in the Appendix. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

       Variable                          Mean        Median    Std Dev   p5         p95          # Obs
       International Div                 17.736      17.073    15.959    0.000      44.681       17,082,302
       % in Target Date Fund             16.077      0.000     33.774    0.000      100.000      17,082,302
       International Div Benchmk         64.368      64.856    1.462     61.365     66.055       17,082,302
       Cohort                            (19)63      (19)63    11.683    (19)40     (19)83       17,082,302
       Age                               45.480      46.000    11.667    27.000     64.000       17,082,302
       Annual Salary                     58,017      47,625    47,772    15,150     127,440      13,105,091
       Total Account Value               63,972      23,434    113,906   367        258,464      17,054,517
       House Value                       244,143     188,133   188,858   74,0780    592,909      13,984,030
       MN Experienced Returns            0.96        0.819     0.837     0.074      2.756        17,082,302
       MN Return Chasing                 8.692       8.748     1.267     6.410      10.306       17,082,302
       Relative Returns                  0.001       0.000     0.061     -0.092     0.117        17,082,302
       Flight to Safety Dummy            0.062       0.000     0.119     0.000      0.409        17,082,302
       Tenure                            12.82       10.21     10.35     1.13       32.98         9,170,900
       Advice Dummy                      0.088       0         0.284     0          1            17,082,302
       Not Stale Advice Dummy            0.032       0         0.176     0          0            17,082,302


	                                                                                                            44	  
                                                                            Table 3
                                                                    On Time, Cohorts and Age
Panel A – Trends, Cohorts and Age Effects
Panel A reports the results for individual level regressions of international diversification on a quadratic time trend, birth year cohort and age, all controlling for
the percent invested in a target date fund and the international diversification benchmark. Columns (2), (5) and (8) control for firm fixed effects, while columns
(3), (6) and (9) control for zip code fixed effects. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and
underlined t-statistics, while significance at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                                (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)            (9)
       Variables               Idiv          Idiv            Idiv            Idiv            Idiv            Idiv            Idiv            Idiv           Idiv

       % Target Date Fund   0.0796***     0.0697***       0.0783***       0.0684***       0.0590***      0.0682***       0.0682***       0.0588***       0.0680***
                              [695.7]       [576.5]         [673.5]         [591.6]         [483.0]        [581.7]         [589.5]         [481.8]         [579.8]

       Int’l divers. bmk     0.196***      0.214***        0.193***       0.210***        0.214***        0.205***        0.208***        0.211***        0.203***
                              [59.01]       [65.69]         [58.79]        [63.61]         [66.02]         [62.98]         [63.18]         [65.11]         [62.48]

       Trend                0.0254***     0.0276***      -0.0442***       0.0573***       0.0395***      -0.0158***       0.102***       0.0808***       0.0268***
                              [6.031]       [6.439]        [-10.55]         [13.72]         [9.287]        [-3.787]        [24.33]         [18.96]         [6.428]

       Trend2               0.00768***   0.00435***      0.00943***      0.00557***      0.00331***      0.00751***      0.00552***     0.00329***      0.00746***
                              [54.19]      [30.01]         [66.90]         [39.61]         [22.95]         [53.58]         [39.27]        [22.83]         [53.29]
       Cohort                                                             0.167***        0.158***        0.161***
                                                                           [508.0]         [481.0]         [479.1]
       Age                                                                                                               -0.170***       -0.159***       -0.163***
                                                                                                                          [-516.8]        [-486.5]        [-487.5]
       Constant              1.532***      1.302***        2.368***       -9.752***       -8.450***       -8.427***       8.040***        8.402***        8.693***
                              [7.675]       [6.640]         [12.03]        [-48.92]        [-43.15]        [-42.81]        [40.52]         [43.02]         [44.36]
       Observations         17,082,302    17,082,302      17,063,721     17,082,302      17,082,302      17,063,721      17,082,302      17,082,302      17,063,721
       Adjusted R-squared      0.039         0.120           0.073          0.053           0.131           0.086           0.054           0.132           0.086
       Firm Fixed Effects        N             Y               N              N               Y               N               N               Y               N
       Zip Code F.E.             N             N               Y              N               N               Y               N               N               Y



	                                                                                                                                                                   45	  
Panel B – Quadratic Function Specifications
Panel B reports the results for individual level regressions of international diversification on a quadratic time trend,
quadratic birth year cohort and quadratic age, controlling for the percent invested in a target date fund and the
international diversification benchmark. Columns (2) and (5) control for firm fixed effects, while columns (3) and
(6) control for zip code fixed effects. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The
superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors
clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while
significance at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                               (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Variables                     idiv             Idiv          idiv           idiv           idiv           idiv

% Target Date Fund        0.0690***         0.0592***     0.0687***      0.0689***      0.0593***      0.0686***
                            [594.6]           [482.5]       [583.5]        [594.5]        [484.0]        [583.8]

Int’l divers. bmk          0.211***          0.214***     0.206***       0.210***       0.211***       0.205***
                            [64.02]           [66.09]      [63.33]        [63.69]        [65.16]        [62.92]

Trend                     0.0525***         0.0380***    -0.0196***      0.0974***      0.0783***      0.0228***
                            [12.57]           [8.929]      [-4.701]        [23.31]        [18.39]        [5.467]

Trend2                    0.00578***        0.00336***   0.00767***     0.00571***     0.00337***     0.00763***
                            [41.06]           [23.33]      [54.71]        [40.58]        [23.43]        [54.49]

Cohort                     0.346***          0.212***     0.298***
                            [113.9]           [71.55]      [97.80]

Cohort2                  -0.00142*** -0.000428*** -0.00109***
                           [-59.26]     [-18.40]    [-45.37]

Age                                                                      0.0119***     -0.0650***      -0.00387*
                                                                           [5.666]       [-31.82]       [-1.840]

Age2                                                                    -0.00196*** -0.00102*** -0.00172***
                                                                          [-87.67]    [-46.64]    [-76.64]

Constant                   -15.29***        -10.11***     -12.68***      4.011***       6.360***       5.160***
                            [-69.46]         [-46.89]      [-58.15]       [19.69]        [31.78]        [25.64]

Observations              17,082,302        17,082,302   17,063,721     17,082,302     17,082,302     17,063,721
Adjusted R-squared           0.053             0.131        0.086          0.054          0.132          0.086
Firm Fixed Effects             N                 Y            N              N              Y              N
Zip Code Fixed Effects         N                 N            Y              N              N              Y
	  

	                                   	  




	                                                                                                                   46	  
                                                                                Table 4
                                                                The Effect of Return Sensitive Variables
This table reports the regressions in columns (4)-(6) of Table 3 Panel A adding return sensitive variables (experienced returns, intnl stock returns relative to U.S. returns, and a
flight to safety dummy). The specifications in Columns (1) and (2) were run using non-linear least squares, where lambda measuring how the effect of past returns decay with time.
All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard
errors clustered at the firm level significant at the 1% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while significance at the 5 and 10% level is denoted by underlined t-
statistics. The standard errors clustered at the firm level for columns (1) and (2) were calculated using OLS with the optimal λ. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.
                                         (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)                (8)
Variables                               Idiv              Idiv               Idiv                Idiv               Idiv              Idiv               Idiv               Idiv
% Target Date Fund                 0.0688***          0.0686***          0.0687***          0.0608***          0.0690***          0.0683***          0.0591***          0.0681***
                                    [594.61]           [591.51]            [532.1]             [444.4]            [526.6]           [590.0]            [483.2]            [579.7]
Int’l divers. bmk                   0.253***           0.201***           0.156***           0.294***           0.182***           0.151***           0.252***           0.138***
                                      [75.68]           [60.45]            [35.90]             [67.61]            [42.24]           [36.01]            [60.21]            [33.18]
Trend                               0.155***           0.080***          0.0616***         -0.0881***         -0.0592***           0.114***            0.00110          0.0501***
                                      [35.53]           [18.41]            [11.20]            [-15.54]           [-10.80]           [23.39]            [0.219]            [10.28]
Trend2                              0.001***           0.005***         0.00551***         0.00642***         0.00854***         0.00379***         0.00452***         0.00545***
                                       [7.86]           [35.46]            [30.65]             [34.58]            [47.66]           [23.43]            [27.01]            [33.83]
Cohort                              0.194***           0.167***           0.168***           0.156***           0.161***           0.167***           0.158***           0.161***
                                    [411.33]           [504.69]            [452.9]             [421.8]            [424.9]           [508.2]            [480.9]            [479.3]
MN Experienced Ret                 -0.554***
                                     [-79.34]
Return Chasing                                         0.098***
                                                        [19.32]
Relative returns                                                         -0.243***          -1.260***          -0.441***
                                                                          [-2.949]           [-15.57]           [-5.448]
Flight to Safety                                                                                                                  -0.930***          0.607***          -1.071***
                                                                                                                                   [-22.44]           [14.25]           [-26.00]
λ                                    3.99***            1.00***
                                       [104]             [52.29]
Constant                           -14.046***         -10.332***         -6.581***          -12.49***         -6.701***          -6.342***          -10.63***          -4.513***
                                     [-68.01]           [-51.25]          [-24.73]           [-47.09]          [-25.45]           [-25.31]           [-42.76]           [-18.21]
Observations                       17,426,447         17,426,477         13,761,372         13,761,372        13,747,036         17,082,302         17,082,302         17,063,721
Adjusted R-squared                     0.054              0.054             0.050              0.128             0.086              0.053              0.131              0.086
Firm Fixed Effects                       N                  N                 N                  Y                 N                  N                  Y                  N
Zip Code Fixed Effects                   N                  N                 N                  N                 Y                  N                  N                  Y


	                                                                                                                                                                                 47	  
                                             Table 5
                          Income, Wealth and International Diversification
This table reports the results for individual level regressions of international diversification on a quadratic time
trend, birth year cohort and wealth variables (annual salary, 401(k) account value and the house value
corresponding to the individual’s zip code), all controlling for the percent invested in a target date fund and the
international diversification benchmark. House values are either from Zillow (columns (1) and (2), or from the
Census (Columns (4) and (5)). All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The
superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors
clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while
significance at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                                   (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
Variables                         Idiv             Idiv          Idiv           Idiv          Idiv
% Target Date Fund            0.0642***        0.0543***     0.0653***      0.0694***     0.0571***
                                [429.4]          [341.2]       [489.9]        [522.1]       [404.7]
Int’l div bmk                  0.378***        0.317***       0.329***      0.335***       0.300***
                                [89.08]         [75.54]        [88.80]       [88.79]        [80.58]
Trend                         -0.048***        0.059***      -0.119***      -0.088***       0.00590
                               [-9.109]         [10.85]       [-25.59]       [-18.67]       [1.224]
Trend2                        0.00792***      0.00242*** 0.0100*** 0.00945*** 0.00413***
                                [44.71]         [13.27]    [63.96]   [59.69]    [25.38]
Cohort                         0.147***        0.148***       0.140***      0.149***       0.147***
                                [314.5]         [321.3]        [331.4]       [355.3]        [353.9]
ln(Annual Salary)              0.138***        0.185***       0.169***      0.0724***      0.185***
                                [14.99]         [20.61]        [20.63]        [8.747]       [22.98]
ln(Annual Salary)2             0.191***        0.186***       0.154***      0.189***       0.183***
                                [129.9]         [128.1]        [114.4]       [140.8]        [139.0]
ln(Account Value)              0.117***        0.0551***     0.0930***      0.108***      0.0206***
                                [28.03]          [13.46]       [25.09]       [28.94]        [5.641]
ln(Account Value)2            -0.0511***      -0.0331***     -0.047***     -0.0438*** -0.0277***
                                [-64.50]        [-42.71]      [-66.43]       [-61.54]   [-39.87]
ln(House Value Zillow)         0.697***        0.653***
                                [88.87]         [74.76]
ln(House Value Census)                                                       0.975***       0.838***
                                                                               [132.9]        [99.81]
Constant                      -29.42***        -25.33***     -16.55***      -30.04***      -26.10***
                               [-107.9]         [-92.48]      [-73.73]        [-123.3]       [-106.1]
Observations                  10,621,481      10,621,481 13,068,893 12,883,608            12,883,608
Adjusted R-squared               0.047           0.120      0.086      0.053                 0.131
Firm Fixed Effects                 N               Y          N          N                     Y
Zip Code Fixed Effects             N               N          Y          N                     N




	                                                                                                               48	  
                                        Table 6
                  International Diversification and Financial Advice
Panel A – Summary Statistics
This table reports the mean, median, std dev, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of observations for the
individual level data divided by whether the individuals have signed the investor service agreement for
online advice. The sample includes individuals with a positive equity allocation in their 401(k) portfolio.
All variables are defined in the Appendix. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                                       Mean      Median       Std Dev     p5          p95          # Obs
       Advice Dummy=0
       International Diversification   17.335    16.667       15.784      0           43.750       15,571,691
       % Target Date Fund              16.834    0            34.586      0           100          15,571,691
       Cohort                          63.668    63           11.745      40          83           15,571,691
       Age                             45.471    46           11.735      26          64           15,571,691
       Annual Salary                   56,420    46,116       47,388      14,269      124,820      11,792,124
       Total Account Value             58,735    21,184       107,211     327         238,235      15,548,551
       House Value (Zillow)            243,629   186,651      189,469     73,341      594,190      12,697,864
       House Value (Census)            239,545   186,923      164,297     77,809      581,671      15,332,097
       Advice Dummy=1
       International Diversification   21.011    20.000       16.363      0           48.649       1,293,508
       % Target Date Fund              7.739     0            21.516      0           61           1,293,508
       Cohort                          63.187    63           10.902      46          81           1,293,508
       Age                             45.855    46           10.842      28          63           1,293,508
       Annual Salary                   73,095    64,766       49,153      27,371      142,572      1,110,295
       Total Account Value             124,977   71,811       161,535     2,826       422,695      1,288,957
       House Value (Zillow)            242,834   199,792      170,824     83,094      550,808      1,095,710
       House Value (Census)            247,129   207,414      153,304     87,339      558,531      1,274,765
       Total
       International Diversification   17.617    16.981       15.859      0           44.262       16,865,199
       % Target Date Fund              16.137    0            33.850      0           100          16,865,199
       Cohort                          63.631    63           11.683      40          83           16,865,199
       Age                             45.500    46           11.669      27          64           16,865,199
       Annual Salary                   57,855    47,498       47,772      15,014      127,094      12,902,419
       Total Account Value             63,806    23,386       113,675     365         257,616      16,837,508
       House Value (Zillow)            243,566   187,780      188,056     73,956      591,247      13,793,574
       House Value (Census)            240,127   188,785      163,492     78,300      580,011      16,606,862
	  




	                                                                                                      49	  
     Panel B – Financial Advice, Its Recency, and Interactions with Individual Characteristics
     This panel replicates the regressions in Panel A of Table 5, controlling for whether the individual has signed up
     for online financial advice from FE and how recent she has logged onto the online advice website. All variables
     are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
     ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level
     are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while significance at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-
     statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                                          (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)              (6)
Variables                                Idiv            Idiv            Idiv             Idiv          Idiv             Idiv
% in Target Date Fund                0.0557***       0.0557***      0.0668***        0.0669***      0.0554***       0.0667***
                                       [350.7]         [350.8]         [502.4]          [503.0]       [348.5]          [500.9]
Intl Div. Benchmark                   0.321***        0.319***       0.316***         0.313***       0.322***        0.316***
                                       [76.72]         [76.29]         [85.55]          [84.94]       [76.82]          [85.78]
Trend                                0.0213***       0.0357***      -0.126***        -0.116***      0.0200***       -0.127***
                                       [3.936]         [6.600]        [-27.06]         [-25.00]       [3.694]         [-27.44]
Trend2                              0.00345***      0.00313***      0.0101***       0.00980***     0.00349***       0.0102***
                                       [18.95]         [17.17]         [64.95]          [62.80]       [19.15]          [65.24]
Cohort                                0.142***        0.142***       0.134***         0.135***       0.146***        0.140***
                                       [308.6]         [308.7]         [318.0]          [319.1]       [303.9]          [317.9]
Advice Dummy                          4.273***        3.058***       4.376***         2.690***       7.396***        9.501***
                                       [262.1]         [134.9]         [303.4]          [133.0]       [46.00]          [62.30]
Non-Stale Advice Dummy                                2.246***                        3.152***
                                                       [77.16]                          [118.9]
Advice Dummy*Cohort                                                                                -0.0450***      -0.0675***
                                                                                                      [-28.73]        [-45.98]
ln(Annual Salary)                     0.143***       0.143***        0.123***        0.120***        0.150***        0.127***
                                       [15.96]        [16.00]         [15.05]         [14.64]          [16.52]         [15.27]
ln(Annual Salary)2                    0.182***       0.181***        0.148***        0.147***        0.185***        0.147***
                                       [125.7]        [125.0]         [110.1]         [109.8]          [124.3]         [107.3]
Adv. Dmy*ln(Annual Salary)                                                                            -0.0793        -0.120**
                                                                                                      [-1.632]        [-2.512]
Adv. Dmy*ln(Annual Salary)2                                                                        -0.0285***         0.0125*
                                                                                                      [-4.322]         [1.934]
ln(Account Value)                     0.0246***      0.0229***       0.0703***       0.0758***      0.0135***       0.0679***
                                        [6.037]        [5.618]         [19.05]         [20.54]         [3.220]         [17.92]
ln(Account Value)2                   -0.0465***     -0.0451***      -0.0622***      -0.0607***     -0.0468***      -0.0586***
                                       [-60.17]       [-58.35]        [-88.09]        [-85.90]        [-57.76]        [-79.33]
Adv. Dmy*ln(Account Value)                                                                           0.323***        0.115***
                                                                                                       [17.38]         [6.721]
Adv. Dmy*ln(Account Value)2                                                                        -0.0356***      -0.0557***
                                                                                                      [-11.74]        [-19.79]
ln(House Value Zillow)                0.700***        0.699***                                       0.700***
                                        [80.30]         [80.24]                                        [80.38]
Constant                             -25.43***       -25.43***       -15.19***      -15.13***       -25.76***       -15.64***
                                       [-93.15]        [-93.18]       [-67.90]       [-67.66]         [-94.24]       [-69.83]

Observations                         10,621,481     10,621,481      13,068,893      13,068,893      10,621,481     13,068,893
Adjusted R-squared                      0.126          0.126           0.093           0.094           0.126          0.093
Firm Fixed Effects                        Y              Y               N               N               Y              N
Zip Code Fixed Effects                    N              N               Y               Y               N              Y




     	                                                                                                               50	  
                                                                             Table 7
                                                           The Geography of International Diversification
Panel A - Summary statistics
Panel A presents the mean, median, standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of observations for the zip code level data. All variables are defined in the Appendix.

Variables                                                                  Mean             Median             Std Dev                p5               p95              # Obs
Bachelor's Degree or Higher                                                  21.8              17.4               16.0                3.1              55.4             32,746
Less than College Degree                                                     63.4              65.6               14.2               36.7              81.9             32,746
College Degree                                                               14.0              11.9                9.8                0.0              32.5             32,746
Advanced Degree                                                               7.8               5.4                8.4                0.0              24.0             32,746
Financial Literacy                                                            2.9               2.9                0.1                2.7               3.1             42,107
Foreign Born Population                                                       5.8               2.2                9.2                0.0              26.0             32,751
Foreign Born Population - Latin America                                     2.936             0.421              6.622                0.0            15.376             32,751
Foreign Born Population - Europe                                            0.955             0.295              2.077                0.0             3.990             32,751
Foreign Born Population - Asia                                              1.462             0.182              3.830                0.0             6.896             32,751
Distance to International Cities                                           13,070            12,801               790              12,272            14,565             41,631
Distance to Tokyo                                                           6,323             6,515               624               5,121             6,987             41,631
Distance to London                                                          4,210             4,143               596               3,350             5,322             41,631
Distance to Mexico City                                                     1,647             1,655               451                924              2,273             41,631
Distance to Toronto                                                          890               705                647                223              2,165             41,631
Rural                                                                         2.0               1.0                1.2                1.0               4.0             41,982
Long Distance Minutes                                                         47                46                  7                 42                57              42,107
State Exports/GDP                                                             7.2               6.6                3.2                3.0              14.4             42,107
State Openness                                                               20.4              17.8                9.2                8.7              38.6             42,107
GDP per capita                                                             41,861            40,451             10,525             31,715            51,714             42,107
GDP Growth 2000-2005                                                         11.4              11.3                5.4                3.5              24.0             42,107
GDP Growth 2006-2011                                                          2.9               2.6                6.2               -7.1              13.7             42,107
House Value – Zillow                                                      203,117           156,350            166,527             62,953           490,047             12,446
House Value – Census                                                      172,967           125,900            145,372             52,100           454,800             31,921




	                                                                                                                                                                                   51	  
Panel B - International Diversification Results
The regressions in this table examine the zip code fixed effects extracted from an individual level regression of international diversification on the percent
invested in a target date fund, the international diversification benchmark, a quadratic time trend, birth year cohort, quadratic annual salary, quadratic account
value advice variable and their interactions with salary and account values. Columns (2) and (4) include house values from the Zillow sample; Column (5)
replicates Column (4) including house values from the 2010 Census, Columns (1), (3) and (6) do not include house values and are based on all the zip codes in
our sample. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level
and * at the 10% level.

                                                   (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
       Variables                              Zip Code FE      Zip Code FE     Zip Code FE    Zip Code FE      Zip Code FE      Zip Code FE
       Bachelor's or Higher                    0.0471***        0.0473***
                                                 [15.57]          [15.96]
       High School Degree                                                       0.0318***      0.0349***        0.0345***        0.0405***
                                                                                  [5.417]        [5.089]          [5.432]          [5.866]
       Bachelor's Degree                                                        0.0634***      0.0640***        0.0639***        0.0702***
                                                                                  [8.901]        [8.317]          [7.627]          [9.106]
       Advanced Degree                                                          0.0633***      0.0791***        0.0772***        0.0892***
                                                                                  [7.199]        [8.247]          [7.424]          [9.205]
       Financial Literacy                        4.051***        2.357***        2.644***       4.387***         2.439***         4.202***
                                                  [11.22]         [6.983]         [5.298]        [9.882]          [4.872]          [9.044]
       Foreign Born Population                  0.0290***       0.0239***
                                                  [5.489]         [6.869]
       Foreign Born - LatAm                                                     0.0339***      0.0462***        0.0414***        0.0463***
                                                                                  [4.415]        [7.575]          [5.144]          [7.562]
       Foreign Born - Europe                                                    0.0985***      0.0966***        0.0893***        0.0952***
                                                                                  [3.765]        [5.116]          [3.231]          [5.020]
       Foreign Born - Asia                                                      0.0465***       0.0186**         0.0259*          0.0133*
                                                                                  [3.613]        [2.379]          [1.945]          [1.691]
       Distance to Intl Cities (,000 miles)      -0.124*        0.000104
                                                 [-1.845]       [0.00198]
       Distance to Tokio (,000 miles)                                           -0.622***       0.833***        -0.695***         0.686***
                                                                                 [-3.103]        [5.503]          [-3.418]         [4.517]
       Distance to London (,000 miles)                                           -0.837*        2.605***         -0.974**         1.169***


	                                                                                                                                                             52	  
                                                                         [-1.911]      [7.312]      [-2.200]        [3.527]
       Distance to Mexico (,000 miles)                                  -0.591**     1.369***      -0.665**       0.543***
                                                                         [-2.170]      [6.343]      [-2.355]        [2.691]
       Distance to Toronto (,000 miles)                                     0.289   -1.851***          0.393       -0.484*
                                                                          [0.817]     [-6.183]       [1.100]       [-1.767]
       Urban                               -0.374***         -0.234    -0.394***      -0.327*     -0.430***          -0.211
                                             [-3.116]      [-1.290]      [-3.247]     [-1.796]      [-3.473]       [-1.158]
       Large Rural                          -0.336**         -0.237     -0.344**        -0.309     -0.342**          -0.278
                                             [-2.286]      [-1.122]      [-2.332]     [-1.462]      [-2.326]       [-1.313]
       Small Rural                             -0.136     -0.497**         -0.107    -0.522**         -0.120      -0.481**
                                             [-0.861]      [-2.058]      [-0.676]     [-2.166]      [-0.764]       [-1.989]
       Long Distance Minutes              -0.0495***     0.0372***    -0.0358***    0.0350***    -0.0370***      0.0243***
                                             [-4.418]       [4.896]      [-2.760]      [4.068]      [-2.860]        [2.829]
       State Exports/GDP                   0.0947***      0.143***     0.0892***     0.190***     0.0883***
                                              [7.130]       [12.78]       [6.239]      [14.61]       [6.185]
       State Openness                                                                                            0.0531***
                                                                                                                   [10.42]
                                                           -4.50e-       -3.12e-      -4.16e-
       GDP per Capita                     -3.15e-05***      05***         05***        05***     -3.57e-05***   -4.30e-05***
                                             [-5.422]     [-9.973]      [-5.363]     [-9.174]       [-6.130]       [-9.355]
       GDP Growth 2000-2005                 5.179***     2.319***      5.052***     2.630***       5.111***          1.122
                                              [6.065]      [2.849]       [5.783]      [2.953]        [5.865]        [1.272]
       GDP Growth 2006-2011                    0.830     2.804***         0.420     3.534***          0.304       4.105***
                                              [1.613]      [7.609]       [0.787]      [8.745]        [0.571]        [9.869]
       ln(House Value Zillow)                              0.174*                      0.140                       -0.0924
                                                           [1.918]                    [1.396]                      [-0.924]
       ln(House Value Census)                                                                      -0.0260
                                                                                                   [-0.220]
       Constant                            -24.97***     -27.67***    -17.40***     -53.24***     -15.45***      -42.26***
                                            [-18.51]      [-21.99]     [-4.675]      [-15.94]      [-4.035]       [-13.30]

       Observations                         28,525        12,297        28,525       12,297        28,136         12,297
       Adjusted R-squared                    0.020         0.085         0.022        0.092         0.022          0.084


	                                                                                                                             53	  
                                                              Table 8
                                              The Firm and International Diversification
Panel A - Summary statistics on firm characteristics
Panel A presents the mean, median, standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of observations for the firm level data. For the private, foreign
headquarter, foreign subsidiary dummies and the % of foreign subsidiaries variable, we substitute the median with the average of the 49th-51st percentiles, the 5th
percentile with the average of the 4th- 6th percentiles, and the 95th percentile with the average of the 94th-96th percentiles. All variables are defined in the
Appendix.

Variables                                                             Mean            Median             Std Dev              p5               p95          # Obs
Private Dummy                                                         0.62             1.00                0.48             0.00              1.00           290
Foreign Headquarter Dummy                                             0.16             0.00                0.37             0.00              1.00           290
Foreign Subsidiary Dummy                                              0.56             1.00                0.50             0.00              1.00           289
Foreign Subsidiaries (%)                                              28.6             10.5                33.5              0.0              87.3           289
Industry Openness                                                     24.0              0.0                35.9              0.0               118           264
Firm Age                                                                69               65                 45                9                147           268
# Employees                                                          18,623            4,650             48,093              220             70,000          265
Assets (USD mn)                                                      38,693            3,674             200,300              48             79,980          156
Leverage (%)                                                          30.6             27.9                20.6              4.9              65.3           126
Sales/Assets (%)                                                       106             78.3                120              8.05               293           152
Profitability (%)                                                     2.84             2.74                9.67            -14.30             14.7           156
Investment Intensity (%)                                              4.18             3.53                3.28             0.12              10.6           125
Fraction of Intnl Eq Funds                                           21.47%           20.00%              7.57%            10.53%            33.33%          297
Expense Ratio of Intnl/Domestic                                       1.294            1.121              1.063             0.489             2.394          296
Turnover of Intnl/Domestic Eq Funds                                   0.896            0.734              0.611             0.158             2.016          294
Alpha of Intnl- Alpha of Domestic Eq Funds                           -0.004           -0.004              0.009            -0.019             0.012          296
Fund Age of Intnl/Domestic Eq Funds                                   0.932            0.854              0.584             0.315             1.900          291
Peer Exp Ratio IntnlEq Funds                                          89.97            95.50              11.91             62.50              100           296
Total Plan Assets (USD mn)                                           456.93           332.79             720.04             40.35             1,081          296
	  




	                                                                                                                                                              54	  
Panel B - Firm characteristics and diversification
The regressions in this table examine the firm fixed effects extracted from an individual level regression of international diversification on the percent invested in
a target dated fund, the international diversification benchmark, a quadratic time trend, birth year cohort, advice dummy, and quadratic annual salary, quadratic
account value, interacted with the advice dummy, and the house value corresponding to the individual’s zip code. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-
statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.



                                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)              (6)             (7)
       Variables                           Firm FE        Firm FE        Firm FE         Firm FE         Firm FE        Firm FE         Firm FE
       Private                             3.922***         3.911*        5.347**          3.918*                         3.894*            3.723
                                             [6.017]        [1.808]        [2.239]         [1.797]                        [1.818]         [1.657]
       Public Parent                       -2.239**           0.112         -2.395           0.126                         -0.765          -0.481
                                            [-2.326]      [0.0315]        [-0.637]       [0.0349]                        [-0.215]        [-0.130]
       Foreign Headquarters Dummy             1.341           3.981         -4.683           3.966                          4.636           2.038
                                             [1.332]        [1.059]       [-0.859]         [1.046]                        [1.232]         [0.500]
       Foreign Subsidiaries Dummy                          3.591**        3.936**         3.571**                         2.864*          3.182*
                                                            [2.241]        [2.194]         [2.142]                        [1.728]         [1.898]
       ln(Firm Age)                                           0.538          0.673           0.542           0.322          0.833           0.715
                                                            [0.900]        [1.016]         [0.891]         [0.544]        [1.366]         [1.113]
       ln(# Employees)                                        0.620          0.899           0.618           0.230          0.462           0.779
                                                            [0.985]        [0.975]         [0.976]         [0.406]        [0.736]         [1.100]
       ln(Assets)                                            -0.397         -0.580          -0.390          -0.134         -0.410          -0.460
                                                           [-0.678]       [-0.694]        [-0.645]        [-0.255]       [-0.690]        [-0.735]
       Leverage                                           -0.00476       -0.00507        -0.00452         0.00470       -0.00488       0.000277
                                                           [-0.162]       [-0.146]        [-0.151]         [0.175]       [-0.164]      [0.00881]
       Sales/Assets                                        -0.0106       -0.00400         -0.0106         0.00220       -0.00986         -0.0141
                                                           [-0.738]       [-0.265]        [-0.726]         [0.161]       [-0.689]        [-0.901]
       Profitability                                      -0.172**        -0.138*        -0.172**        -0.157**       -0.164**        -0.175**
                                                           [-2.241]       [-1.678]        [-2.226]        [-2.120]       [-2.163]        [-2.223]
       Investment Intensity                                -0.0196          -0.215        -0.0206           -0.110        0.0274          0.0493
                                                           [-0.110]       [-0.864]        [-0.114]        [-0.708]        [0.151]         [0.251]



	                                                                                                                                                                 55	  
       Industry Openness                                                                             0.000625         0.00219        0.00218     -0.000875
                                                                                                     [0.0464]         [0.172]        [0.162]      [-0.0601]
       Fraction of Intnl Eq Funds                                                                                                     9.390         6.221
                                                                                                                                     [1.248]       [0.737]
       Expense Ratio of Intnl/Expense Ratio of Domestic
       Eq Funds                                                                                                                      -1.021**     -1.080**
                                                                                                                                      [-2.178]     [-2.195]
       Turnover of Intnl/Domestic Eq Funds                                                                                                           -0.481
                                                                                                                                                   [-0.481]
       Alpha of Intnl/Domestic Eq Funds                                                                                                               48.21
                                           	                   	                	               	               	                              [0.891]
       Fund Age of Intnl/Domestic Eq Funds 	                   	                	               	               	                                0.381
                                                                	                	               	               	                              [0.493]
       Peer Exp Ratio Intnl Eq Funds          	                	                	               	               	                             -0.110*
                                                                                  	               	               	                             [-1.930]
       	  
       Total Plan Assets                      	                	                	               	               	                            3.62e-07
                                              	                	                	               	               	                              [0.318]
       	  
       Constant                               	   -27.40***    	   -33.98***    	   -31.68***   	   -34.05***   	   -29.04***   -33.90***   -25.23***
                                                     [-58.11]          [-7.453]         [-4.093]         [-6.989]     [-6.437]        [-6.864]     [-3.954]
       Observations                                     286               109              109              109          113             108           103
       R-squared                                       0.120             0.165            0.345            0.165        0.057           0.215         0.280
       Industry Fixed Effects                           N                 N             Y                N                N             N            N
	  

	  

	  

	  

	  




	                                                                                                                                                            56	  
                                            Table 9
  Panel A – Controlling for the Quarter the Worker Joined the Firm, the Firm’s Identity and
  the Quarter-Year of Observation
  Panel A reports the results of including fixed effects based on the quarter the worker joined the firm, the firm’s identity
  and the quarter-year of observation in the regressions in Column (4) of Table 3, Columns (2) and (5) of Table 5 and of
  Table 6. Panel B repeats the same regressions controlling directly for the number and quality of the international funds
  offered by the plan in a more recent subsample. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets.
  The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors
  clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while significance
  at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.
                                            (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
Variables                                  Idiv             Idiv              Idiv             Idiv              Idiv
% in Target Date Fund                 0.0324***        0.0304***         0.0322***        0.0321***         0.0315***
                                         [172.7]          [134.7]           [156.1]          [142.3]           [139.6]
Intl Div. Benchmark                    0.257***         0.312***          0.275***         0.315***          0.315***
                                         [50.16]          [49.41]           [47.44]          [50.04]           [49.96]
Trend                                  0.156***         0.207***          0.197***         0.186***          0.172***
                                         [22.19]          [24.24]           [24.94]          [21.74]           [20.16]
Trend2                               -0.0023***       -0.0058***        -0.0049***       -0.0052***        -0.0049***
                                        [-9.843]         [-20.27]          [-18.57]         [-18.23]          [-17.18]
Cohort                                0.0478***        0.0566***         0.0572***        0.0543***         0.0569***
                                         [84.97]          [83.60]           [91.54]          [80.42]           [81.04]
Advice Dummy                                                                               2.415***          4.593***
                                                                                             [79.06]           [18.16]
Non-Stale Advice Dummy                                                                     1.638***
                                                                                             [43.81]
Advice Dummy*Cohort                                                                                        -0.0264***
                                                                                                              [-12.92]
ln(Annual Salary)                                       0.283***         0.284***         0.257***           0.269***
                                                         [20.04]          [22.00]          [18.25]             [18.90]
ln(Annual Salary)2                                     0.0726***        0.0774***        0.0697***          0.0706***
                                                         [32.48]          [37.65]          [31.26]             [30.99]
Adv Dmy*ln(Annual Salary)                                                                                   -0.295***
                                                                                                              [-3.082]
Adv Dmy*ln(Annual
Salary)2                                                                                                     0.0171
                                                                                                             [1.360]
ln(Account Value)                                       0.248***         0.213***         0.233***          0.226***
                                                         [40.22]          [37.67]          [37.75]           [35.89]
ln(Account Value)2                                     0.0603***        0.0642***        0.0503***         0.0428***
                                                         [51.42]          [59.80]          [42.95]           [35.45]
Adv Dmy*ln(Account Value)                                                                                   0.271***
                                                                                                             [9.652]
Adv Dmy*ln(Account
Value)2                                                                                                    0.0263***
                                                                                                             [5.792]
ln(House Value Zillow)                                 0.238***                           0.260***          0.257***
                                                        [20.75]                            [22.64]           [22.41]

  	                                                                                                                      57	  
     ln(House Value Census)                                       0.348***
                                                                    [30.57]
     Constant                      -2.664***      -12.78***      -12.02***       -13.03***       -12.96***
                                    [-8.560]       [-31.47]        [-31.84]       [-32.15]        [-31.94]
     Observations                  9,170,900      6,040,811      7,038,080       6,040,811       6,040,811
     Adjusted R-squared               0.136          0.134           0.136          0.138           0.138
     Quarter Joined *Quarter-
     Year *Firm Fixed Effects          Y             Y               Y              Y               Y



         Panel B – Controlling for the International Funds offered and their Quality
                                           (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)
Variables                                 Idiv          Idiv             Idiv            Idiv            Idiv
% in Target Date Fund                 0.0644***     0.0601***       0.0646***        0.0614***       0.0613***
                                        [543.2]       [391.3]          [473.9]         [401.4]         [399.4]
Intl Div. Benchmark                    0.158***      0.253***        0.244***         0.236***        0.240***
                                        [46.69]       [57.34]          [62.54]         [53.71]         [54.66]
Trend                                  0.134***     0.0303***      -0.0263***          0.0107*         0.00176
                                        [30.96]       [5.454]         [-5.369]         [1.940]         [0.319]
Trend2                               0.00294***    0.00550***      0.00750***       0.00608***      0.00640***
                                        [20.22]       [29.60]          [45.46]         [32.84]         [34.55]
Cohort                                 0.163***      0.146***        0.146***         0.141***        0.145***
                                        [487.2]       [308.1]          [342.1]         [298.1]         [293.5]
Advice Dummy                                                                          2.586***        9.097***
                                                                                       [103.8]         [42.63]
Non-Stale Advice Dummy                                                                3.276***
                                                                                       [102.1]
Advice Dummy*Cohort                                                                                 -0.0557***
                                                                                                       [-32.47]
ln(Annual Salary)                                     0.00977      -0.0355***       -0.0378***       -0.0249**
                                                      [0.812]        [-3.380]         [-3.159]         [-2.054]
ln(Annual Salary)2                                   0.223***       0.220***         0.218***         0.219***
                                                      [115.8]         [129.3]          [113.4]          [111.4]
Advice Dummy*ln(Annual Salary)                                                                       -0.430***
                                                                                                       [-5.114]
Advice Dummy*ln(Annual Salary)2                                                                      0.0573***
                                                                                                        [5.064]
ln(Account Value)                                    0.121***       0.0994***        0.0981***       0.0802***
                                                       [28.67]        [26.40]          [23.38]          [18.64]
ln(Account Value)2                                  -0.0518***     -0.0434***       -0.0633***      -0.0604***
                                                      [-64.06]       [-59.82]         [-78.33]         [-71.61]
Advice Dummy*ln(Account Value)                                                                        0.286***
                                                                                                        [14.50]
Advice Dummy*ln(Account Value)2                                                                     -0.0804***
                                                                                                       [-24.41]
ln(House Value Zillow)                               0.624***                        0.629***         0.644***
                                                      [77.26]                         [78.26]           [79.97]
ln(House Value Census)                                               0.760***
                                                                       [0.23]
Fraction of Intnl Eq Funds            21.30***       22.49***        22.78***        21.87***        22.12***
                                       [388.3]        [318.9]         [364.7]         [311.0]         [314.4]
Expense Ratio of Intnl/Domestic      -1.505***      -1.566***       -1.509***       -1.574***       -1.556***

         	                                                                                                  58	  
                                     [-381.5]      [-308.9]      [-347.4]      [-311.7]      [-307.9]
Turnover of Intnl/Dom Eq Funds     -0.368***     -0.235***     -0.219***     -0.251***     -0.294***
                                     [-45.38]      [-23.32]      [-24.57]      [-24.97]      [-29.25]
Alpha Intnl- Alpha Dom Eq Funds    -14.05***     -27.91***     -6.934***     -33.19***     -33.38***
                                     [-27.87]      [-40.08]      [-11.82]      [-47.82]      [-48.05]
Fund Age of Intnl/Dom Eq Funds     0.0718***      0.204***      0.103***      0.194***      0.204***
                                      [16.26]       [37.77]       [21.17]       [36.10]       [37.94]
Peer Exp Ratio Intnl Eq Fds        -0.178***     -0.180***     -0.171***     -0.184***     -0.184***
                                     [-356.3]      [-273.7]      [-306.3]      [-281.2]      [-280.6]
	  
Total Plan Assets                 4.72e-07***   -5.6e-08***   9.42e-08***   1.21e-07***   9.78e-08***
                                      [127.6]      [-7.976]       [18.24]       [17.33]       [14.05]
Constant                            6.767***     -7.811***     -9.349***     -5.802***     -6.569***
                                      [32.25]      [-27.07]      [-36.54]      [-20.18]      [-22.82]
Observations                       16,299,381    9,983,354     12,163,670    9,983,354     9,983,354
Adjusted R-squared                     0.073         0.068         0.074         0.075         0.074




       	                                                                                         59	  
                                                                                     Table 10
                                                                                    Subsamples
This table reports the results for individual level regressions of international diversification on the percent invested in a target dated fund, the international diversification
benchmark, a quadratic time trend and birth year cohort for different subsamples. Panel B reports the results of these same regressions, controlling for salary, wealth and access to
advice effects. Column (2) excludes observations with (a) tenure 0-3, age>35, (b) tenure 4-5, age>40, (c) tenure 6-10, age>45, (d) tenure 11-15, age>50, (e) tenure 16-20, age>55,
(f) those with missing tenure. Column (3) excludes observations with salaries>=100,000 and account balances>=200,000, along with those that have missing information for either
variable. Column (4) is a combination of the exclusion rules specified in columns (2) and (3). Column (5) excludes observations with bond allocations over 50% and Column (6)
uses international stocks as the dependent variable. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level,
** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the firm level significant at the 1% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while significance at
the 5 and 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.
                                                (1)                     (2)                       (3)                       (4)                     (5)                       (6)
Variables                                      Idiv                    Idiv                      Idiv                      Idiv                    Idiv                 Int’l Stock
% Target Date Fund                        0.0590***              0.0481***                  0.0539***                 0.0445***               0.0560***                 0.0709***
                                             [483.0]                 [292.9]                   [409.9]                   [258.8]                 [458.2]                    [725.5]
Int’l div. bmk                             0.214***                0.188***                  0.245***                  0.243***                0.209***                   0.278***
                                             [66.02]                 [41.53]                   [67.14]                   [48.75]                 [63.33]                    [110.8]
Trend                                     0.0395***                0.133***                 -0.00786*                 0.0287***               0.0815***                  -0.318***
                                             [9.287]                 [21.29]                  [-1.654]                   [4.247]                 [18.56]                   [-96.93]
Trend2                                   0.00331***               -0.000275                0.00532***                0.00419***              0.00178***                 0.0128***
                                             [22.95]                [-1.303]                   [33.04]                   [18.27]                 [12.04]                    [114.7]
Cohort                                     0.158***                0.158***                  0.152***                  0.147***                0.161***                   0.211***
                                             [481.0]                 [335.4]                   [406.6]                   [283.8]                 [477.2]                    [840.9]
Constant                                  -8.450***               -5.691***                 -9.492***                 -7.922***               -8.439***                  -18.90***
                                            [-43.15]                [-20.58]                  [-43.07]                  [-26.10]                [-42.20]                   [-124.8]
Observations                             17,082,302               9,169,875                 13,550,869                7,603,024               15,940,134                19,017,474
Adjusted R-squared                            0.131                   0.097                     0.128                     0.099                   0.138                      0.142
Firm Fixed Effects                               Y                       Y                         Y                         Y                       Y                         Y
Subsample                               Whole Sample             Age-Tenure               Salary-Account            Age/Tenure and        Exclude High Bond            Int’l Stock as
                                                                     Screen                    Screen               Salary/Account           Allocations              dependent var.




	                                                                                                                                                                                    60	  
                                                     Appendix
    1: Firm Characteristics

    Panel A presents the mean, median, standard deviation and 5th and 95th percentiles for firms in our sample
    between 2006 and 2011. The 5th percentile is an average of the 4th, 5th and 6th percentiles, the median is the
    average of the 49th, 50th, and 51st percentiles and the 95th percentile is the average of the 94th, 95th, and 96th
    percentile. Panels B and C present these same statistics for all firms in Compustat and the S&P 500
    between 2006 and 2011, respectively. Note that firm age in these two cases is calculated as number of years
    in Compustat.

    Panel A - Sample Firms
Variables                              mean              median                sd                p5                p95
Assets (USD mn)                       46,286              4,378             254,441             152              88,847
Debt (USD mn)                         26,376              1,616             227,237              32              16,042
Net Income (USD mn)                     167                132               4,481              -642              2,935
Sales (USD mn)                         9,337              3,122             17,619              133              43,044
Capex (USD mn)                          694                161               1,156               3                3,596
Leverage (%)                             31                29                 21                 5                 66
Sales/Assets (%)                         95                77                 87                 11                234
Profitability (%)                       1.9                2.9               11.2              -14.4              13.0
Investment Intensity (%)                4.5                3.5                3.8                0.1              12.3
ROA                                     2.1                3.0                9.3              -13.9              13.1
ROE                                    -111.3              5.8              1405.9             -52.2              13.8
Annual Return (%)                       14.9               5.6               104.9             -61.6              79.6
Number of Employees                   17,095              4,483             42,969              232              66,633
Firm Age (years)                         69                65                 45                 9                 148
Plan Assets –
Total per firm (USD mn)                 925                297               2,055               22               4,342
Defined Benefit Dummy                    69                65                 45                 9                 148
Default Investment Dummy                688                247               1,271               24               3,164
    	  

    	                                    	  




    	                                                                                                             61	  
Panel B - Compustat Firms

Variables                       mean     median     sd        p5     p95
Assets (USD mn)                 4,578     558     16,748      8     20,959
Debt (USD mn)                   1,174     99      4,100       0     5,595
Net Income (USD mn)              150       6       595       -96     912
Sales (USD mn)                  2,275     254     6,508       3     11,622
Capex (USD mn)                   171      11       549        0      890
Leverage (%)                      32      22        62        1       81
Sales/Assets (%)                  86      66        82        5      248
Profitability (%)               -12.6     1.4      91.0     -70.5    15.3
Investment Intensity (%)          5.3     2.8      7.5       0.1     20.6
ROA                              -9.4     1.6      68.3     -62.2    16.4
ROE                              -8.4     3.9      45.4     -71.1    15.9
Annual Return (%)                 5.6     0.0      51.5     -68.3    94.2
Number of Employees             7,576     951     20,404      24    38,945
Firm Age (years in Compustat)     14       9        14        0       47

Panel C - S&P 500 Firms
Variables                        mean    median      sd       p5      p95
Assets (USD mn)                 53,556   12,524   186,742   2,145   176,675
Debt (USD mn)                   16,236   2,921    74,226       6    34,558
Net Income (USD mn)             1,281     573      3,976    -617     5,768
Sales (USD mn)                  18,365   7,819    35,079    1,336   71,725
Capex (USD mn)                  1,034     285      2,396       4     3,946
Leverage (%)                      25       23        18        0       56
Sales/Assets (%)                  84       67        73        7      234
Profitability (%)                 5.8     5.5       8.1      -3.5    17.2
Investment Intensity (%)          4.3     3.1       4.6       0.0    12.2
ROA                               5.8     5.5       8.1      -4.3    18.0
ROE                               3.4     6.0      16.3     -11.9    12.1
Annual Return (%)                 8.3     7.5      41.5     -54.5    71.1
Number of Employees             48,038   19,283   113,816   2,115   194,120
Firm Age (years in Compustat)     35       35        19        8       60




	                                                                        62	  
     Panel D Sample Firms – Private versus Public
     Panel D presents the mean, median, standard deviation, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of firm-year observations in
     our sample between 2006 and 2011. The 5th percentile is an average of the 4th, 5th and 6th percentiles, the median is the
     average of the 49th, 50th, and 51st percentiles and the 95th percentile is the average of the 94th, 95th, and 96th percentile.
     Summary statistics are decomposed into private firms and public firms. There are 178 private firms, 108 public firms and
     4 firms who switch from public to private or private to public in the sample.

     Public Firms
Variable                         # Obs        Mean          Median           Std Dev         p5           p95
Assets (USD mn)                   403       50,464          5,895            282,944      439         70,368
Debt (USD mn)                     403       28,513          1,627            237,620       31         16,509
Net Income (USD mn)               403        255             200               5,010     -515          3,112
Sales (USD mn)                    403       10,923          3,730             19,154      551         50,853
Capex (USD mn)                    403        700             166               1,178        3          3,651
Leverage (%)                      403         30              28                 21         4            59
Sales/Assets (%)                  403         82              72                 52        14           183
Profitability (%)                 403         1.9            3.2                11.0     -15.1          12.7
Investment Intensity (%)          403         4.4            3.4                 3.8      0.1           11.7
ROA                               401         2.4            3.3                 9.4     -14.7          13.4
ROE                               399       -111.3           5.8              1405.9     -52.2          13.8
Annual Return (%)                 397        15.8            6.8               105.8     -61.6          82.8
Number of Employees               406       30,394         10,204             61,706     1,400       142,833
Firm Age (years)                  388         76              74                 47         9           152
Plan Assets –
Total per firm (USD mn)           271        1,284           457              2,760        44          5,207
Defined Benefit Dummy             104        0.673          0.917             0.416         0            1
Default Investment Dummy          104        0.118          0.167             0.126         0          0.200
     	  
     Private Firms
Variable                         # Obs        mean         median               sd         p5           p95
Assets (USD mn)                   111        31,117        1,176             95,164        15        263,255
Debt (USD mn)                      38         3,712        1,448              4,312       282         13,668
Net Income (USD mn)               109         -159           10               1,208     -1,990          735
Sales (USD mn)                     98         2,814        1,225              5,131        13         18,048
Capex (USD mn)                     37          622           68                889          9          2,416
Leverage (%)                       38           45           45                 22          6            84
Sales/Assets (%)                   96          152          106                156          5           384
Profitability (%)                 107          2.0          1.4                11.8      -12.1          13.7
Investment Intensity (%)           35          5.2          4.1                 3.9       0.2           12.9
ROA                                66          0.3          1.1                 8.0      -10.9           7.7
ROE                                 0
Annual Return (%)                   9         -22.2          0.0              33.3      -95.5          0.8
Number of Employees               549         7,260         2,433            13,122      151         31,826
Firm Age (years)                  574           63            62               42         7           142
Plan Assets –
Total per firm (USD mn)           370          672           217             1,277        19          3,663
Defined Benefit Dummy             169         0.524         0.750            0.460         0            1
Default Investment Dummy          169         0.156         0.167            0.167         0          0.500

                                                                    63	  

     	  
       2: Employee Characteristics	  
	  
Panel A Employee Characteristics across Firms

Panel A presents the mean, median, standard deviation and 5th and 95th percentiles for all individuals in
the sample between 2005 and 2011 (the data include both stock market participants and non-stock market
participants).

Variables                                     Mean               Median             Std Dev              p5                p95
Salary                                        46,205             39,687             48.014                0              118,183
Total Account Value                           62,798             22,255             113,850             279              256,085
Contribution Rate                             5.89%              5.00%               6.16%               0%              17.00%
Tenure                                        10.55               7.25               10.64              0.08              32.02
Age                                             46                 46                  12                27                65
Cohort                                         1963               1963                 12               1940              1983
	  

Panel B Current Population Survey (CPS)

Panel B presents the mean, median, standard deviation and 5th and 95th percentiles for individual statistics
in the Current Population Survey between 2006 and 2011. In order to extract tenure data, we use the
January CPS Displaced Worker, Employee Tenure and Occupational Mobility Supplement for years
2006, 2008, and 2010, while 2007, 2009, and 2011 data come from the January CPS. The summary
statistics reported in this table are the average of the annual statistics.

Variables                      Mean                    Median               Std Dev                  p5                   p95
Salary                         45,437                  37,175               30,045                 14,685               109,840
Tenure                          7.7                     5.0                   8.2                   0.3                  25.7
Age                              41                      42                    12                    23                   62

Panel C - Summary Statistics for Managed Accounts
This table reports the mean, median, std dev, 5th and 95th percentiles and number of observations for the individual
level data. The sample includes individuals with a managed account. All variables are defined in the Appendix. The
sample period is 2005 to 2011.

       Variable                         Mean           Median        Std Dev    p5            p95           # Obs
       Cohort                           1962           1961          11         1946          1981          1,611,453
       Age                              46             47            11         28            63            1,611,453
       Annual Salary                    56,160         47,625        42,147     19,919        114,689       1,363,806
       Total Account Value              59,639         27,735        91,565     1,220         224,215       1,611,552
       House Value (Census)             234,266        178,300       159,756    82,300        575,800       1,587,840
       Tenure                           8.1            3.7           9.2        0.4           27.6          1,476,011
       Contribution Rate (%)            7              6             6          0             17            1,363,806



                                                                   64	  

	  
Appendix 3: Controlling for the Firm’s Identity and the Quarter-Year of Observation in Table 9
This table reports the results of including fixed effects based on the firm’s identity and the quarter-year of observation in the
regressions in Column (4) of Table 3, Columns (2) and (5) of Table 5 and of Table 6. All variables are defined in the Appendix.
T-statistics are in brackets. The superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level.
Standard errors clustered at the firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while
significance at the 10% level is denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.

                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
       Variables                                  Idiv             Idiv             Idiv            Idiv             Idiv
       % in Target Date Fund                  0.0369***        0.0331***        0.0362***       0.0344***        0.0340***
                                                [243.6]          [176.6]          [216.0]         [183.8]          [181.4]
       Intl Div. Benchmark                     0.188***         0.268***         0.243***        0.270***         0.271***
                                                [48.63]          [55.10]          [55.38]         [55.69]          [55.89]
       Trend                                  0.0508***        0.0398***          0.00746       0.0231***          0.00755
                                                [9.003]          [5.776]          [1.186]         [3.352]          [1.097]
       Trend2                                0.00232***       0.00161***       0.00301***      0.00204***       0.00240***
                                                [12.26]          [6.935]          [14.21]         [8.802]          [10.38]
       Cohort                                 0.0649***        0.0698***        0.0702***       0.0675***        0.0696***
                                                [142.2]          [121.1]          [134.3]         [117.2]          [116.7]
       Advice Dummy                                                                              2.333***         4.334***
                                                                                                  [84.50]          [20.16]
       Non-Stale Advice Dummy                                                                    1.701***
                                                                                                  [49.59]
       Advice Dummy*Cohort                                                                                      -0.0238***
                                                                                                                  [-12.66]
       ln(Annual Salary)                                        0.191***        0.184***        0.168***         0.177***
                                                                 [16.91]         [18.45]         [14.91]           [15.59]
       ln(Annual Salary)2                                       0.116***        0.120***        0.113***         0.116***
                                                                 [62.83]         [72.65]         [61.66]           [61.97]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Annual Salary)                                                                               -0.121
                                                                                                                  [-1.604]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Annual
       Salary)2                                                                                                  -0.0247**
                                                                                                                   [-2.454]
       ln(Account Value)                                        0.242***        0.196***         0.224***         0.215***
                                                                 [45.81]         [41.37]          [42.54]           [40.13]
       ln(Account Value)2                                      0.0242***       0.0279***        0.0149***       0.00882***
                                                                 [24.21]         [30.90]          [14.93]           [8.553]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Account
       Value)                                                                                                    0.336***
                                                                                                                  [13.39]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Account
       Value)2                                                                                                  0.0135***
                                                                                                                  [3.328]
       ln(House Value Zillow)                                   0.332***                        0.351***         0.350***
                                                                 [32.40]                         [34.34]          [34.23]


                                                                65	  

	  
       ln(House Value Census)                                       0.487***
                                                                      [48.84]
       Constant                            0.502**     -11.68***    -11.92***   -11.84***   -11.87***
                                            [2.108]     [-36.21]     [-40.42]    [-36.79]    [-36.84]
       Observations                       11,902,112   7,641,430    9,079,957   7,641,430   7,641,430
       Adjusted R-squared                    0.149        0.141        0.147       0.144       0.144
       Quarter-Year *Firm Fixed Effects       Y                 Y      Y           Y           Y




                                                       66	  

	  
Appendix 4: Subsamples – Income, Wealth, Access to Advice and International Diversification
Panel A reports the results for individual level regressions of international diversification on the percent invested in a target dated fund, the intnl div benchmark, a quadratic time
trend and birth year cohort for different subsamples, salary and wealth on various subsamples. Panel B adds access to online advice. See Table 10 for more details on this table.
Panel A
                                                                    (1)                  (2)        (3)                     (4)                  (5)                (6)
         Variables                                                 idiv                 idiv       idiv                    idiv                 idiv          Int’l Stock
         % target date fund                                   0.0543***            0.0417*** 0.0538***                0.0412***            0.0509***          0.0743***
                                                                 [341.2]              [204.3]    [335.6]                 [200.5]              [319.0]             [581.8]
         Int’l diversification benchmark                       0.317***             0.322***   0.297***                0.295***             0.312***            0.347***
                                                                 [75.54]              [57.80]    [69.46]                 [52.09]              [72.94]             [104.8]
         Trend                                                0.0589***            0.0588*** 0.0504***                0.0486***             0.109***           -0.321***
                                                                 [10.85]              [7.839]    [9.119]                 [6.357]              [19.35]            [-75.19]
         Trend2                                              0.00242***           0.00221*** 0.00306***             0.00310***           0.000616***          0.0125***
                                                                 [13.27]              [8.716]    [16.48]                 [11.97]              [3.271]             [86.63]
         Cohort                                                0.148***             0.121***   0.150***                0.122***             0.148***            0.224***
                                                                 [321.3]              [191.3]    [321.6]                 [191.8]              [311.2]             [619.6]
         ln(annual salary)                                     0.185***             0.292***   0.182***                0.293***             0.187***            0.222***
                                                                 [20.61]              [20.78]    [20.29]                 [20.91]              [20.57]             [31.90]
         ln(annual salary)2                                    0.186***             0.149***   0.187***                0.148***             0.181***            0.165***
                                                                 [128.1]              [67.29]    [126.5]                 [65.31]              [123.1]             [145.1]
         ln(account value)                                    0.0551***            -0.170***  0.0660***               -0.156***            0.0697***            0.252***
                                                                 [13.46]             [-29.79]    [15.98]                [-27.10]              [16.80]             [81.84]
         ln(account value)2                                  -0.0331***           -0.0416*** -0.0403***              -0.0498***           -0.0413***         -0.00535***
                                                                [-42.71]             [-39.01]   [-49.17]                [-44.24]             [-52.65]            [-9.074]
         ln(house value Zillow)                                0.653***             0.684***   0.653***                0.689***             0.643***            0.637***
                                                                 [74.76]              [59.64]    [73.34]                 [59.15]              [72.06]             [92.58]
         Constant                                             -25.33***            -21.88***  -24.07***               -20.29***            -24.80***           -35.56***
                                                                [-92.48]             [-59.78]   [-86.35]                [-54.50]             [-88.69]            [-164.7]
         Observations                                        10,621,481            6,040,610 10,216,034               5,813,961            9,898,960          11,642,469
         Adjusted R-squared                                       0.120                0.094      0.122                   0.096                0.126               0.138
         Firm Fixed Effects                                          Y                    Y          Y                       Y                    Y                  Y
         Subsample                                               Whole                 Age-      Salary-           Age/Tenure and        ex-High Bond        Int’l Stock as
                                                                                      Tenure   Account             Salary/Account         Allocations          dependent
                                                                                      Screen     Screen                  Screen                                  variable

                                                                                          67	  

	  
        Panel B

                                (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)
Variables                      Idiv          Idiv          Idiv            Idiv          Idiv      Itnl Stock
% in Target Date Fund     0.0554***     0.0427***     0.0550***       0.0422***     0.0519***      0.0754***
                             [348.5]       [208.7]       [343.2]         [205.0]       [325.6]        [591.2]
Intl Div. Benchmark        0.322***      0.326***      0.301***        0.299***      0.316***       0.351***
                             [76.82]       [58.71]       [70.75]         [52.99]       [74.05]        [106.2]
Trend                     0.0200***     0.0225***      0.0121**          0.0125     0.0687***      -0.349***
                             [3.694]       [2.999]       [2.191]         [1.642]       [12.28]       [-82.07]
Trend2                   0.00349***    0.00317***    0.00412***      0.00407***    0.00172***      0.0132***
                             [19.15]       [12.51]       [22.24]         [15.76]       [9.156]        [92.30]
Cohort                     0.146***      0.122***      0.147***        0.123***      0.147***       0.218***
                             [303.9]       [184.3]       [303.5]         [184.4]       [296.5]        [578.9]
Advice Dummy               7.396***      5.783***      7.116***        5.653***      8.194***       2.961***
                             [46.00]       [22.63]       [43.57]         [21.97]       [49.58]        [23.02]
Advice Dummy*Cohort      -0.0450***    -0.0399***    -0.0422***      -0.0388***    -0.0563***      0.0118***
                            [-28.73]      [-19.53]      [-26.34]        [-18.66]      [-34.89]        [9.420]
ln(Annual Salary)          0.150***      0.289***      0.149***        0.292***      0.157***       0.193***
                             [16.52]       [20.44]       [16.34]         [20.66]       [17.00]        [27.38]
ln(Annual Salary)2         0.185***      0.146***      0.185***        0.143***      0.181***       0.161***
                             [124.3]       [64.52]       [122.0]         [62.13]       [120.0]        [138.6]
Adv Dmy*ln(Salary)          -0.0793     -0.535***      -0.0843*       -0.584***     -0.139***      -0.144***
                            [-1.632]      [-5.502]      [-1.732]        [-5.952]      [-2.811]       [-3.665]
Adv Dmy*ln(Salary)2      -0.0285***     0.0569***    -0.0209***       0.0717***    -0.0329***      0.0168***
                            [-4.322]       [4.462]      [-3.088]         [5.434]      [-4.912]        [3.155]
ln(Account Value)         0.0135***     -0.198***     0.0213***       -0.189***     0.0272***       0.208***
                             [3.220]      [-34.10]       [5.054]        [-32.20]       [6.408]        [65.93]
ln(Account Value)2       -0.0468***    -0.0562***    -0.0528***      -0.0627***    -0.0558***    -0.00938***
                            [-57.76]      [-50.45]      [-61.87]        [-53.48]      [-67.85]       [-15.23]
Adv Dmy*ln(Acct Val)       0.323***      0.530***      0.355***        0.597***      0.351***       0.322***
                             [17.38]       [18.82]       [18.68]         [20.45]       [18.72]        [22.34]
Ad Dy*ln(ActVl)2         -0.0356***    -0.0355***    -0.0413***      -0.0492***    -0.0324***     -0.0711***
                            [-11.74]      [-7.902]      [-12.58]        [-10.04]      [-10.52]       [-30.04]
ln(House Value Zillow)     0.700***      0.703***      0.697***        0.706***      0.690***       0.670***
                             [80.38]       [61.44]       [78.49]         [60.71]       [77.63]        [97.52]
Constant                  -25.76***     -22.25***     -24.43***       -20.61***     -25.27***      -35.57***
                            [-94.24]      [-60.84]      [-87.85]        [-55.40]      [-90.58]       [-165.1]
Observations             10,621,481     6,040,610    10,216,034       5,813,961     9,898,960     11,642,469
Adjusted R-squared            0.126         0.098         0.128           0.100         0.132          0.143
Firm Fixed Effects               Y             Y             Y               Y             Y             Y
                                          Age-        Salary-        Age/Tenure     Exclude
                           Whole         Tenure      Acct Value           &        High Bond     Intl Stock as
Subsample                  Sample        Screen       Screen         Salary/Acct     Alloc.        Dep Var



                                                            68	  

        	  
Appendix 5 – Tobit Regressions. The table repeats the regressions in Column (4) of Table 3, Columns (2) and (5) of
Table 5 and of Table 6 using a tobit specification. All variables are defined in the Appendix. T-statistics are in brackets. The
superscript *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level and * at the 10% level. Standard errors clustered at the
firm level significant at the 5% level are denoted by bold and underlined t-statistics, while significance at the 10% level is
denoted by underlined t-statistics. The sample period is 2005 to 2011.
                                                    (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)
       Variables                                   Idiv            Idiv             Idiv            Idiv             Idiv
       % in Target Date Fund                   0.0885***       0.0833***        0.0898***       0.0851***        0.0849***
                                                 [655.2]         [488.7]          [588.7]         [501.0]          [499.1]
       Intl Div. Benchmark                      0.184***        0.402***         0.356***        0.371***         0.374***
                                                 [47.06]         [82.30]          [81.37]         [76.39]          [76.96]
       Trend                                    0.224***       0.0573***        0.0202***       0.0766***        0.0673***
                                                 [44.91]         [9.393]          [3.688]         [12.62]          [11.07]
       Trend2                                 0.00162***      0.00526***       0.00684***      0.00454***       0.00492***
                                                 [9.667]         [25.72]          [37.19]         [22.31]          [24.18]
       Cohort                                   0.229***        0.197***         0.202***        0.188***         0.196***
                                                 [585.1]         [366.2]          [414.3]         [350.6]          [348.5]
       Advice Dummy                                                                              3.217***         12.01***
                                                                                                  [127.2]          [63.19]
       Non-Stale Advice Dummy                                                                    3.600***
                                                                                                  [107.8]
       Advice Dummy*Cohort                                                                                      -0.0990***
                                                                                                                   [-53.49]
       ln(Annual Salary)                                        0.148***       0.0687***        0.0835***        0.0877***
                                                                 [14.11]         [7.226]          [7.993]           [8.244]
       ln(Annual Salary)2                                       0.222***        0.218***         0.213***         0.212***
                                                                 [132.2]         [141.6]          [127.2]           [122.9]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Annual Salary)                                                                               0.0102
                                                                                                                    [0.177]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Annual Salary)2                                                                           0.0234***
                                                                                                                    [3.020]
       ln(Account Value)                                       0.231***         0.228***        0.206***          0.195***
                                                                 [47.45]          [52.10]         [42.50]           [39.20]
       ln(Account Value)2                                     -0.0497***       -0.0399***      -0.0684***       -0.0642***
                                                                [-54.16]         [-47.99]        [-74.57]          [-66.64]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Account Value)                                                                             0.169***
                                                                                                                    [7.563]
       Advice Dummy*ln(Account Value)2                                                                          -0.0921***
                                                                                                                   [-25.27]
       ln(House Value Zillow)                                   0.836***                         0.858***         0.875***
                                                                 [92.47]                          [95.38]           [97.16]
       ln(House Value Census)                                                   1.266***
                                                                                  [148.7]
       Constant                               -15.69***        -39.43***       -41.97***        -37.13***       -38.03***
                                               [-66.30]         [-125.6]         [-148.6]        [-118.8]        [-121.4]
       Observations                           17,082,302       10,621,481      12,883,608       10,621,481      10,621,481
                                                                 69	  

	  
Appendix 6: Variable Description

Individual Level Variables             Description
International Diversification (idiv)   Allocation to international equities over allocation to all
                                       equities. The total equity allocation is defined as the
                                       combination of investments in Large Cap Stocks, Small
                                       and Mid Cap Stocks, Individual Stocks, Company
                                       Stock and International Stocks. This series is individual
                                       specific. Source: Financial Engines.
Cohort                                 The cohort variable is defined as the individual's birth
                                       year minus 1900. The cohort is set to 1993 if the
                                       individual is born after 1990 and to 1940 if the
                                       individual is born before 1945. This data is individual
                                       specific. Source: Financial Engines.
Age                                    Age is defined as the difference between the
                                       observation date and the individual's birth date. Source:
                                       Financial Engines.
Total Account Value (log)              Total account values represent the balance in the 401(k)
                                       account. This value is first deflated to 2005 prices using
                                       the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers and
                                       then the natural logarithm is taken. Source: Financial
                                       Engines and U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of
                                       Labor Statistics.
House Value - Zillow (log)             The natural logarithm of house values deflated to 2005
                                       prices using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
                                       Consumers. We match the Zillow average house value
                                       in a zip code to each individual based on the zip code
                                       they live in according to Financial Engines. Source:
                                       Zillow, U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor
                                       Statistics, Financial Engines.
House Value - Census (log)             The natural logarithm of median house values in dollars
                                       at the zip code level. This variable is matched to the
                                       individual data using the zip code where the user lives.
                                       Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012 American
                                       Community Survey - Table B25077: Median Housing
                                       Value of Owner-Occupied Housing Units (Dollars).
Annual Salary (log)                    Annual Salary represents the dollar amount an
                                       individual is paid by the company. The dollar amount is
                                       first deflated to 2005 prices using the Consumer Price
                                       Index for All Urban Consumers and then the natural
                                       logarithm is taken. Source: Financial Engines and U.S.

                                               70	  

	  
                                          Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics.




% Target Date Fund                        Amount allocated to target dated funds as a percentage
                                          of the individual's total account value. This data is
                                          individual specific. Source: Financial Engines.
International Diversification Benchmark   The ratio of international market cap (MSCI Market
                                          Cap All Countries ex-US) to the sum of international
                                          and domestic market cap (MSCI Market Cap All
                                          Countries). We obtain daily data from MSCI and match
                                          the ratio of market caps to the date on which the
                                          individual's data point is drawn. Source: MSCI and
                                          Financial Engines.
Relative Returns                          International stock returns (MSCI All Countries ex-US
                                          returns) in excess of US stock returns (MSCI US)
                                          between the period t-1 and t. For each individual, we
                                          calculate the cumulative international stock return
                                          between t-1 and t, the cumulative return for US stocks
                                          between t-1, and t and take the difference. Note that t is
                                          defined as the day on which the individual is observed,
                                          while t-1 is the previous observation (in annualized
                                          percent). Source: MSCI and Financial Engines.
MN Experienced Returns                    Following the methodology proposed by Malmendier
                                          and Nagel (2011), the experienced returns measure is
                                          the weighted average of past returns with weights that
                                          depend on an individual's age at time t, how many years
                                          ago the return was realized and a parameter that
                                          controls for the shape of the weighting function. This
                                          paper builds experienced returns based on international
                                          stock returns in excess of US stock returns (in
                                          annualized percent).
Return Chasing                            This variable is constructed using the same
                                          methodology as MN Experienced Returns, but uses
                                          international stock returns as the relevant past returns.
Flight to Safety                          We borrow the flight to safety (FTS) dummy variable
                                          for the United States from Baele et al. (2013). They use
                                          data on bond and stock returns to measure the
                                          occurrence of stress periods in which stock markets
                                          decline and liquid benchmark bonds increase in value.
Advice Dummy                              Dummy variable equal to 1 if the individual has signed
                                                  71	  

	  
                              the investor service agreement to obtain online advice
                              from Financial Engines. Source: Financial Engines.
Not Stale Advice Dummy        Dummy variable equal to 1 if the individual has
                              accessed the online advice website within the past year.
                              Source: Financial Engines.
Total Equity                  Allocation to equities in the overall 401(k) portfolio.
                              The total equity allocation is defined as the combination
                              of investments in Large Cap Stocks, Small and Mid Cap
                              Stocks, Individual Stocks, Company Stock and
                              International Stocks. This series is individual specific.
                              Source: Financial Engines.

International Equity          Allocation to international equity in the overall 401(k)
                              portfolio. This series is individual specific. Source:
                              Financial Engines.

Zip Code Variables            Description
Bachelor's Degree or Higher   Bachelor's degree or higher as a percentage of
                              population over 25 years old. Bachelor's degree or
                              higher is the sum of people with a bachelor's degree
                              (hd01_vd22),      master's     degree     (hd01_vd23),
                              professional school degree (hd01_vd24) and doctorate
                              degree (hd01_vd25). This is divided by the total
                              population 25 years and over in the area (hd01_vd01).
                              Census labels are in parentheses. Data is at a zip code
                              level. Source:     U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012
                              American Community Survey - Table B15003:
                              Educational attainment for the population over 25 years
                              and over.
Advanced Degree               Master's degree or higher as a percentage of population
                              over 25 years old. Master's degree or higher is the sum
                              of people with a master's degree (hd01_vd23),
                              professional school degree (hd01_vd24) and doctorate
                              degree (hd01_vd25). This is divided by the total
                              population 25 years and over in the area (hd01_vd01).
                              Census labels are in parentheses. Data is at a zip code
                              level. Source:     U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012
                              American Community Survey - Table B15003 -
                              Educational attainment for the population over 25 years
                              and over.




                                     72	  

	  
Less than college degree                  Less than college degree as a percentage of population
                                          over 25 years old. Less than college degree is the sum
                                          of people with a regular high school diploma
                                          (hd01_vd17), GED high school diploma (hd01_vd18),
                                          some college - less than 1 year (hd01_vd19), some
                                          college - more than 1 year (hd01_vd20) and associate's
                                          degree (hd01_vd21). This sum is divided by the total
                                          population 25 years and over in the area (hd01_vd01).
                                          Census labels are in parentheses. Data is at a zip code
                                          level. Source:     U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012
                                          American Community Survey - Table B15003:
                                          Educational attainment for the population over 25 years
                                          and over.
Bachelor's Degree                         Bachelor's degree as a percentage of population over 25
                                          years old. This variable is defined as people with a
                                          bachelor's degree (hd01_vd22) divided by the total
                                          population 25 years and over in the area (hd01_vd01).
                                          Census labels are in parentheses. Data is at a zip code
                                          level. Source:     U.S. Census Bureau, 2008-2012
                                          American Community Survey - Table B15003:
                                          Educational attainment for the population over 25 years
                                          and over.
Foreign Born Population                   Foreign-born population over total population. This
                                          variable is defined as Total Foreign Born Population
                                          (hd01_vd01) over total population in the area
                                          (hc01_vc03). Census labels are in parentheses. Data is
                                          at a zip code level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-
                                          2011 American Community Survey - Tables B05007:
                                          Place of birth by year of entry by citizenship status for
                                          the foreign-born population and DP05: ACS
                                          demographic and housing estimates.
Foreign Born Population - Latin America   Foreign-born population from Latin America over total
                                          population. This variable is defined as the Latin
                                          American born population (hd01_vd28) over total
                                          population in the area (hc01_vc03). Census labels are in
                                          parentheses. Data is at a zip code level. Source: U.S.
                                          Census Bureau, 2007-2011 American Community
                                          Survey - Tables B05007: Place of birth by year of entry
                                          by citizenship status for the foreign-born population and
                                          DP05: ACS demographic and housing estimates.
Foreign Born Population - Europe          Foreign-born population from Europe over total
                                          population. This variable is defined as the European

                                                 73	  

	  
                                  born population (hd01_vd02) over total population in
                                  the area (hc01_vc03). Census labels are in parentheses.
                                  Data is at a zip code level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
                                  2007-2011 American Community Survey - Tables
                                  B05007: Place of birth by year of entry by citizenship
                                  status for the foreign-born population and DP05: ACS
                                  demographic and housing estimates.
Foreign Born Population - Asia    Foreign-born population from Asia over total
                                  population. This variable is defined as the Asian born
                                  population (hd01_vd15) over total population in the
                                  area (hc01_vc03). Census labels are in parentheses.
                                  Data is at a zip code level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
                                  2007-2011 American Community Survey - Tables
                                  B05007: Place of birth by year of entry by citizenship
                                  status for the foreign-born population and DP05: ACS
                                  demographic and housing estimates.
Foreign Born Population - Other   Foreign-born population from a region other than Asia,
                                  Europe and Latin America over total population. This
                                  variable is defined as the "Other" born population
                                  (hd01_vd82) over total population in the area
                                  (hc01_vc03). Census labels are in parentheses. Data is
                                  at a zip code level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2007-
                                  2011 American Community Survey - Tables B05007:
                                  Place of birth by year of entry by citizenship status for
                                  the foreign-born population and DP05: ACS
                                  demographic and housing estimates.
State Exports/GDP                 Export of goods measured as a share of gross domestic
                                  product at the state level (ratio is average of 2008-2011
                                  annual data). Source: U.S. Census Bureau and Bureau
                                  of Economic Analysis.
State Openness                    The sum of exports and imports of goods measured as a
                                  share of gross domestic product at the state level (ratio
                                  is average of 2008-2011 annual data). Source: U.S.
                                  Census Bureau and Bureau of Economic Analysis.
GDP per capita                    Per capita real GDP by state (chained 2005 dollars),
                                  2005 to 2011 average. Data is annual. Source: Bureau
                                  of Economic Analysis.
GDP growth                        Real GDP by state (millions of chained 2005 dollars).
                                  We take the 2000 to 2005 and 2006 to 2011 growth
                                  rates. Data is annual. Source: Bureau of Economic
                                  Analysis.

                                         74	  

	  
Rural                              Rural is a categorical variable that takes values 1 to 4 in
                                   integer units, with 1 representing the most urban areas
                                   and 4 the most isolated. The variable is constructed
                                   from the RUCA 2.0 variable in the Zip RUCA Code
                                   dataset. More specifically, a zip code is classified in the
                                   following way: (i) urban if RUCA2.0 is 1.0, 1.1, 2.0,
                                   2.1, 3.0, 4.1, 5.1, 7.1, 8.1, or 10.1, (ii) large rural
                                   city/town if RUCA2.0 is 4.0, 4.2, 5.0, 5.2, 6.0, or 6.),
                                   (iii) small rural town if RUCA2.0 is 7.0, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4,
                                   8.0, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 9.0, 9.1, 9.2, and isolated if RUCA2.0
                                   is 10.0, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, or 10.6. Source: RUCA
                                   Rural Health Research Center.
Urban                              The variable Urban is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
                                   RUCA2.0 is equal to 1.0, 1.1, 2.0, 2.1, 3.0, 4.1, 5.1, 7.1,
                                   8.1, or 10.1 (these are the metropolitan areas in the Zip
                                   RUCA Code dataset). Data is at the zip code level.
                                   Source: RUCA Rural Health Research Center.
Large Rural                        The variable Large Rural is a dummy variable equal to
                                   1 if RUCA2.0 is equal to 4.0, 4.2, 5.0, 5.2, 6.0, or 6.1
                                   (these are the large rural city/town areas in the Zip
                                   RUCA Code dataset). Data is at the zip code level.
                                   Source: RUCA Rural Health Research Center.
Small Rural                        The variable Small Rural is a dummy variable equal to
                                   1 if RUCA2.0 is equal to 7.0, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 8.0, 8.2, 8.3,
                                   8.4, 9.0, 9.1, 9.2 (these are the small rural town areas in
                                   the Zip RUCA Code dataset). Data is at the zip code
                                   level. Source: RUCA Rural Health Research Center.
Isolated                           The variable Isolated is a dummy variable equal to 1 if
                                   RUCA2.0 is equal to 10.0, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, or
                                   10.6 (these are the isolated small rural areas in the Zip
                                   RUCA Code dataset). Data is at the zip code level.
                                   Source: RUCA Rural Health Research Center.
Long distance minutes              Number of long distance hours from land lines and
                                   mobile phones scaled by total population. Data is at the
                                   state level and is the average of the annual data between
                                   2000-2011. Source: FCC.
Distance to International Cities   Distance to international cities is the cumulative
                                   distance from each zip code to London, Tokyo, Toronto
                                   and Mexico City (in miles). To calculate the distance
                                   from a zip code to each city, we apply the haversine
                                   formula using the latitude and longitude of each point.

                                           75	  

	  
                             This formula calculates the great-circle distance
                             between two points (the shortest distance over the
                             earth’s surface), giving an ‘as-the-crow-flies’ distance
                             between the zip code and the city. We then add the four
                             distances to produce the zip code's distance to
                             international cities. Source:
                             federalgovernmentzipcodes.us.
Financial Literacy           Mean number of correct quiz answers in financial
                             knowledge survey. Multiple choice quiz questions
                             include calculations involving interest rates and
                             inflation, the relationship between bond prices and
                             interest rates, risk and diversification, and the impact of
                             short-term rates on life of a mortgage. Data is at the
                             state level. Source: 2012 National Financial Capability
                             Study Data Tables.
House Value - Zillow (log)   The natural logarithm of house values at the zip code
                             level deflated to 2005 prices using the Consumer Price
                             Index for All Urban Consumers. We take the average of
                             the deflated monthly data for the period that the zip
                             code is in the sample (ranges between 2006-2011).
                             Source: Zillow and U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau
                             of Labor Statistics.
House Value - Census (log)   The natural logarithm of median house values in dollars
                             at the zip code level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau,
                             2008-2012 American Community Survey - Table
                             B25077: Median Housing Value of Owner-Occupied
                             Housing Units (Dollars).
Firm Variables               Description

Private                      Dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the firm is
                             private and 0 if the firm is public. Source: Capital IQ.
Foreign Headquarter Dummy    Dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if firm's
                             ultimate parent is based in a country outside of the
                             United States. Source: Capital IQ.
Foreign Subsidiary Dummy     Dummy variable equal to 1 if firm has a subsidiary in a
                             country outside of the United States. Source: Orbis.
% Foreign Subsidiaries       Number of foreign subsidiaries over the total number of
                             subsidiaries in the firm. If company has no subsidiaries,
                             this variable takes the value of zero. Source: Orbis.



                                     76	  

	  
Industry Openness           The sum of exports and imports of goods measured as a
                            share of gross output by industry (ratio is average of
                            2000-2011 annual data). Industry is classified at the 3-
                            digit NAICS level. Source: U.S. Census Bureau and
                            Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Firm Age (log)              Firm age is calculated as the difference between the
                            current fiscal year and the year the firm was founded.
                            Source: Capital IQ.
Number of Employees (log)   Number of employees in the firm. Use data from
                            Capital IQ only when Compustat data is missing. Given
                            that Compustat reports number of employees in
                            thousands, we multiply the data item "emp" by 1000 in
                            order to be consistent with Capital IQ. We take the
                            average of the annual data for the period that the firm is
                            in the sample (ranges between 2005 and 2011). Source:
                            Compustat and Capital IQ.
Assets (log)                Firm assets in USD million, data item "at" in
                            Compustat, deflated to 2005 prices using the Consumer
                            Price Index for All Urban Consumers. Use data from
                            Capital IQ only when Compustat data is missing. We
                            take the average of the annual data for the period that
                            the firm is in the sample (ranges between 2005 and
                            2011). Source: Compustat, Capital IQ and U.S.
                            Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Leverage                    Firm total debt over assets, data items (dlc + dltt)/at in
                            Compustat. Use data from Capital IQ only when
                            Compustat data is missing. We take the average of the
                            annual data for the period that the firm is in the sample
                            (ranges between 2005 and 2011). Source: Compustat
                            and Capital IQ.
Sales/Assets                Firm sales over assets, data items "sales" and "at" in
                            Compustat. Use data from Capital IQ only when
                            Compustat data is missing. We take the average of the
                            annual data for the period that the firm is in the sample
                            (ranges between 2005 and 2011). Source: Compustat
                            and Capital IQ.
Profitability               Firm net income over assets, data items "ni" and "at" in
                            Compustat. Use data from Capital IQ only when
                            Compustat data is missing. We take the average of the
                            annual data for the period that the firm is in the sample
                            (ranges between 2005 and 2011). Source: Compustat

                                    77	  

	  
                                          and Capital IQ.



Investment Intensity                      Firm capex over assets, data items "capx" and "at" in
                                          Compustat. Use data from Capital IQ only when
                                          Compustat data is missing. We take the average of the
                                          annual data for the period that the firm is in the sample
                                          (ranges between 2005 and 2011). Source: Compustat
                                          and Capital IQ.
Plan Variables                            Description
Fraction of International Equity Funds    Number of international over Domestic equity funds.
                                          The funds are classified as international based on the
                                          Lipper categories covering international equity funds,
                                          emerging market funds, area or country specific funds.
                                          Source: Financial Engines.
Expense Ratio of Intnl/Expense Ratio of   Ratio of the median expense ratio of the international
Domestic Eq Funds                         funds and the median expense ratio of the domestic fund
                                          offered by the company’s plan(s). Source: Financial
                                          Engines.
Turnover of Intnl/ Domestic Eq Funds      Ratio of the median turnover of the international funds
                                          and the median turnover of the domestic fund offered by
                                          the company’s plan(s). Source: Financial Engines.
Alpha of Intnl/ Domestic Eq Funds         Difference between the median alpha of the international
                                          funds and the median alpha of the domestic fund offered
                                          by the company’s plan(s). Alphas are calculated relative
                                          to a benchmark computed using style analysis with 15
                                          asset classes. Source: Financial Engines.
Fund Age of Intnl/ Domestic Eq Funds      Ratio of the median age of the international funds and
                                          the median age of the domestic fund offered by the
                                          company’s plan(s). Source: Financial Engines.

Peer Expense Ratio of Intnl Funds         Median relative standing among peers in terms of
                                          expense ratio for the international funds offered by the
                                          company’s plan(s). Source: Financial Engines.
Total Plan Assets                         Total asset aggregated across all the plans offered by the
                                          firm (USD mn). Source: Financial Engines.




                                                  78	  

	  
