                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW LARGE IS THE STOCK COMPONENT OF HUMAN CAPITAL?

                                            Mark Huggett
                                            Greg Kaplan

                                        Working Paper 21238
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21238


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "The Money Value of a Man". The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Mark Huggett and Greg Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
How Large is the Stock Component of Human Capital?
Mark Huggett and Greg Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 21238
June 2015
JEL No. D91,E21,G12,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the value of an individual’s human capital and the associated return on human
capital using U.S. data on male earnings and financial asset returns. We find that (1) the value of human
capital is far below the value implied by discounting earnings at the risk-free rate and (2) the stock
component of the value of human capital is smaller than the bond component at all ages. The stock
component averages less than 35 percent of the value of human capital at each age.


Mark Huggett
Georgetown University
mh5@georgetown.edu

Greg Kaplan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gkaplan@princeton.edu
1    Introduction

A common view is that by far the most valuable asset that most people own is their human capital. We
provide a detailed characterization of the value and return to human capital, and their implications
for portfolio choice over the lifecycle. We first estimate a statistical model for male earnings and
stock returns to describe how earnings move with age, education and a rich structure of aggregate
and idiosyncratic shocks. We then embed this statistical model into a decision problem of the type
analyzed in the literature on the income-fluctuation problem. The properties of the implied human
capital values are calculated by using the stochastic discount factor produced by a solution to this
decision problem to value future earnings after taxes and transfers.

We highlight two main findings. First, the value of human capital is far below the value that would
be implied by discounting net earnings at the risk-free interest rate. The most important reason for
this is the large amount of idiosyncratic earnings risk that we estimate from U.S. data. An agent’s
stochastic discount factor covaries negatively with this component of earnings risk.

This finding is particularly relevant with respect to the view that various legal impediments, including
personal bankruptcy laws, hinder greater skill investment and greater risk sharing in an individual’s
future earnings. The finding that individual human capital valuations are far below the value im-
plied by discounting earnings at the risk-free rate suggests that individual valuations are well below
market valuations. If so, then absent these impediments there is ample scope for alternative financial
arrangements to arise to share some of this idiosyncratic risk.1

Our second main finding involves decomposing the value of human capital at each age into a stock,
bond and orthogonal value component. We find that the stock component is typically below 35 percent
of the value of human capital. This holds for two different educational groups (high school or college
educated males) under a wide range of attitudes towards risk-aversion. We determine the stock share
by projecting the sum of next period’s earnings and human capital value onto next period’s bond and
stock returns. We then value these components using the individual’s stochastic discount factor.

This finding is relevant for understanding optimal portfolio allocation. One view is that, in deciding
how to allocate financial wealth between stock and bonds, the implicit holdings of stock and risk-free
bonds in human wealth are important. This seems particularly relevant if, as we find, the value of
human wealth far exceeds the value of financial wealth for most individuals. Thus, a first-order issue
for the portfolio allocation literature is to decompose the value of human capital into bond and stock
   1
     Krebs, Kuhn and Wright (2013) argue that young, multi-member households are underinsured against mortality risk
- one very specific source of human capital risk.



                                                         1
components and determine the features that drive the magnitude of the stock component.

To the best of our knowledge, Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2007) is the only paper besides
ours that defines the value of human capital as we do and then decomposes this value into components.
On the basis of a rough calibration of a joint earnings-stock-returns process, they conclude that the
stock component of human capital is 50 percent of the value of human capital at age 20 and remains
at 50 percent for the first half of the working lifetime. If correct, then one explanation for why some
individuals hold little or no stock in their financial asset portfolios is that they already hold a large
implicit position in stock, and risk preferences dictate that stock holdings in overall wealth is less than
50 percent.

We find that the stock component of the value of human capital is positive, but is typically far
below the 50 percent value highlighted by Benzoni et al. (2007). A number of model features lead
to a positive stock component. For example, social security retirement benefits that are positively
linked to the level of average earnings, a left-skewed distribution of idiosyncratic, earnings shocks and
a positive conditional correlation between stock returns and the aggregate component of individual
earnings all contribute towards a positive stock component. They also have support in US data.

We do not find much support for the claim that cointegration between the aggregate component
of earnings and stock returns is key to producing a large stock component, at least when such a
relationship is estimated using US data. Cointegration is potentially important as then shock histories
with large stock returns will tend to be associated with positive shocks to average earnings. Earnings
far in the future will then take on stock-like features. Benzoni et al. (2007) calculate the value of
human capital after roughly calibrating such a cointegrated process. In contrast to Benzoni et al.
(2007), all our work is based on estimating the relationship between earnings and stock returns.

Our work is most closely related to two literatures. First, a long line of work values human capital
by discounting the future earnings stream using a deterministic interest rate or discount factor.2 Our
work differs as discounting is done using an individual’s stochastic discount factor, which produces an
individual-specific value of human capital. Huggett and Kaplan (2011) is more closely related. They
put bounds on individual human capital values using knowledge of the earnings and asset returns
process and Euler equation restrictions. Second, there is a vast literature on financial asset allocation
decisions over the lifetime. Coco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005), Benzoni et al. (2007), Lynch and
Tan (2011), and many others focus on quantitative properties of portfolio decisions. We focus on
  2
    See Farr (1853), Dublin and Lotka (1930), Weisbrod (1961), Becker (1975), Graham and Webb (1979), Jorgenson
and Fraumeni (1989), Haveman, Bershadker and Schwabish (2003). Some of this work calculates an aggregate value of
human capital.



                                                       2
decomposing the value of human capital based on a joint earnings-stock-returns process estimated
from micro data.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical framework.
Section 3 to 5 present our main findings. Section 6 explores the robustness and the key drivers of
these findings. Section 7 concludes.


2     Theoretical Framework

This section presents the framework, defines the value of human capital and illustrates the value and
return concepts with a simple example.

2.1    Decision Problem

An agent solves Problem P1. Lifetime utility U (c) is determined by a consumption plan c = (c1 , ..., cJ ).
Consumption at age j is given by a function cj : Z j → R+
                                                        1 that maps shock histories z j = (z , ..., z ) ∈
                                                                                            1        j

Z j into consumption. All the variables that we analyze are functions of these shocks.


         Problem P1: max U (c) subject to

                              aij+1 =             aij Rji + ej and cj ≥ 0, ∀j
                    P                   P
         (1) cj +       i∈I                 i∈I

         (3) aiJ+1 = 0, ∀i ∈ I


The budget constraint says that period resources are divided between consumption cj and savings
        i
P
   i∈I aj+1 . Period resources are determined by an exogenous earnings process ej and by the value of

financial assets brought into the period i∈I aij Rji . The value of financial assets is determined by the
                                         P

amount aij of savings allocated to each financial asset i ∈ I = {1, ..., I} and by the gross return Rji > 0
to each asset i.

2.2    Value and Return Concepts

The value of human capital vj is defined to equal expected discounted dividends (i.e. net earnings)
at a solution (c∗ , a∗ ) = ((c∗1 , ..., c∗J ), {(a∗,i       ∗,i
                                                  1 , ..., aJ+1 )}i∈I ) to Problem P1. Discounting is done using the

agent’s stochastic discount factor from the solution to Problem P1. The stochastic discount factor
mj,k reflects the agent’s marginal valuation of an extra period k consumption good in terms of the
period j consumption good. The stochastic discount factor has a conditional probability term P (z k |z j )




                                                                 3
because human capital values are stated using the mathematical expectations operator E.3

                                   J
                        j
                                   X                                         ∂U (c∗ )/∂ck (z k )  1
                    vj (z ) ≡ E[          mj,k ek |z j ] and mj,k (z k ) ≡
                                                                             ∂U (c )/∂cj (z ) P (z k |z j )
                                                                                  ∗          j
                                 k=j+1

                                                     h
Given the value concept, we define the gross return Rj+1 to human capital to be next period’s value
                                              h                    vj+1 + ej+1
and dividend divided by this period’s value: Rj+1 =                     vj     .   The return to human capital is then
well integrated into standard asset pricing theory. Off corners, all returns Rj+1 satisfy the same type
of restriction: E[mj,j+1 Rj+1 |z j ] = 1.4

2.3     An Interpretation

We now provide an interpretation for vj . The value vj is a personalized price to an agent for the
non-traded earnings stream that the agent owns. The price vj is the value of all the shares (total
shares are normalized to 1) in the future earnings stream. The price process {vj }Jj=1 has the property
that if the agent were allowed to change share holdings in this earnings stream at any age at these
prices, then the agent would optimally decide not to change share holdings and would make exactly
the same consumption and asset choices (c∗ , a∗ ) that were optimal in Problem P1.5

2.4     A Simple Example

A simple example illustrates the value and return concepts. An agent’s preferences are given by a
constant relative risk aversion utility function. Earnings follow an exogenous Markov process. There
is a single, risk-free financial asset.6

                                                                                 c1−ρ
                                                                          (
                                                                                  j
       Utility: U (c) = E[ Jj=1 β j−1 u(cj )|z 1 ], where u(cj ) =
                          P
                                                                                (1−ρ)       :      ρ > 0, ρ 6= 1
                                                                              log(cj )      :      ρ=1
                            Qj
       Earnings: ej =        k=1 zk ,   where ln zk ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ) is i.i.d.
   3
     The expectations operator integrates the relevant age k functions with respect to the distribution P (z k |z j ). In all of
our applied work, the set of partial shock histories is finite and, thus, integration is straightforward summation.
   4                                                   h
                                                             by construction because vj = E[ Jk=j+1 mj,k ek |z j ] implies
                                                                                                  P
     This holds for the return to human capita Rj+1
          v    +e
E[mj,j+1 ( j+1vj j+1 )|z j ] = 1.
    5
      Broadly, the pricing of human capital generalizes the method of pricing a non-traded asset in Lucas (1978). One
proposes a second economy where trade in the non-traded asset is allowed and then finds prices that persuade the agent
not to do so. The result claimed in the text holds for general utility functions under a concavity asssumption and is not
sensitive to the nature of the earnings process or the financial asset returns process. It extends to economies with valued
leisure and endogenous earnings. See Huggett and Kaplan (2012, Theorem 1) for a proof. It also holds under a variety
of borrowing constraints on financial asset holdings.
    6
      The model is a finite-lifetime version of the permanent-shock model analyzed by Constantinides and Duffie (1996).




                                                               4
       Decision Problem: max U (c) subject to

                          (1) cj + aj+1 ≤ aj (1 + r) + ej , (2) cj ≥ 0, aJ+1 ≥ 0

                                2 2
When 1 + r =     1
                 β   exp(ρµ − ρ 2σ ) and initial financial assets are zero, then setting consumption equal to
                                                                                          ∂U (c∗ )/∂ck (z k )      1
earnings each period is optimal. The stochastic discount factor equals mj,k (z k ) ≡      ∂U (c∗ )/∂cj (z j ) P (z k |z j )
                                                                                                                              =
β k−j u′ (ek (z k ))
   u′ (ej (z j ))
                     . This example leads to a   closed-form formula where vj is proportional to earnings ej and
where Rjh is a time-invariant function           of the period shock zj .

Figure 1 illustrates some quantitative properties. The parameter σ, governing the standard deviation
of earnings shocks, varies over the interval [0, 0.3] and µ = −σ 2 /2. As all agents start with earnings
equal to 1, the expected earnings profile over the lifetime is flat and equals 1 in all periods. The
lifetime is J = 46 periods which can be viewed as covering real-life ages 20 − 65. The interest rate is
fixed at r = .01. Thus, the discount factor β is adjusted to be consistent with this interest rate given
                                           1              ρ2 σ2
the remaining parameters: 1 + r =          β   exp(ρµ −     2 ).

Figure 1 shows that the value v1 of an age 1 agent’s human capital falls and that the mean return
in any period rises as the shock standard deviation increases. Thus, a high mean return on human
capital is the flip side of a low value attached to human capital. These patterns are amplified as the
preference parameter ρ increases.

Figure 1 also plots the “naive value” of human capital. The naive value equals earnings discounted at a
                                                                                            e
constant interest rate r that we set equal to the risk-free rate (i.e. v1naive = E[ Jj=2 (1+r)j j−1 |z 1 ]). This
                                                                                   P

follows a traditional empirical procedure that is widely employed in the literature as was mentioned
in the introduction. The naive value is exactly the same in each economy in Figure 1 because the
risk-free interest rate and the mean earnings profile are unchanged across economies. Our notion of
value v1 differs from v1naive because the agent’s stochastic discount factor is allowed to covary with
earnings. Figure 1 shows that negative covariation can be substantial.

Figure 1 plots the total benefit and the marginal benefit of moving from the model consumption plan c
to a smooth consumption plan where csmooth
                                    j      = E1 [cj ] = E1 [ej ] = 1. The benefit function Ω is defined,
following Alvarez and Jermann (2004), by the first equation below. The total benefit is Ω(1) and the
marginal benefit is Ω′ (0). The marginal benefit in Figure 1 increases as the standard deviation of the
period earnings shock increases.


                                      U ((1 + Ω(α))c) = U ((1 − α)c + αcsmooth )




                                                             5
                   PJ            ∂U (c)      smooth (z j ) − c (z j ))
                                                                                 E[ Jj=1 m1,j csmooth
                            P
                            z j ∂cj (z j ) (cj                                                        |z 1 ]
                                                                                   P
                      j=1                                       j                              j
           ′
         Ω (0) =                                                         =                                              −1
                                                                             v1 (z 1 ) + e1 (z 1 ) + a1 (z 1 )(1 + r)
                            PJ P ∂U (c)                      j
                               j=1       z j ∂cj (z j ) cj (z )

The marginal benefit is tightly connected to the value v1 of human capital. To see this, differentiate
the first equation above with respect to α. This implies the leftmost equality in the second equation
above. The rightmost equality holds by rearrangement because the individual solves Problem P1.7 The
numerator term in the second equation is pinned down by asset prices so that E[ Jj=1 m1,j csmooth |z 1 ] =
                                                                               P
                                                                                           j
PJ       1 j−1
  j=1 ( 1+r )  , whereas the denominator is determined by the value of human capital plus initial
earnings and initial wealth. The only unobservable is the value of human capital. The theory then
implies that a high marginal benefit of moving towards perfect consumption smoothing coincides with
a low value of human capital. This straightforward point has not, to the best of our knowledge, been
noted in the literature on the value of human capital.


3       Empirics: Earnings and Asset Returns

We outline an empirical framework for idiosyncratic earnings shocks, aggregate earnings shocks and
stochastic stock returns. Let ei,j,t denote real pretax annual earnings for individual i of age j in year
t. We assume that the natural logarithm of earnings consists of an aggregate component u1 and an
                                                                                                

idiosyncratic component u2 and
                             

                                                  log ei,j,t = u1t + u2i,j,t.                                                (1)

In Section 3.1 we describe the structure of the idiosyncratic component of earnings, our estimation
procedure and the fit of the estimated model. In Section 3.2 we describe the structure and estimation
of the joint process for the aggregate component of earnings and stock returns.

3.1     Idiosyncratic Component of Earnings

The idiosyncratic component of earnings is the sum of four orthogonal components: a common age
effect κj , an individual-specific fixed effect ξ, a persistent component ζ and a transitory component υ.

                                          u2i,j,t = κj + ξi + ζi,j,t + υi,j,t                                                (2)

                                           ζi,j,t = ρζi,j−1,t−1 + ηi,j,t

                                           ζi,0,t = 0.
    7
    More specifically, convert the period budget constraints in Problem P1 into an age-1 budget constraint, using the
fact that the Euler equation holds at a solution to Problem P1. Then the age-1 value of the consumption plan equals
the value of human capital, earnings at age 1 and initial wealth.


                                                               6
The common age effect is modeled as a quartic polynomial. The individual fixed effects are assumed to
be normally distributed with a constant variance σξ2 . The transitory idiosyncratic shocks are assumed
                                                                        2 , and third central moment
to be distributed according to a distribution with zero mean, variance συ,j
µ3,υ,j . In order to capture life-cycle properties of the variance and skewness of earnings we allow the
moments of the transitory component to be age-dependent and model this as a quartic polynomial.

Persistent idiosyncratic shocks are assumed to be distributed according to a distribution with zero
                2 (X ) and third central moment µ
mean, variance ση,t t                             3,η,t (Xt ). The variance and skewness have a linear

trend, in order to capture low frequency trends over the sample period, and are state dependent via
the variable Xt .8 We model Xt as a two-state process. Specifically, we set Xt = 1∆u1t >0 so that Xt is
an indicator function taking on the value 1 in booms and 0 in recessions. Thus, aside from a trend
term, the variance and skewness of the persistent innovations take on different values in expansions
and contractions.

We estimate the idiosyncratic earnings process using data on male annual labor earnings from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) from 1967 to 1996.9 We focus on male heads of households
between ages 22 and 60 with real annual earnings of at least $1, 000. Our measure of annual gross
labor earnings includes pre-tax wages and salaries from all jobs, plus commission, tips, bonuses and
overtime, as well as the labor part of income from self-employment. Labor earnings are inflated to
2008 dollars using the CPI All Urban series. We also consider two sub-samples. Individuals with 12
or fewer years of education are included in the High School sub-sample, while those with at least 16
years or a Bachelor’s degree are included in the College sub-sample.

Estimation is done in two stages. In the first stage we estimate κj by regressing log real annual
earnings on a quartic polynomial in age and a full set of year dummies. This is done separately for
the three education samples. On the basis of the first-stage results for the PSID, and related results
for the Current Population Survey data and NIPA data, we set the contraction years over the time
interval 1967-1996 to be 1970, 1974-5, 1979-82, 1989-91 and 1993.

Residuals from this first-stage regression are then used to estimate the remaining parameters of the
                                                                          
                                        2 (X ), µ
individual earnings equation: ρ, σξ2 , ση,t t     3,η,t (Xt ), σ 2 ,µ
                                                                 ν,j  3,ν,j . We compute the auto-covariance

function for residual log-earnings up to 10 lags for every age/year combination, as well as the third
central moments and third-order auto-covariances. A GMM estimator is then used to estimate the
   8
     Allowing for a trend in the shock variances is important for accurately estimating cyclical variation in the variance
and skewness. This is because of the well-documented increase in the variance of idiosyncratic earnings shocks over this
period. See for example Heathcote, Perri and Violante (2010).
   9
     After 1996 the PSID was converted into a biannual survey.




                                                            7
parameters, using the full set of second and third-order autocovariances as moments.10

The estimated process delivers a good fit to the variance and third central moment of the earnings
distribution as a function of both age and time. The fit of these and other moments for the full sample
is displayed in Figure 2. Corresponding results for the College and High School samples are contained
in the Appendix.

We highlight three findings from Table 1. First, transitory shocks are left skewed for the full sample
and the college sample. Left skewness is needed to match the left skewness of the first-stage residuals
as documented in Figure 2. Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014) document that male earnings growth
rates are left skewed in administrative data. Second, the variance and left skewness of persistent shocks
is higher in recessions than in booms. Thus, consistent with the findings in Storesletten, Telmer and
Yaron (2004), there is evidence for counter-cyclical risk even when the framework is generalized to
account for skewness and a time trend. However, the cyclical variation in risk that we estimate is
less dramatic than their findings. Third, the autoregression parameter ρ is higher for the full sample
and the college sample compared to the high school sample. Thus, persistent innovations of a given
magnitude will be of greater proportional importance for those with a college than a high school
education.

The parameter estimates are broadly consistent with those from related specifications (that do not
account for skewness), that have been estimated elsewhere in the literature and summarized in Meghir
and Pistaferri (2010).11 We note that our estimate of the variance of the transitory component is
approximately 0.1 larger than what has been estimated by others (see for example, Guvenen (2009)).
The source of this difference is due entirely to our broader sample selection. Since it is likely that a
substantial fraction of this variance is due to measurement error, we make an adjustment when using
these estimates as parameters in the structural model.12
  10
     When computing the auto covariance function, individuals are grouped into 5-year age cells so that when calculating
covariances at age j, individuals aged j ∈ [j − 2, j + 2] are used. Only cells with at least 30 observations are retained.
The moments are weighted by n0.5  j,t,l where nj,t,l is the number of observations used to calculate the covariance at lag l in
year t for age j. Individuals aged 22 to 60 are used to construct the empirical auto-covariance functions. This means that
variances, covariance and third moments from ages 24 to 58 are effectively used in the estimation. Standard errors are
calculated by bootstrap with 39 repetitions, thus accounting for estimation error induced by the first-stage estimation.
  11
     Our model is estimated using data on log earnings levels. Estimation using data on log earnings growth rates would
yield larger estimates of the persistent or permanent shocks. See Heathcote et al. (2010) for a discussion of this issue.
We favor the estimation in levels since it allows us to accurately capture the age profile of the cross-sectional variance of
earnings.
  12
     Using indirect inference on a structural model of consumption and savings behavior, Guvenen and Smith (2011)
estimate that the variance of measurement error in male log annual earnings is around 0.02-0.025. Using a validation
study of the PSID, French (2004) concludes that the variance of measurement error in the PSID is around 0.01. However,
both of their samples are substantially more selected than ours, with a cross-sectional variance about 0.1 lower. Assuming
that half of this additional variance is due to measurement error, would suggest that around 0.05-0.06 of the estimated
                                                                                                       2
transitory variance is measurement error. Accordingly, we adjust our estimates of the variance σν,j        down by 1/3 at all



                                                              8
3.2    Aggregate Component of Earnings and Stock Returns

The joint process for the dynamics of the aggregate component of earnings and stock returns is modeled
                              ′
as follows. Let yt = u1t Pt , where Pt is an underlying process that generates risky returns. Gross
returns on stock Rts satisfy log Rts = ∆Pt . We do not assume from the outset that the vector yt is
a stationary process. Rather, we allow for yt to be a first order integrated process and write it as a
Vector Error Correction Model (VECM), a form that is common in the literature on cointegration:13

                                                                                                   
                      ∆yt                  γ                 Γ     α           ∆yt−1                εt
                                =        ′          +                                      +                        (3)
                      wt                β γ+ρ               β Γ 1 + β′α
                                                             ′                 wt−1                β ′ εt
Equation (3) expresses the dynamics of the aggregate states as a coupled system of equations between
the growth rates of the aggregate variables yt and a cointegrating vector wt defined by wt ≡ β ′ yt +
µ + ρ(t + 1). To understand this process, first note that when α = 0, there is no cointegration and the
process collapses to a standard first-order VAR for ∆yt :

                                                ∆yt = γ + Γ∆yt−1 + εt                                               (4)


When α = 0 the growth rate of log aggregate earnings and stock returns follow a first-order VAR.
Mean aggregate earnings growth and mean stock returns are captured by the constant term γ. When
α 6= 0, the process allows for cointegration. The pattern of cointegration is described by β and a
linear time trend ρ in the level of the cointegrating vector wt . The strength of the cointegration, i.e.
how sensitive ∆yt is to wt , is reflected by α. The error term εt is a vector of zero mean IID random
variables with covariance matrix Σ.

We estimate (3) and (4) using data on male annual labor earnings from the the Current Population
Survey (CPS) from 1967 to 2008. Our sample selection criteria and definition of earnings are the same
as those used for the PSID, descibed in section 3.1. We constructe an empirical counterpart to u1t by
estimating a median regression (Least Absolute Deviations) of earnings on a full set of age and time
dummies. We use median regression rather than OLS since it is more robust to the effects of changes
in top coding in the CPS over our sample period. We use the estimates of û1t from our CPS sample,
rather than corresponding estimates from the PSID, as input to the estimation because CPS data has
both a longer time dimension and a larger cross-section sample each year compared to PSID data.
                                                                                                   3
ages. We adjust the third central moment at each age so that the coefficient of skewness, µ3,ν,j /σν,j remains unchanged
after adjusting the demoninator.
  13
     We have used symbols in the specification of the VAR process that are consistent with notation that is common in
the literature on cointegration. The parameters α, β, γ and ρ should not be confused with the preference parameters
that use the same symbols.



                                                               9
Data on equity and bond returns are annual returns. Equity returns are based on a value-weighted
portfolio of all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks including dividends. Bond returns are based on
1-month Treasury bill returns.14 Real returns are calculated by adjusting for realized inflation using
the CPI All Urban series.

Table 2 reports results of estimation of (3) and (4). The parameter estimates reveal a moderate degree
of persistence in aggregate earnings growth. There is a positive correlation between innovations to
earnings growth and innovations to stock returns in all models. This implies that the conditional
correlation between earnings growth and stock returns is positive. This is one feature, among others,
that will later produce a positive conditional correlation between stock and human capital returns.

The implied steady-state dynamics are reported in Table 3. The estimated model matches the observed
correlation structure well. When we input the estimated process into our economic model, we adjust
the constants (γ1 , γ2 ) estimated in Table 2 so that all models produce in steady state E[log Rs ] = .041
and E[∆u1 ] = 0. This facilitates comparisons of human capital value and return properties across
models.

In the Appendix we show how the VECM model in (3) can be derived from an underlying VAR(2)
for yt . We present results from standard lag-order selection tests for the order of a more general
VAR(p) process and find that for our baseline sample, as well as for college and high-school sub-
samples, and for alternative measures of aggregate earnings and alternative sample periods, virtually
all specifications indicate the presence of two lags, i.e. p = 2. This is what leads us to adopt the
model in (3). The Appendix also contains tests of the cointegrating rank of (3) based on the methods
in Johansen (1995). For all three education samples, tests based on the trace statistic, the maximum
eigenvalue or the Schwarz-Bayes information criterion, suggest a cointegrating rank of zero, while the
Hannan-Quinn information criterion suggest the presence of one cointegrating vector. We interpret
these findings as providing only very weak evidence for cointegration. Hence, we adopt the model
without cointegration in (4) as our benchmark specification. However, since these tests may all have
relatively little power given the short annual sample period, we present estimates for the model with
cointegration and later assess the implications.
  14
     All returns come from Kenneth French’s data archive. We restrict attention to the period 1967-2008 since this is the
period that the CPS earnings data covers.




                                                           10
4     The Benchmark Model

We now use the theoretical framework and the empirical results to quantify the value and return to
human capital. The benchmark model has two financial assets. Asset i = 1 is riskless and asset i = 2
is risky. The agent cannot go short on either financial asset.


Benchmark Model: max U (c) subject to c ∈ Γ1 (x, z 1 )


                             Γ1 (x, z 1 ) = {c = (c1 , ..., cJ ) : ∃(a1 , a2 ) s.t. 1 − 2 holds ∀j}


                        aij+1 ≤ x for j = 1 and cj +               aij+1 ≤             aij Rji + ej for j > 1
              P                                          P                   P
    1. cj +       i∈I                                        i∈I                 i∈I


    2. cj ≥ 0 and a1j+1 , a2j+1 ≥ 0, ∀j



The utility function U (c) = U 1 (c1 , ..., cJ ) is of the type employed by Epstein and Zin (1991). It
is defined recursively by applying an aggregator W and a certainty equivalent F . The certainty
equivalent encodes attitudes towards risk with α governing risk-aversion. The aggregator encodes
attitudes towards intertemporal substitution where ρ is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution. We allow for mortality risk via the one-period-ahead survival probability ψj+1 .


                                    U j (cj , ...cJ ) = W (cj , F (U j+1 (cj+1 , ..., cJ )), j)



                  W (a, b, j) = [(1 − β)a1−γ + βψj+1 b1−γ ]1/(1−γ) and F (x) = (E[x1−α ])1/(1−α)

Table 4 summarizes the parameters in the benchmark model.

Demographics: Agents start economic life at real-life age 22, retire at age 61 and live at most up to
age 90. Thus, we set J = 69 and Ret = 40. Agents face a conditional probability ψj+1 of surviving
from period j to period j + 1 that is set to estimates for males from the 1989-91 US Decennial Life
Tables in NCHS (1992).

Preferences: We set the preference parameters to values estimated from Euler equation restrictions.
Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) estimate 1/γ = 1.17 for a prefered specification and conclude
that the risk aversion parameter α in the interval [5, 10] can be obtained under realistic assumptions,
based on household-level data. Thus, the special case of constant-relative-risk-aversion preferences,


                                                                11
where γ = α, is not the parameter configuration that best fits the Euler equation restrictions. We
examine model implications for 1/γ = 1.17 and α ∈ {4, 6, 8, 10, 12}. We set the discount factor β so
that given all other model parameters the model produces a steady-state wealth to income ratio of
3.5.

Initial Wealth: Initial wealth is set to equal 30 percent of mean earnings at age 22.

Earnings and Asset Returns: Earnings and asset returns in the benchmark model are based on
the estimates in Tables 1-3 for the case of no cointegration. The earnings that enter the model are
earnings after taxes and transfers. Before the retirement age, model earnings ej (z) are the process
estimated in Tables 1-3 times (1 − τ ), where τ = .27. After the retirement age, model earnings ej (z)
equal model social security benefits after taxes.


                                               exp(u1 ) exp(κj + ξ + ζ + υ)(1 − τ ) j < Retire
                                           
                  ej (z) = z1 gj (z2 ) =
                                               exp(u1 )b(ξ)(1 − τ )                 otherwise
We group the variables from the statistical model into a state variable z = (z1 , z2 ), where z1 = exp(u1 )
captures the aggregate component of earnings and z2 = (ξ, ζ, υ, ∆u1 , log Rs ) captures the idiosyncratic
components (ξ, ζ, υ), the growth in the aggregate component of earnings and the stock return.15

The fixed effect ξ is normally distributed with the variance given in Table 1. The transitory shock υ
and the persistent shock innovations η follow a Generalized Normal distribution, determined by the
first three central moments. The second and third central moments of the persistent shock innovations
are state dependent as described in Table 1. The age-dependent second and third moments of the
transitory shock distribution are scaled as discussed in footnote 12. See Hosking and Wallis (1997,
Appendix A.8) for a discussion of the Generalized Normal distribution.

Social Security: The nature of social security benefits is potentially of great importance for how
people value future earnings flows after taxes and transfers. Social security wealth is by some calcu-
lations the single most important asset type for many older households.16 Social security benefits in
the model are an annuity payment which is determined by the aggregate earnings level z1 when the
agent reaches the retirement age and by a concave benefit function b. We adopt the benefit function
employed by Huggett and Parra (2010) which captures the bend-point structure of old-age benefits in
the U.S. social security system. We employ the computationally-useful assumption that the benefit
function applies only to an agent’s idiosyncratic fixed effect rather than to an average of the agent’s
  15
      The Appendix discusses how we compute model solutions. The state variable in the model with cointegration is
z = (z1 , z2 ), where z2 = (ξ, ζ, υ, ∆u1 , log Rs , w).
   16
      Poterba, Venti and Wise (2011) calculate that the capitalized wealth implicit in social security retirement annuities
is approximately 33 percent of all wealth for households aged 65-69 and is a much larger percentage of individual wealth
for households with low wealth.


                                                            12
past earnings as in the U.S. system. Thus, the model benefit is risky after entering the labor market
only because the aggregate component of earnings at the time of retirement is risky. Old-age benefit
payments in the U.S. system are indexed to average economy-wide earnings when an individual hits
age 60.17 This is captured within the model by the fact that benefits are proportional to z1 ≡ exp(u1 ).

Properties of the benchmark model are displayed in Figure 3, which is constructed by simulating
many shock histories, calculating allocations along these histories and then taking averages at each
age. Figure 3 shows that mean consumption and mean earnings net of taxes and transfers are hump
shaped over the lifetime. The college profile is much steeper than the high school earnings profile.
One consequence of this is that a larger fraction of young college agents will hold exactly zero financial
assets early in life compared to high school agents. This has implications for how strongly college
agents discount future earnings early in life.


5        Human Capital Values and Returns: Benchmark Model

We report properties of the benchmark model based on the high school and the college subsamples.
Results for the full sample are typically between the results for these education groups.

5.1      Human Capital Values

Figure 4 plots the value of human capital in the benchmark model and a decomposition of this value.
The mean value of human capital over the lifetime is hump shaped and is lower for higher values of
the risk aversion coefficient.18 For comparison purposes, we also plot the value of human capital that
would be implied by discounting future earnings at the risk-free rate. We label this the naive value.

Our notion of value lies far below the naive value. This occurs because of negative covariation between
an agent’s stochastic discount factor and earnings and because agents are sometimes on the corner of
the risk-free asset choice. Corner solutions occur more frequently early in life for college agents than
for high school agents due to differences in the mean earnings profile. When an agent is on the corner,
then the agent discounts certain future earnings at more than the risk-free rate.

We now decompose human capital values into a bond, stock and a residual-value component. To do
so, we project next period’s human capital payout vj+1 + ej+1 onto the space of conditional asset
returns. The decomposition is carried out in the two equations below. The human capital payout
    17
    See the Social Security Handbook (2012, Ch. 7).
    18
    Figure 3(a)-(b) are constructed by first computing human capital values at each age as a function of the state. We
then calculate the sample average of the value at each age, conditional on survival, by simulating many realizations of
the state variable over the lifetime. Computational methods are described in the Appendix.



                                                          13
contains a component ( i∈I αij Rj+1
                                i
                      P
                                    ) spanned by asset returns and a component (ǫj+1 ) orthogonal to
asset returns, where αij are the projection coefficients. When the agent is off corners in the holding of
                                          i
asset i then the Euler equation E[mj,j+1 Rj+1 |z j ] = 1 holds.19

                                                                     X
                      vj = E[mj,j+1 (vj+1 + ej+1 )|z j ] = E[mj,j+1 (  αij Rj+1
                                                                            i
                                                                                + ǫj+1 )|z j ]
                                                                            i∈I


                                       X
                                vj =         αij E[mj,j+1 Rj+1
                                                           i
                                                               |z j ] + E[mj,j+1 ǫj+1 |z j ]
                                       i∈I

Figure 4 calculates the value of the bond, stock and orthogonal components as a fraction of the value
of human capital at each age and then averages these ratios across the states that occur at each age.
The bond component averages more than 80 percent of the value of human capital. This holds for
both education groups and for a range of risk-aversion parameters.

Figure 4 shows that the stock component of the value of human capital is positive on average. It
averages below 35 percent at all ages for high school agents and below 20 percent for college agents for
a wide range of risk-aversion parameters. The stock component is positive, at a given age and state,
provided that the sum of next period’s earnings and human capital value covaries positively with the
return to stock, conditional on this period’s state.20 Our empirical work, as summarized in Table 2,
directly relates to the conditional comovement of earnings and stock returns since cov(ε1,t , ε2,t ) > 0
in all the estimated models.

The orthogonal component has a large negative value early in the lifetime. Given that the orthogonal
component has a zero mean, this is due to strong negative covariation between the orthogonal compo-
nent and the stochastic discount factor early in life. This occurs, for example, because consumption
and future utility are increasing in the realization of the persistent idiosyncratic earnings shock, other
things equal. The persistent shock component is particularly important early in life as the effect of
such a shock has many periods over which it impacts future earnings.

While it may seem plausible that the value of human capital is largely bond-like during retirement,
it is useful to understand why it is not always 100 percent bond-like. If a retired agent will in all
future date-events end up holding positive bonds, then the decomposition will indeed calculate that
this agent’s human capital in retirement is 100 percent bond-like as social security annuity payments
in the model are riskless after retirement. However, if an agent hits the corner of the bond decision in
the future under some sequence of risky stock returns, then this is not true. The mean of the agent’s
                                                   i
 19
      We allow for corners in which case E[mj,j+1 Rj+1 |z j ] ≤ 1.
 20
      The Appendix describes our methods for computing the projection coefficients in the value decomposition.


                                                             14
stochastic discount factor will be less than the inverse of the gross risk-free rate in such an event.
Thus, the agent discounts future social security transfers at greater than the risk-free rate beyond this
date. The value of these transfers at earlier dates takes on a positive stock component provided that
a corner solution is induced by low stock return realizations. In summary, while the value of human
capital is mostly bond-like in retirement, it is not 100 percent bonds because agents run down financial
assets, hit a corner solution on the holdings of the risk-free asset and live off social security transfers.

5.2     Human Capital Returns

Figure 5 plots properties of human capital returns. Mean returns are very large early in the working
lifetime. To understand what drives the mean human capital returns, it is useful to return to the
main ideas used in the value decomposition. The first equation below decomposes gross returns by
decomposing the future payout into a bond, a stock and an orthogonal component. The second
equation shows that the conditional mean human capital return always equals the weighted sum of
the conditional mean of the bond and stock return.21


                                    h        vj+1 + ej+1   αbj Rj+1
                                                                b   + αsj Rj+1
                                                                           s   +ǫ
                                   Rj+1 ≡                =
                                                  vj                 vj


                                      h
                                                     αbj                αsj
                                   E[Rj+1 |z j ] =          b
                                                         E[Rj+1 |z j ] + E[Rj+1
                                                                            s
                                                                                |z j ]
                                                     vj                 vj

The weights on the bond and stock return do not always sum to one. When the agent’s Euler equation
for both stock and bonds hold with equality, then these weights will sum to more than one exactly
when the value of the orthogonal component is negative.22 The value of the orthogonal component
of human capital payouts is negative early in the working lifetime. Human capital returns can vastly
exceed a convex combination of stock and bond returns when the weights sum to more than one.

The mean return to human capital is near the risk-free rate immediately after retirement but sub-
sequently increases.        The high return towards the end of the lifetime might at first seem odd.
This should not be surprising, however, as in the penultimate period vJ−1 = E[mJ−1,J eJ ] and
1 = E[mJ−1,J eJ /vJ−1 ]. As the payment eJ , conditional on surviving to the last period, is certain,
the return is RJh = eJ /vJ−1 = 1/E[mJ−1,J ]. Thus, the return equals the risk-free bond rate when the
agent is off the corner (i.e. RJh = 1/E[mJ−1,J ] = Rb ) but can exceed the risk-free rate when the agent
  21
    The orthogonal component drops out as, with a risk-free asset, the mean of the orthogonal component is zero.
  22
    In this case, vj = E[mj+1 (vj+1 + ej+1 )] = αbj + αsj + E[mj+1 ǫj+1 ] and E[mj+1 ǫj+1 ] < 0 imply αbj /vj + αsj /vj > 1. Of
course, the weights for decomposing returns can and do sum to more than one even when Euler equations do not hold
with equality.


                                                              15
is on the corner (i.e. RJh = 1/E[mJ−1,J ] ≥ Rb ). Towards the end of the lifetime an increasing fraction
of agents in the model are on this corner and live off their social security annuity.

The positive correlation between human capital returns and stock returns in Figure 5 is based in
part on two properties. First, innovations to the aggregate component of earnings growth and to
stock returns are positively correlated. This implies that the component of human capital returns
related directly to the earnings payout next period covaries positively with stock returns. Second, the
old-age transfer benefit formula in the benchmark model is proportional to the aggregate component
of earnings at the retirement age. The U.S. social security system has a similar feature as old-age
benefits are proportional to a measure of average earnings in the economy when the worker turns age
60, other things equal.

5.3    Portfolio Allocation

Figure 6 describes portfolio allocation for three measures of wealth. Higher values of the risk-aversion
coefficient are associated with lower average stock shares of financial wealth. The average stock share
increases just before retirement. This is connected to the falling stock share of the value of human
capital just before retirement.

The remainder of Figure 6 divides overall wealth (human plus financial wealth) into components. In
the model human capital averages more than 50 percent of overall wealth at all ages.23 Early in the
working lifetime and in retirement the value of an agent’s human capital makes up on average an
overwhelming share of overall wealth. This holds despite the fact that human capital values are far
below naive values.

We also divide overall wealth into bond and stock components using the human capital value de-
composition. Thus, to account for overall stock holdings, we add together stock directly held in the
financial wealth portfolio and the stock position embodied in the value of human capital. For both
education groups we find that the bond component of overall wealth exceeds the stock component
at all ages. The overall stock share early in life is largely determined by the decomposition analysis
presented earlier. This is because financial assets are small in value compared to the value of human
capital and negative positions in either financial asset are not allowed.
  23
    This is the mean of the shares produced across simulations of a population of individuals, each drawing a sequence
of shocks from the stochastic process for aggregate and idiosyncratic shock variables.




                                                         16
6     Discussion: Robustness and Drivers

The previous section documented properties of human capital values in the benchmark model. We
find that (1) the value of human capital is far below the value implied by discounting future earnings
at the risk-free rate and (2) the stock component of human capital is less than 35 percent of the value
of human capital at all ages. This section determines the robustness and drivers of these findings.

6.1   Value of Human Capital

What drives the value of human capital to be substantially below the naive value? To answer this
question, we consider a number of perturbations of the benchmark model. For each perturbation, we
recalculate human capital values and then plot the results. The benchmark model analyzed in this
section is the model in Table 4 that sets risk aversion to α = 6 and that sets earnings to the process
without cointegration estimated for the full sample.

We first consider perturbations that help agents to better smooth consumption. Intuitively, such
perturbations lessen the negative covariation between the stochastic discount factor and earnings.
One perturbation starts agents off with an initial wealth of 1 times mean earnings at age 22 rather
than the benchmark value of 0.30 times mean earnings. The other perturbations allow agents to hold
negative balances in the risk-free asset up to 1.0 times mean earnings or up to the natural borrowing
limit. Figure 7 shows that while all perturbations increase the human capital value early in life human
capital values remain well below the naive value.

Next we examine the extent to which transitory or persistent idiosyncratic shocks are key drivers.
First, we eliminate transitory or persistent shocks. Figure 7 shows that eliminating transitory shocks
increases human capital values. However, the quantitative effects are small compared to the massive
impact of eliminating persistent idiosyncratic shocks. Eliminating persistent shocks produces more
than a tripling of the value of human capital early in life. Lastly, we impose that persistent shocks
have no skewness and no cyclical variation in variance or skewness. Figure 7 shows that this increases
human capital values and that its effect is more powerful than eliminating transitory shocks. This
foreshadows the importance of skewness as a driver of the stock component of human capital values
that we find in the next subsection. We note that for each of these three changes we re-estimate the
model with the new restrictions imposed.

We examine the effect of altering the preference parameter γ, while keeping relative risk aversion
fixed. The value of 1/γ controls the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). Figure 7 shows that
increasing the IES to 2 increases the human capital value slightly, whereas decreasing the IES to 0.5

                                                    17
reduces the value of human capital. Neither change alters the finding that human capital values are
substantially below naive values.

6.2   Stock Share of Human Capital Values

What drives the magnitude of the stock share of human capital values? We answer this question by
analyzing four perturbations of the benchmark model. We (i) vary the borrowing constraint, (ii) vary
the IES, (iii) eliminate the cyclical changes in persistent idiosyncratic shocks and/or eliminate the
left-skewness in these shocks and (iv) allow cointegration.

Figure 8 shows the results. Raising the IES to 2 lowers the stock component slightly whereas lowering
the IES to 0.5 raises the stock component slightly. Allowing borrowing up to one times mean earnings
has almost no impact on the stock component.

Next we eliminate skewness and/or eliminate the cyclical variation in shock distributions. The case
of no skewness means that the generalized normal distribution analyzed in the benchmark model is
replaced by the normal distribution. In all cases, we re-estimate the idiosyncratic shock process under
the new restrictions to best match data moments.

Figure 8 shows that eliminating left-skewness and eliminating cyclicality decreases the stock component
of human capital values relative to the benchmark model. This could be stated more positively if one
took the benchmark model to be the model with no skewness and no cyclical changes in idiosyncratic
shocks. Using that model as a benchmark, implies that allowing left-skewed shocks and allowing
the distribution of such shocks to vary cyclically increases the stock component of human capital.
Furthermore, Figure 8 shows that the incremental effect of adding left-skewness is substantially larger
than adding cyclical variation in a distribution displaying no skewness. Thus, we find that skewness
is a quantitatively important factor that increases the stock share of human capital values and, at the
same time, acts to lower human capital values.

Figure 8 also addresses whether cointegration between earnings and stock returns is important for
the magnitude of the stock share. First, we compare the benchmark model and the model allowing
cointegration when both are estimated using CPS 1967-2008 data. We find that allowing cointegration
slightly decreases the stock share of human capital values. One might be skeptical that a cointegrated
relationship can be precisely estimated over a short time period. For this reason, we repeat the analysis
using an aggregate measure of earnings growth to proxy male earnings growth. We use NIPA 1929-
2009 data on aggregate wages and salaries and divide this by the labor force to get average earnings.
We re-estimate both models from Table 2 using data over the period 1929-2009. Figure 8 shows that


                                                   18
the stock share increases somewhat when these estimated models are incorporated into the economic
model. However, allowing cointegration does not significantly alter the stock share compared to the
case of no cointegration, given the new data.

In summary, Figure 8 shows that two changes to the benchmark model produce a larger stock share.
These are to decrease the IES to values below 1 and to re-estimate the model using NIPA data over
a longer time period. We also find that skewness is a key driver of the stock component. Abstracting
from skewness implies a much smaller stock share of human capital.24 While one may conjecture that
allowing cointegration may substantially increase the stock share of the value of human capital, we do
not find support for this when the models are estimated using the same data set.

This last finding may seem surprising in light of the work of Benzoni et al. (2007). The main focus
of their work is to examine how cointegration affects portfolio choice as a single parameter κ that
controls the strength of adjustment in the cointegrating relationship increases. Stock holding in the
financial asset portfolio is zero early in life in their model for a sufficiently large value of κ, when the
relative-risk aversion coefficient is set to equal 5. For the parameter configuration that they highlight,
the stock component of the value of human capital is 50 percent at age 20 and remains at 50 percent
throughout the first half of the working lifetime.

Our model differs from their work in a number of dimensions. For example, we model social security
benefits, allow idiosyncratic shocks to be drawn from a skewed distribution and allow for cyclical
changes in idiosyncratic shocks. They abstract from all of these features. In addition, the method-
ology differs. While we estimate the idiosyncratic and aggregate shock structure from micro data,
they roughly calibrate a cointegrated aggregate process governing stock returns and the aggregate
component of earnings.

To make contact with Benzoni et al. (2007), we simply take the calibrated aggregate process from their
work and substitute it into our model. Their calibrated process has the discrete-time approximation
of the form indicated below. We take as given their parameter value for κ = 0.15 and their values
governing the variance-covariance structure of the shock terms (ǫ1 , ǫ2 , ǫ3 ), but we adjust the constant
terms (γ1 , γ2 ) so that E[logR] = .041 and E[∆u] = 0.25
  24
     One might conjecture that increasing the mean growth rate E[∆u1t ] from the sample average of zero might matter.
Increasing this mean from zero to 1 or 2 percent substantially increases individual human capital values while leaving
the stock share essentially unchanged in the benchmark model.
  25
     Appendix A.3 shows how we go from their continuous-time formulation to the discrete-time model and computes
steady-state properties. The Benzoni et al. (2007) process produces an unconditional standard deviation of SD(∆ut ) =
0.069 which is more than twice the values that we calculate in US earnings data as documented in Table A.4 and Table
A.5.




                                                         19
                                                               
                  ∆ut+1         γ1       0 0 −κ      ∆ut         ǫ1,t+1
                log Rt+1  =  γ2  +  0 0  0   log Rt  +  ǫ2,t+1                                 (5)
                   wt+1         0        0 0 1−κ      wt         ǫ3,t+1

Figure 9 shows how the stock share of the value of human capital changes across models. Figure 9(a)
compares the benchmark model (without cointegration) from this section to the model that results
from replacing the aggregate dynamics with the Benzoni et al. (2007) process featuring cointegration,
as constructed above. When inserted into our framework, the Benzoni et al. (2007) process produces
a stock share that is well below the 50 percent value that they highlight.

Figure 9(b) considers a different comparison. The benchmark model is now modified to exclude
skewness and cyclical variation in idiosyncratic risk, but is still estimated to best match data. We
then insert the Benzoni et al. (2007) process into this model. Figure 9(b) shows that once again both
models produce a stock share that is well below 50 percent over the lifetime. The results in Figure 9
are essentially unchanged if the mean log earnings growth rate is increased to equal 1 percent in all
the models rather than the benchmark value of zero.


7    Conclusion

Our analysis highlights two main properties of human capital values based on an analysis of U.S.
data on males earnings and financial asset returns: (1) the value of human capital is far below the
value implied by discounting future earnings at the risk-free rate and (2) the stock component of the
value of human capital averages less than 35 percent at each age over the working lifetime. These
properties hold for (i) three different educational groups, (ii) a wide range of parameters characterizing
risk aversion, (iii) a range of assumptions on borrowing constraints and (iv) two different statistical
models for earnings estimated using male earnings data.

We investigate the main drivers of these two findings. Persistent idiosyncratic shocks and the left
skewness of idiosyncratic shocks are two key drivers of low human capital values. In our model frame-
work, an agent’s stochastic discount factor falls for larger realizations of idiosyncratic shocks, other
things equal. A number of model features lead to a positive stock component of the value of human
capital including (i) social security benefits linked to average earnings, (ii) positive conditional correla-
tion between the aggregate component of earnings and stock returns and (iii) left-skewed idiosyncratic
shocks. We provide support for all three of these features in US data. We do not find much support
for the idea that cointegration between the aggregate component of earnings and stock returns is a
key factor driving the size of the stock component of the value of human capital.


                                                     20
References
   Alvarez, F. and U. Jermann (2004), Using Asset Prices to Measure the Cost of Business Cycles,
   Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1223-56.
   Becker, G. (1975), Human Capital, Second Edition, National Bureau of Economic Research.
   Benzoni, L., Collin-Dufresne, P. and R. Goldstein (2007), Portfolio Choice over the Life-Cycle
   when the Stock and Labor Markets are Cointegrated, Journal of Finance, 62, 2123-67.
   Coco, J., Gomes, F. and P. Maenhout (2005), Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the Life
   Cycle, Review of Financial Studies, 18, 491-533.
   Constantinides, G. and D. Duffie (1996), Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Consumers, Journal
   of Political Economy, 104, 219-40.
   Dublin, L. and A. Lotka (1930), The Money Value of a Man, The Ronald Press Company.
   Epstein, L. and S. Zin (1991), Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of Con-
   sumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of Political Economy, 99, 263-86.
   Farr, W. (1853), The Income and Property Tax, Journal of the Statistical Society of London,
   16, 1-44.
   French, E. (2004), The Labor Supply Response to (Mismeasured but) Predictable Wage Changes,
   Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2), 602-613.
   Graham, J. and R. Webb (1979), Stocks and Depreciation of Human Capital: New Evidence
   from a Present-Value Perspective, Review of Income and Wealth, 25, 209- 24.
   Guvenen, F. (2009), An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes, Review of Economic
   Dynamics, 12(1), 58-79.
   Guvenen, F. and A. Smith (2011), Inferring Labor Income Risk from Economic Choices: An
   Indirect Inference Approach, manuscript.
   Guvenen, F., Ozkan, S. and J. Song (2014), The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk, Journal
   of Political Economy, 122, 621-60.
   Haveman, R., Bershadker, A. and J. Schwabish (2003), Human Capital in the United States
   from 1975 to 2000: Patterns of Growth and Utilization, Upjohn Institute.
   Heathcote, J., Perri, F. and G. Violante (2010), Unequal We Stand: An Empirical Analysis of
   Economic Inequality in the United States, Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1), 15-51.
   Hosking, J. and J. Wallis (1997), Regional Frequency Analysis, Cambridge University Press.
   Huggett, M. and G. Kaplan (2011), Human Capital Values and Returns: Bounds Implied By
   Earnings and Asset Returns Data, Journal of Economic Theory, 146, 897-919.
   Huggett, M. and G. Kaplan (2012), The Money Value of a Man, NBER Working Paper 18066.
   Huggett, M. and J.C. Parra (2010), How Well Does the U.S. Social Insurance System Provide
   Social Insurance?, Journal of Political Economy, 118, 76-112.
   Johansen, S. (1995), Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive Models,
   Oxford University Press.




                                              21
Jorgenson, D. and B. Fraumeni (1989), The Accumulation of Human and Nonhuman Capital,
1948- 1984, in The Measurement of Saving, Investment and Wealth, R. Lipsey and H. Tice, eds.
NBER Studies in Income and Wealth.
Krebs, T., Kuhn, M. and M. Wright (2013), Human Capital Risk, Contract Enforcement and
the Macroeconomy, manuscript.
Lucas, R. (1978), Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica, 46, 1429- 45.
Lynch, A. and S. Tan (2011), Labor Income Dynamics at Business-Cycle Frequencies: Implica-
tions for Portfolio Choice, Journal of Financial Economics, 101, 333-59.
Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2010), Earnings, Consumption and Lifecycle Choices, NBER Work-
ing Paper.
NCHS (1992), US Decennial Life Tables 1989-1991, Washington, DC: Hyattsville, Md.
Poterba, J., Venti, S. and D. Wise (2011), The Composition and Drawdown of Wealth in Re-
tirement?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, 95-118.
Social Security Handbook (2012), available http://www.ssa.gov.
Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. and A. Yaron (2004), Cyclical Dynamics in Idiosyncratic Labor-
Market Risk, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 695-717.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. and O. Attanasio (2003), Stock-Market Participation, Intertemporal Sub-
stitution, and Risk-Aversion, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 93, 383-91.
Weisbrod, B. (1961), The Valuation of Human Capital, Journal of Political Economy, 69, 425-
36.




                                          22
40                                                              45

35                                                              40                            ρ=1
                                                                                              ρ=2
                                                                35
30                                                                                            ρ=4
                                                                30
25
                                                                25
20
                                                                20
15
                                                                15
       Naive value
10     ρ=1                                                      10
       ρ=2
 5     ρ=4                                                       5

 0                                                               0
  0   0.05      0.1        0.15       0.2      0.25       0.3     0        0.05     0.1        0.15       0.2   0.25   0.3
                σ: st dev earnings shocks                                           σ: st dev earnings shocks

             (a) Value of human capital                                    (b) Mean return human capital (%)
                            600

                                                Marginal benefit (ρ = 2)
                            500                 Total benefit (ρ = 2)


                            400


                            300


                            200


                            100


                              0
                               0        0.05      0.1        0.15       0.2       0.25      0.3
                                                  σ: st dev earnings shocks

                           (c) Benefit of moving to a smooth consumption plan
                           (%)



                Figure 1: Human capital values and returns: a simple example




                                                            23
0.8                                                                    0.8

                                                                     0.75
0.7
                                                                       0.7

                                                                     0.65
0.6
                                                                       0.6

0.5                                                                  0.55

                                                                       0.5
0.4
                                                      Data           0.45
                                                      Model            0.4
0.3
                                                                     0.35                                                   Data
                                                                                                                            Model
0.2                                                                    0.3
 1965     1970    1975   1980     1985   1990       1995      2000       20       25    30         35        40   45   50   55      60
            (a) Variance of log earnings by year                                   (b) Variance of log earnings by age
  0                                                                      0

−0.1
                                                                     −0.1
−0.2

−0.3                                                                 −0.2

−0.4
                                                                     −0.3
−0.5
                                                                     −0.4
−0.6

−0.7                                                                 −0.5
−0.8
                                                                     −0.6
−0.9                                                  Data                                                                  Data
                                                      Model                                                                 Model
 −1
 1965      1970   1975   1980     1985   1990       1995      2000       20       25       30      35        40   45   50   55      60
      (c) Third central moment of log earnings by year                       (d) Third central moment of log earnings by age
                                 0.4

                                0.35

                                 0.3

                                0.25

                                 0.2

                                0.15

                                 0.1

                                0.05                                                            Data
                                                                                                Model
                                  0
                                   0            2             4              6         8                10
                                         (e) Average autocovariance function



              Figure 2: Fit of estimated idiosyncratic earnings model for the full sample



                                                                  24
     2.5                                                            2.5
                                          Earnings                                                      Earnings
                                          Consumption: RA=4                                             Consumption: RA=4
                                          Consumption: RA=6                                             Consumption: RA=6
      2                                   Consumption: RA=8          2                                  Consumption: RA=8
                                          Consumption: RA=10                                            Consumption: RA=10
                                          Consumption: RA=12                                            Consumption: RA=12

     1.5                                                            1.5




      1                                                              1




     0.5                                                            0.5




      0                                                              0
             30     40     50      60     70       80          90            30     40     50     60     70      80          90

       (a) Mean earnings and consumption (high school)                    (b) Mean earnings and consumption (college)



                             Figure 3: Life-cycle profiles in the benchmark model
Notes: The vertical scale is in units of 100,000 dollars in year 2008.




                                                                25
      40                                                              40
                                             Mean Naive Value                                                  Mean Naive Value
                                             Mean Value: RA=4                                                  Mean Value: RA=4
      35                                     Mean Value: RA=6         35                                       Mean Value: RA=6
                                             Mean Value: RA=8                                                  Mean Value: RA=8
      30                                     Mean Value: RA=10        30                                       Mean Value: RA=10
                                             Mean Value: RA=12                                                 Mean Value: RA=12

      25                                                              25


      20                                                              20


      15                                                              15


      10                                                              10


       5                                                               5


       0                                                               0
             30       40     50      60     70       80          90            30        40     50     60     70       80       90

             (a) Human capital values (high school)                                 (b) Human capital values (college)



      1                                                                    1


     0.8                                                               0.8


     0.6                                                               0.6
                                          Stock Component                                                    Stock Component
                                          Bond Component                                                     Bond Component
     0.4                                  Orthogonal Component         0.4                                   Orthogonal Component

     0.2                                                               0.2


      0                                                                    0


    −0.2                                                              −0.2

             30       40     50     60      70       80          90             30        40     50     60     70        80         90

                  (c) Decomposition (high school)                                      (d) Decomposition (college)



                              Figure 4: Human capital values and a decomposition
Notes: The vertical scale in Figure 3 (a)-(b) is in units of 100,000 dollars in year 2008.




                                                                  26
40                                                                                 40
                                            Mean Expected Return: RA=4                                       Mean Expected Return: RA=4
35                                          Mean Expected Return: RA=6             35                        Mean Expected Return: RA=6
                                            Mean Expected Return: RA=8                                       Mean Expected Return: RA=8
                                            Mean Expected Return: RA=10                                      Mean Expected Return: RA=10
30                                                                                 30
                                            Mean Expected Return: RA=12                                      Mean Expected Return: RA=12

25                                                                                 25


20                                                                                 20


15                                                                                 15


10                                                                                 10


 5                                                                                  5


 0                                                                                  0
             30        40        50          60        70        80           90              30        40        50        60       70        80           90

        (a) Human capital returns (%) (high school)                                        (b) Human capital returns (%) (college)
 1                                                                                  1
                                                    Mean Correlation: RA=4                                                        Mean Correlation: RA=4
0.9                                                 Mean Correlation: RA=6         0.9                                            Mean Correlation: RA=6
                                                    Mean Correlation: RA=8                                                        Mean Correlation: RA=8
0.8                                                 Mean Correlation: RA=10        0.8                                            Mean Correlation: RA=10
                                                    Mean Correlation: RA=12                                                       Mean Correlation: RA=12
0.7                                                                                0.7

0.6                                                                                0.6

0.5                                                                                0.5

0.4                                                                                0.4

0.3                                                                                0.3

0.2                                                                                0.2

0.1                                                                                0.1

 0                                                                                  0
        25        30        35        40       45       50       55       60             25        30        35        40    45       50       55      60

      (c) Correlation: HC, stock returns (high school)                                   (d) Correlation: HC, stock returns (college)



                                           Figure 5: Properties of human capital returns




                                                                               27
       1                                                                       1
               Stock share of financial wealth: RA=4
     0.9       Stock share of financial wealth: RA=6                         0.9
               Stock share of financial wealth: RA=8
     0.8       Stock share of financial wealth: RA=10                        0.8
               Stock share of financial wealth: RA=12
     0.7                                                                     0.7

     0.6                                                                     0.6

     0.5                                                                     0.5

     0.4                                                                     0.4

     0.3                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                      Stock share of financial wealth: RA=4
     0.2                                                                     0.2                      Stock share of financial wealth: RA=6
                                                                                                      Stock share of financial wealth: RA=8
     0.1                                                                     0.1                      Stock share of financial wealth: RA=10
                                                                                                      Stock share of financial wealth: RA=12
       0                                                                       0
               30        40         50         60       70       80     90            30      40      50        60       70         80         90

           (a) Stock share of financial wealth (high school)                        (b) Stock share of financial wealth (college)
       1                                                                       1

     0.9                                                                     0.9

     0.8                                                                     0.8

     0.7                                                                     0.7

     0.6                                                                     0.6

     0.5                                                                     0.5
                                                        Stocks                                                           Stocks
     0.4                                                                     0.4
                                                        Bonds                                                            Bonds
     0.3                                                Human Capital        0.3                                         Human Capital

     0.2                                                                     0.2

     0.1                                                                     0.1

       0                                                                       0
               30        40         50         60       70       80     90            30      40      50        60       70         80         90

                    (c) Portfolio shares (high school)                                      (d) Portfolio shares (college)


                                         Stocks                                                            Stocks
      1                                  Bonds                                 1                           Bonds
                                         Orthogonal                                                        Orthogonal

     0.8                                                                      0.8


     0.6                                                                      0.6


     0.4                                                                      0.4


     0.2                                                                      0.2


      0                                                                        0


    −0.2                                                                     −0.2
               30        40        50         60        70       80     90             30     40      50        60        70        80         90

             (e) Overall portfolio shares (high school)                                (f) Overall portfolio shares (college)



                                         Figure 6: Portfolio shares in the benchmark model
Notes: Financial portfolio shares in panels (a)-(b) are averages over the sub-population with positive asset holdings.
Panels (c)-(f) present results setting risk aversion equal to 6.



                                                                         28
     30                                                                      30
                                                 Naive Value                                                  Naive Value
                                                 Benchmark                                                    Benchmark
                                                 With borrowing (1x)                                          No skewness and no cyclicality in shocks
     25                                          With borrowing (NBL)        25                               No persistent shocks
                                                 High initial wealth                                          No transitory shocks

     20                                                                      20



     15                                                                      15



     10                                                                      10



      5                                                                       5



      0                                                                       0
            30     40      50          60        70          80         90                30        40        50        60       70        80            90

      (a) Human capital values (borrowing, initial wealth)                             (b) Human capital values (idiosyncratic risk)

                                  30
                                                                                                     Naive Value
                                                                                                     Benchmark
                                                                                                     IES=2
                                  25                                                                 IES=0.5


                                  20



                                  15



                                  10



                                   5



                                   0
                                            30          40        50              60           70        80        90

                                                   (c) Human capital values (IES)



                                Figure 7: What drives the value of human capital?
Notes: In panel (a) “With borrowing (1x)” refers to the model that allows borrowing up to 1 times average annual
earnings, and “With borrowing (NBL)” refers to model that allows borrowing up to the “Natural Borrowing Limits” i.e.
limits that impose only that the agent must be able to repay his debt in all states of the world.




                                                                         29
       1                                                                  1
                                                     Benchmark                                                Benchmark
     0.9                                             IES=2               0.9                                  Allowing for Borrowing
                                                     IES=0.5
     0.8                                                                 0.8

     0.7                                                                 0.7

     0.6                                                                 0.6

     0.5                                                                 0.5

     0.4                                                                 0.4

     0.3                                                                 0.3

     0.2                                                                 0.2

     0.1                                                                 0.1

       0                                                                  0
             30     40       50    60       70        80            90         30     40     50       60        70       80            90

           (a) Stock component of human capital (IES)                     (b) Stock component of human capital (borrowing)
       1                                                                  1
                                    Benchmark                                                     Benchmark
     0.9                            No skewness, With Cyclicality        0.9                      Cointegration (CPS, 1967−2008)
                                    With skewness, No Cyclicality                                 Cointegration (NIPA, 1929−2009)
     0.8                            No skewness, No Cyclicality          0.8                      No cointegration (NIPA, 1929−2009)

     0.7                                                                 0.7

     0.6                                                                 0.6

     0.5                                                                 0.5

     0.4                                                                 0.4

     0.3                                                                 0.3

     0.2                                                                 0.2

     0.1                                                                 0.1

       0                                                                  0
             30     40       50    60       70        80            90         30     40     50       60        70       80            90

     (c) Stock component of human capital (counter- (d) Stock component of human capital (cointegration)
     cyclical risk)



                         Figure 8: What drives the stock component of human capital?
Notes: When comparing different models estimated on the same data set or the same model estimated on different data
sets, the constants in all models are reset so that E[∆uit ] = 0 and E[log Rts ] = 0.041 as previously noted in Table 3.




                                                                     30
                       Benchmark                                                                  Benchmark, no skew, no cyclcality
 0.45                  with Benzoni et al. (2007) aggregate process         0.45                  with Benzoni et al. (2007) aggregate process

  0.4                                                                        0.4

 0.35                                                                       0.35

  0.3                                                                        0.3

 0.25                                                                       0.25

  0.2                                                                        0.2

 0.15                                                                       0.15

  0.1                                                                        0.1

 0.05                                                                       0.05

   0                                                                          0

−0.05                                                                      −0.05
        30        40     50         60        70        80            90           30        40     50         60        70        80            90

             (a) Stock share of human capital                                           (b) Stock share of human capital



                                   Figure 9: Analysis of Benzoni et al. (2007)




                                                                       31
                  Table 1: Parameter Estimates for the Idiosyncratic Earnings Process
                                                 Full     College High School
                                                Sample Sample         Sample

                         Fixed Effect
                         σξ2                           0.082      0.064         0.137
                                                      (0.013)    (0.015)       (0.032)
                         Persistent Component
                         ρ                             0.942      0.951         0.843
                                                      (0.012)    (0.015)       (0.097)

                         ση2 : boom                    0.038      0.037         0.047
                                                      (0.005)    (0.006)       (0.023)

                         ση2 : recession               0.058      0.048         0.072
                                                      (0.005)    (0.008)       (0.020)

                         ση2 : linear trend            0.001      0.001         0.002
                                                      (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.002)

                         µ3,η : boom                   -0.020     -0.006        -0.149
                                                      (0.014)    (0.015)       (0.181)

                         µ3,η : recession              -0.061     -0.040        -0.190
                                                      (0.013)    (0.019)       (0.170)

                         µ3,η : linear trend           -0.001     -0.001        -0.003
                                                      (0.001)     0.001)       (0.002)
                         Transitory Component
                         συ2                           0.132      0.139         0.128
                                                      (0.005)    (0.006)       (0.023)

                         µ3,υ                          -0.161     -0.162        -0.002
                                                      (0.027)    (0.029)       (0.172)

Notes: Models of the moments of the transitory shock include a fourth-order polynomial in age. The reported mo-
ments for transitory shocks are averages over the age range. Standard errors are computed by block bootstrap with 39
repetitions.




                                                        32
                      Table 2: Parameter Estimates for the Aggregate Stochastic Process
                                           No Cointegration                 With Cointegration
                                      Full    College High School      Full    College High School
                                    Sample Sample         Sample     Sample Sample        Sample


    Equation 1: ∆u1t
        ∆u1t−1                 Γ11    0.383      0.260         0.348    0.364    0.12    0.295
                                     (0.14)     (0.15)        (0.14)   (0.19)   (0.15)   (0.18)
               s
          log Rt−1             Γ12    0.044      0.04          0.057    0.045    0.016   0.058
                                     (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.03)
          Constant             γ1    -0.004     -0.003        -0.009   -0.004   -0.005   -0.008
                                     (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)

   Equation 2: log Rts
        ∆u1t−1                 Γ21   -2.149     -2.203        -1.731   0.473    -2.248   0.236
                                     (1.15)     (1.29)        (0.97)   (1.42)   (1.45)   (1.18)
               s
          log Rt−1             Γ22    0.106      0.153         0.101   0.054     0.145   0.072
                                     (0.17)     (0.18)        (0.17)   (0.16)   (0.21)   (0.17)
          Constant             γ2     0.032      0.031         0.024    0.00     0.029    0.00
                                     (0.03)     (0.03)        (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.03)

    Var-Cov Matrix
     var (ε1,t ) × 10−4                  4.42   4.24          6.49     4.42     3.37      6.44
     var (ε2,t ) × 10−2                   3.2   3.24          3.23     2.57     3.24      2.92
   cov (ε1,t , ε2,t ) × 10−3             1.23   1.24          1.52     1.28     1.21      2.00

      Cointegrating
         Vector
          log Rts              β2                                       0.309   -0.211    0.469
                                                                       (0.10)   (0.06)   (0.15)
            Trend               ρ                                      -0.019    0.016   -0.026
                                                                       (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.01)
          Constant             µ                                        -0.67    0.343   -0.976

       Adjustment
       Parameters
          ∆u1t                 α1                                      0.007    -0.196   0.017
                                                                       (0.05)   (0.07)   (0.04)
            log Rts            α2                                       -1.04   -0.063   -0.651
                                                                       (0.36)   (0.64)   (0.23)
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                         33
             Table 3: Implied Steady-State Statistics for the Aggregate Stochastic Process

                                                               Full Sample
                                             Data     No Cointegration With         Cointegration
                E logRtb
                           
                                              0.012        0.012                      0.012
                E (log Rts )                 0.041        0.045                      0.070
                E ∆u1t                       -0.002       -0.004                     -0.002

                sd ∆u1t
                         
                                              0.025        0.025              0.025
                sd (log Rts ):                0.187        0.187              0.187
                corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                    
                                              0.184        0.177              0.156
                corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1            0.425        0.441              0.435
                corr log Rts , log Rt−1
                                     s
                                         
                                              0.057        0.055              0.005
                corr ∆u1t log Rt−1s
                                      
                                              0.372        0.398              0.394
                corr log Rt , ∆u1t−1
                              s
                                       
                                             -0.292       -0.270             -0.289
                                                          College Sub-sample
                                             Data     No Cointegration With Cointegration
                E logRtb
                           
                                             0.012         0.012              0.012
                E (log Rts )                0.041         0.040              0.045
                E ∆u1t                       0.000        -0.001             -0.001

                sd ∆u1t
                         
                                              0.023         0.023              0.023
                sd (log Rts ):                0.187         0.187              0.186
                corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                    
                                              0.248         0.251              0.243
                corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1            0.346         0.341              0.342
                corr log Rts , log Rt−1
                                     s
                                         
                                              0.057         0.084              0.050
                corr ∆u1t log Rt−1s
                                      
                                              0.377         0.387              0.367
                corr log Rts , ∆u1t−1
                                       
                                             -0.225        -0.235             -0.229
                                                         High School Sub-sample
                                             Data     No Cointegration With Cointegration
                E logRtb
                           
                                              0.012         0.012              0.012
                E (log Rts )                 0.041         0.045              0.074
                E ∆u1t                       -0.007        -0.010             -0.008

                sd ∆u1t
                         
                                              0.030            0.030                  0.030
                sd (log Rts ):                0.187            0.187                  0.186
                corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                    
                                              0.207            0.194                  0.175
                corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1            0.386            0.416                  0.411
                                     s
                corr log Rts , log Rt−1
                                         
                                              0.057            0.047                  0.003
                corr ∆u1t log Rt−1s
                                      
                                              0.387            0.420                  0.420
                corr log Rts , ∆u1t−1
                                       
                                             -0.289           -0.261                 -0.276

Notes: Table shows average moments in the data, together with implied steady-state statistics from the corresponding
estimated model. Data cover the period 1967-2008. When implementing the estimated processes in the structural model,
we adjust the constants (γ1 , γ2 ) estimated in Table 2 so that all models have E[log Rts ] = 0.041 and E[∆u1t ] = 0.




                                                         34
                           Table 4: Parameter Values for the Benchmark Model

   Category           Symbol                                                                Parameter Value
   Demographics       J, Ret                                                               (J, Ret) = (69, 40)
                      ψj+1 Survival Probability                                              U.S. Life Table
   Preferences        α Risk Aversion                                                      α ∈ {4, 6, 8, 10, 12}
                      1/γ Intertemporal Substitution                                           1/γ = 1.17
                      β Discount Factor                                                         see Notes
   Returns            Rs , Rb                                                                 Table 2 - 3
                                     z1 exp(κj + ξ + ζ + υ)(1 − τ ) if j < Ret
   Earnings           ej (z) =                                                                   τ = .27
                                                     z1 b(ξ)(1 − τ ) if j ≥ Ret
                      ζ ′ = ρζ + η ′ and η ′ ∼ GN (0, ση2 (X), µ3,η (X))                      b(·) see text
                      ξ ∼ N (0, σξ2 ) and υ ∼ GN (0, συ,j 2 ,µ
                                                               3,υ,j )                         Table 1-2
                               i   i                                                             i i
                      P                                                                  P
   Initial Wealth            a
                          i∈I 1 1R                                                         i∈I 1 R1 = 0.3E[e1 ]
                                                                                               a

Notes: β is calibrated to generate a steady-state ratio of wealth to income equal to 3.5. All sensitivity analyses are
performed by re-calibrating β to generate the same ratio. Survival probabilities are smoothed versions of male values
from the 1989-91 US Decennial Life Tables in NCHS (1992). Smoothing is done using a nine point moving average. E[e1 ]
denotes mean earnings at age 1 in the model.




                                                         35
A     Appendix
A.1      Model Fit
The fit of the earnings model for the high school and college samples is provided in Figure A.1 and
A.1 respectively.

A.2      Computation
This section describes our methods to compute solutions to the benchmark model and to compute
values and returns.

A.2.1     Value Function and Decision Rules

To compute the optimal value function Vj∗ and optimal decision rules to the model in section 4,
we employ the method of dynamic programming. This involves computing functions Vj solving the
Bellman equation (BE). Of course, the idea is that Vj = Vj∗ . In stating Γ̂j (x, z) in Bellman’s equation,
we impose the restrictions from the original budget constraint Γj (x, z). We also use the fact that
shocks are Markovian so that the current shock, denoted z, rather than partial histories z j contain all
relevant information. We model the shock z = (z1 , z2 ) as stated in section 4.

      Vj∗ (x, z) ≡ max W (cj , F (U (cj+1 , ..., cJ )), j) s.t. c ∈ Γj (x, z)

      (BE) Vj (x, z) = max W (cj , F (Vj+1 (x′ , z ′ )), j) s.t. (c, a1 , a2 ) ∈ Γ̂j (x, z)

      Γ̂j (x, z) = {(c, a1 , a2 ) : c + i∈I ai ≤ x, c ≥ 0, a1 , a2 ≥ 0}
                                       P


We compute solutions to Bellman’s equation only when the first component of the shock z = (z1 , z2 )
takes the value z1 = 1. This is indicated below. To do so requires knowledge of Vj+1 (x′ , z1′ , z2′ ) at
all values of z1′ . Lemma 1 below shows that Vj∗ (λx, λz1 , z2 ) = λVj∗ (x, z1 , z2 ), ∀λ > 0 and therefore
Vj∗ (x, z1 , z2 ) = z1 Vj∗ ( zx1 , 1, z2 ). In the Algorithm described below, we make use of this key property.
In Lemma 1, Γ(x, z) is homogeneous provided c ∈ Γ(x, z) ⇒ λc ∈ Γ(λx, λz), ∀λ > 0.

                          Vj (x, 1, z2 ) =            max                W (cj , F (Vj+1 (x′ , z1′ , z2′ )), j)
                                             (c,a1 ,a2 )∈Γ̂j (x,1,z2 )



Lemma 1:

  (i) Assume U is homothetic and Γ(x, z) is homogeneous. c∗ ∈ argmax {U (c) : c ∈ Γ(x, z)} implies
      λc∗ ∈ argmax {U (c) : c ∈ Γ(λx, λz)}, ∀λ > 0.

 (ii) In the benchmark model Vj∗ (λx, λz1 , z2 ) = λVj∗ (x, z1 , z2 ), ∀λ > 0

Proof:
(i) obvious
(ii) Follows from Lemma 1(i) after noting two things. First, EZ preferences are homothetic and, in
fact, homogeneous of degree 1. Second, Γj (x, z) is homogeneous in (x, z1 ) for any fixed z2 . This is
implied because the earnings function from the benchmark model is ej = z1 gj (z2 ) and z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ),


                                                                  36
0.8                                                                    0.8
                                                                                  Data
                                                                     0.75         Model
0.7
                                                                       0.7

                                                                     0.65
0.6
                                                                       0.6

0.5                                                                  0.55

                                                                       0.5
0.4
                                                                     0.45

                                                                       0.4
0.3
                                                      Data           0.35
                                                      Model
0.2                                                                    0.3
 1965     1970    1975   1980    1985    1990       1995      2000       20       25      30     35         40   45   50   55   60
            (a) Variance of log earnings by year                                   (b) Variance of log earnings by age
  0                                                                      0
                                                                                                  Data
−0.1                                                                                              Model
                                                                     −0.1
−0.2

−0.3                                                                 −0.2

−0.4
                                                                     −0.3
−0.5
                                                                     −0.4
−0.6

−0.7                                                                 −0.5
−0.8
                                                                     −0.6
−0.9                                                  Data
                                                      Model
 −1
 1965      1970   1975   1980     1985   1990       1995      2000       20       25      30      35        40   45   50   55   60
      (c) Third central moment of log earnings by year                       (d) Third central moment of log earnings by age
                                 0.4

                                0.35

                                                                                               Data
                                 0.3
                                                                                               Model

                                0.25

                                 0.2

                                0.15

                                 0.1

                                0.05

                                  0
                                   0            2             4               6           8            10
                                         (e) Average autocovariance function



           Figure 10: Fit of estimated idiosyncratic earnings model for High School sample



                                                                  37
0.8                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                Data
                                                                     0.75                       Model
0.7
                                                                       0.7

                                                                     0.65
0.6
                                                                       0.6

0.5                                                                  0.55

                                                                       0.5
0.4
                                                                     0.45

                                                                       0.4
0.3
                                                      Data           0.35
                                                      Model
0.2                                                                    0.3
 1965     1970    1975   1980    1985    1990       1995      2000       20       25    30     35         40   45   50   55      60
            (a) Variance of log earnings by year                                   (b) Variance of log earnings by age
  0                                                                      0

−0.1
                                                                     −0.1
−0.2

−0.3                                                                 −0.2

−0.4
                                                                     −0.3
−0.5
                                                                     −0.4
−0.6

−0.7                                                                 −0.5
−0.8
                                                                     −0.6
−0.9                                                  Data                                                               Data
                                                      Model                                                              Model
 −1
 1965      1970   1975   1980     1985   1990       1995      2000       20       25    30      35        40   45   50   55      60
      (c) Third central moment of log earnings by year                       (d) Third central moment of log earnings by age
                                 0.4

                                0.35

                                                                                             Data
                                 0.3
                                                                                             Model

                                0.25

                                 0.2

                                0.15

                                 0.1

                                0.05

                                  0
                                   0            2             4               6         8            10
                                         (e) Average autocovariance function



             Figure 11: Fit of estimated idiosyncratic earnings model for College sample



                                                                  38
where z2 is Markov and primes denote next period values. These two properties hold both for the
model with and without cointegration. ⋄

The Lagrange function corresponding to (BE) is stated below along with first-order conditions.

                                       2
                                       X
                      L = W(x −              ai , F(Vj+1 (x′ , z′1 , z′2 )), j) + λ1 [a1 − 0] + λ2 [a2 − 0]
                                       i=1


      (1) − W1 + W2 dF/da1 + λ1 = 0

      (2) − W1 + W2 dF/da2 + λ2 = 0

      (3) constraints + complementary slackness

We rewrite equation (1)-(2) below after imposing the functional forms from section 4. The Algorithm
is then based on repeatedly solving these Euler equations.

                                 cj+1 −γ     V
      (1′ ) − 1 + βψj+1 E[(       cj )   ( F (Vj+1
                                                j+1 )
                                                      )γ−α R1 (z ′ )|x, z]       + λ′1 = 0
                                 cj+1 −γ     V
      (2′ ) − 1 + βψj+1 E[(       cj )   ( F (Vj+1
                                                j+1 )
                                                      )γ−α R2 (z ′ )|x, z]       + λ′2 = 0

Algorithm:

   1. Set VJ (x, 1, z2 ) = W (x, 0) and cJ (x, 1, z2 ) = x at grid points (x, z2 ).

   2. Given (Vj+1 (x, 1, z2 ), cj+1 (x, 1, z2 )), compute (a1j+1 (x, 1, z2 ), a2j+1 (x, 1, z2 )) at grid points (x, 1, z2 )
      by solving (1′ ) − (2′ ) and (3).

   3. Set cj (x, 1, z2 ) = x− i aij+1 (x, 1, z2 ) and Vj (x, 1, z2 ) = W (cj (x, 1, z2 ), F (Vj+1 ), j) at grid points.
                              P

   4. Repeat 2-3 for successive lower ages.

To carry out this Algorithm we mention two points. First, evaluating (1′ ) − (2′ ) involves an interpo-
lation of the first component of the functions (Vj+1 , cj+1 ). Second, evaluating (1′ ) − (2′ ) also involves
knowledge of (Vj+1 , cj+1 ) when the second component of these functions differs from z1 = 1. This is
accomplished by using Lemma 1 as indicated below.

                                                       x′                                                    x′
                 Vj+1 (x′ , z1′ , z2′ ) = z1′ Vj+1 (       , 1, z2
                                                                  ′
                                                                    ) and cj+1 (x ′ ′
                                                                                   , z1 , z2
                                                                                            ′
                                                                                              ) = z1
                                                                                                    ′
                                                                                                      cj+1 (     , 1, z2′ )
                                                       z1′                                                   z1′
                                               X
                                        x′ =           aij+1 (x, 1, z2 )Ri (z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ )
                                                 i




                                                                     39
A.2.2     Human Capital Values and Returns

We describe how to compute human capital values and returns. Let (vj (x, z), Rj+1 (x, z, z ′ )) denote
the value and the return to human capital. These functions are recursive versions of the values and
returns defined in section 2. Human capital values vj (x, z) follow the recursion (∗∗), given vJ (x, z) = 0:

                             (∗∗) vj (x, z) = E[mj+1 (x, z, z ′ )(vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ ))|z]

                                                                           vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ )
                                            Rj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) =
                                                                                   vj (x, z)

                                                                   cj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) −γ Vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) γ−α
                            mj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) = βψj+1 (                            ) (                      )
                                                                     cj (x, z)         F (Vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ))
                                                        X
                                              x′ =            aij+1 (x, z)Ri (z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ )
                                                          i

Although the recursive structure above is a step in the right direction, it is not practical to implement
because the aggregate component of earnings z1 “fans out” over time in the benchmark model. Instead,
we compute the functions (v̂j , m̂j+1 ) defined below and then use Lemma 2 to compute values and
returns. v̂j is defined recursively, given v̂J = 0 . To compute (v̂j , m̂j+1 ), we require as inputs the
functions (cj , a1j+1 , a2j+1 , Vj ) from the previous sections computed on the restricted domain. In what
follows, we write earnings as ej (z) = z1 gj (z2 ) and use the fact that z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ) which is consistent
with the model from section 4. In retirement z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ) = z1 .

                        v̂j (x̂, z2 ) = E[m̂j+1 (x̂, z2 , z2′ )fj+1 (z2′ )(v̂j+1 (x̂′ , z2′ ) + gj+1 (z2′ ))|z2 ]

                                                  fj+1 (z2′ )cj+1 (x̂′ , 1, z2′ ) −γ fj+1 (z2′ )Vj+1 (x̂′ , 1, z2′ ) γ−α
            m̂j+1 (x̂, z2 , z2′ ) ≡ βψj+1 (                                      ) (                                     )
                                                        cj (x̂, 1, z2 )              F (fj+1 (z2′ )Vj+1 (x̂′ , 1, z2′ ))

                                                     aij+1 (x̂, 1, z2 )Ri (z2′ ) + fj+1 (z2′ )gj+1 (z2′ )
                                             P
                                      ′          i
                                    x̂ ≡
                                                                            fj+1 (z2′ )
Lemma 2 says that the value of human capital is proportional to z1 other things equal and after
correcting for financial asset holdings. It also says that the stochastic discount factor and the return
to human capital are independent of the level of z1 , after correcting for financial asset holdings. Lemma
2 and the associated formulas allow the computation of statistics of (vj , Rj ) over the lifetime by means
of simulating lifetime draws of z2 shocks and using v̂j and the computed decision rules.

Lemma 2: In the benchmark model the following hold when x̂ = x/z1 :

  (i) mj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) = m̂j+1 (x̂, z2 , z2′ )

 (ii) vj (x, z) = z1 vj (x̂, 1, z2 ) = z1 v̂j (x̂, z2 )
                            fj+1 (z2′ )(v̂j+1 (x̂′ ,z2′ )+gj+1 (z2′ ))
(iii) Rj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) =                  v̂j (x̂,z2 )                .




                                                                             40
Proof: (i) The result follows from direct substitution of the consumption and the value function
into the definition of mj+1 (x, z, z ′ ). Here we use Lemma 1 so that cj (x, z) = z1 cj ( zx1 , 1, z2 ) and
                                ′
Vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) = z1′ Vj+1 ( zx′ , 1, z2′ ). We also use the fact that z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ) and that F is homogeneous
                                1
of degree 1.
(ii) Lemma 2(ii) holds trivially for j = J. We show it holds for j given it holds for j + 1. The first
line below uses the definition and the induction hypothesis. The leftmost equality in the second line
follows from the first line, Lemma 2(i) and the induction hypothesis. The rightmost equality follows
from the definition of v̂j .

                         vj (x, z) = E[mj+1 (x, z, z ′ )(z1′ vj+1 (x̂′ , 1, z2′ ) + z1′ gj+1 (z2′ ))|z]


                 vj (x, z) = E[m̂j+1 (x̂, z2 , z2′ )(z1′ v̂j+1 (x̂′ , z2′ ) + z1′ gj+1 (z2′ ))|z] = z1 v̂j (x̂, z2 )

(iii) The first line follows from the definition, Lemma 2(ii) and the structure of earnings. The second
line follows from the first and z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ).

                                          vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ )  z ′ v̂j+1 (x̂′ , z2′ ) + z1′ gj+1 (z2′ )
                   Rj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) =                                   = 1
                                                  vj (x, z)                           z1 v̂j (x̂, z2 )

                                                        fj+1 (z2′ )(v̂j+1 (x̂′ , z2′ ) + gj+1 (z2′ ))
                                Rj+1 (x, z, z ′ ) =
                                                                        v̂j (x̂, z2 )
⋄

An algorithm to compute the naive value vjn (z) is provided. First, we list some useful points from
theory, where z = (z1 , z2 ), ej (z) = z1 gj (z2 ) and z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ). The first two equations are Bellman
equations. The third equation is an implication of theory. It follows from the first equation by
backwards induction and substituting in for earnings.

                                                          1
                                       vjn (z) ≡ E[          (v n (z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ )|z]
                                                        1 + r j+1

                                                      fj+1 (z2′ ) n
                                    v̂jn (z2 ) ≡ E[              (v̂j+1 (z2′ ) + gj+1 (z2′ )|z2 ]
                                                        1+r

                                                        vjn (z) = z1 v̂jn (z2 )

The algorithm is as follows. Step 1: compute the functions v̂jn (z2 ) by iterating on Bellman’s equation.
Step 2: simulate histories of z2 shocks. Step 3: compute z1 histories using step 2 and z1′ = z1 fj+1 (z2′ ).
Step 4: compute histories vjn (z) using (i) vjn (z) = z1 v̂jn (z2 ), (ii) v̂jn (z2 ) from step 1, (iii) shock histories
from steps 2-3.

A.2.3     Decomposing Human Capital Values

We decompose the value of human capital into a bond, a stock and a residual component. We then
calculate the bond and stock shares of human capital at different ages and states. To do so, apply
the Projection Theorem to the payout y = vj+1 (x′ , z ′ ) + ej+1 (z ′ ). By construction, the residual
ǫ ≡ y − αb Rb + αs Rs is orthogonal to each asset return.

                                                                 41
                              vj (x, z) = E[mj+1 y] = E[mj+1 (αb Rb + αs Rs + ǫ)]


                             vj (x, z) = αb E[mj+1 Rb ] + αs E[mj+1 Rs ] + E[mj+1 ǫ]


                                                     αij (x, z)E[mj+1 Ri ]
                                shareij (x, z) ≡                           f or i = s, b
                                                             vj (x, z)

Calculate (αb , αs ) by solving the system below, using the relevant conditional expectation. The system
imposes that ǫ is orthogonal to each return.

                                         αb E[Rb2 ] + αs E[Rs Rb ] = E[yRb ]


                                         αb E[Rb Rs ] + αs E[Rs2 ] = E[yRs ]

Lemma 3 below is useful in theory and computation. It says that in the decomposition defined above,
shareij (x, z) is invariant to scaling up or down (x, z1 ). Thus, shares can be computed for a single value
z1 = 1 to determine the share decomposition for all z1 values.

Lemma 3: In the benchmark model the following holds for i = s, b :

      shareij (λx, λz1 , z2 ) = shareij (x, z1 , z2 ), ∀λ > 0

Proof: The first line is the definition of the share. The second line uses Lemma 1 and the fact that the
solution (αb , αs ) to the linear system scales linearly in (x, z1 ). This latter fact holds as the payout scales
linearly in (x, z1 ). To show this, write the payoff: y = vj+1 (x′ , z1 fj+1 (z2′ ), z2′ ) + z1 fj+1 (z2′ )gj+1 (z2′ ).
The payoff scales in (x, z1 ) because vj+1 scales in its first two components (Lemma 2(ii)) and x′ scales
in (x, z1 ). Lemma 3 then follows if E[mj+1 Ri |λx, λz1 , z2 ] is constant in λ. This holds because financial
asset returns Ri depend only on z2′ , z2 is Markov and mj+1 is homogeneous of degree zero in (x, z1 )
by Lemma 2(i).

                                                      αij (λx, λz1 , z2 )E[mj+1 Ri |λx, λz1 , z2 ]
                         shareij (λx, λz1 , z2 ) =
                                                                    vj (λx, λz1 , z2 )

                                                      λαij (x, z1 , z2 )E[mj+1 Ri |λx, λz1 , z2 ]
                          shareij (λx, λz1 , z2 ) =
                                                                        λvj (x, z)

                                                       αij (x, z1 , z2 )E[mj+1 Ri |λx, λz1 , z2 ]
                          shareij (λx, λz1 , z2 ) =
                                                                       vj (x, z)
⋄




                                                             42
A.2.4   Discretization of Stochastic Processes

For computation, we discretize the idiosyncratic component of earnings, the aggregate component of
earnings and stock returns. We construct our discrete approximations to the estimated stochastic
processes as follows.
For the idiosyncratic earnings process, both the persistent and transitory innovations are drawn from
a three-parameter Generalized Normal distribution. The (inverse) map from the mean, variance and
third central moment to the parameters of the Generalized Normal is unique. Thus, we set model
parameters consistent with the values in Table 1 as indicated in Table 4. For a given number of grid
points, we choose the upper and lower bounds and the (non-linear) spacing of the grid points for
each component to minimize the distance between the average variance and average skewness over
the lifecycle of the discretized process, and the corresponding moments from the estimated continuous
process, excluding the estimated trend. We fill in transition probabilities by assigning to each grid
point the mass implied by the continuous Generalized Normal distribution between the mid-points of
adjacent grid points. We construct separate discretizations for booms and recessions. We use 7 grid
points for the transitory component, 11 grid points for the persistent component and 3 grid points for
the fixed effect. Table A.1 reports moments from the continuous and discretized persistent processes
for the baseline model. The moments for the transitory process are matched exactly, for each age, by
construction.
For the aggregate earnings process, we assume that innovations are drawn from a joint normal dis-
tribution. We use equally spaced grid points in each dimension where the upper and lower bounds
are a constant multiple of the unconditional variance in the respective dimensions. We choose this
multiple to minimize the distance between the second moments of the underlying estimated continu-
ous process and the discretized process. We use 4 grid points for aggregate earnings growth, 5 grid
points for equity returns and in the models that include cointegration we include 3 grid points for the
cointegrating vector. Table A.1 reports moments from the continuous and discretized processes for
the baseline model.

                                     Table A.1: Model Moments

                                                             Full      College   High School
                                                            Sample     Sample      Sample
         Idiosyncratic Component
         Variance persistent component: true                  0.340     0.339       0.193
         Variance persistent component: discretized           0.324     0.329       0.184

         Skewness persistent component: true                  -1.14    -0.738       -4.73
         Skewness persistent component: discretized           -1.20    -0.815       -4.43

         Aggregate Component
         Variance aggregate earnings growth: true           0.00632    0.00539     0.00918
         Variance aggregate earnings growth: discretized    0.00657    0.00560     0.00953

         Variance stock returns: true                        0.0349    0.0351       0.0350
         Variance stock returns: discretized                 0.0333    0.0336       0.0334




                                                  43
We impose a constant lower bound on the possible realizations of the combined process for total
earnings, in order to minimize numerical inaccuracies that result from very low probability low earnings
realizations.We set this minimum at 5% of average earnings. The minimum does not bind except for
the high school sample at young ages where there is large amount of negative skewness in persistent
shocks.

A.3     Time Series Model
A.3.1  Full Description of Stochastic Model for Aggregate Variables

We assume the following general VAR model for yt = u1t Pt :
                                                         

                                                         p
                                                         X
                                          yt = v(t) +              Ai yt−i + εt
                                                         i=1

where εt is a vector of mean zero IID random variables with covariance matrix Σ. v (t) is a quadratic
time trend which is parameterized below. We restrict attention to values of p ≤ 2 to keep the state
space manageable. This model has a general VECM form given by
                                                                      p−1
                                                                      X
                                 ∆yt = v + δt + αβ ′ yt−1 +                 Γi ∆yt−i + εt
                                                                      i=1

where the vector β is known as the cointegrating vector. We can split the constant and trend terms
into components as follows

                                                    v = αµ + γ
                                                    δt = αρt + τ t

where γ ′ αµ = 0 and τ ′ αρ = 0. In this case the VECM model can be written as
                                                                              p−1
                                                                              X
                                                     ′
                                                                        
                        ∆yt = γ + τ t + α β yt−1 + µ + ρt +                         Γi ∆yt−i + εt
                                                                              i=1

It is useful to define the one-dimensional object wt = β ′ yt + µ + ρ(t + 1) which, in the case of
cointegration (α 6= 0), is a stationary random variable. By construction, wt evolves as

                                           wt = wt−1 + β ′ ∆yt + ρ

Since we would like a system where wt evolves based on variables at t − 1 or earlier, we can re-write
this as
                                                                        p−1
                                                                        X
                                      ′         ′
                  wt = wt−1 + β γ + β τ t + β’αwt−1 +                         β ′ Γi ∆yt−i + β ′ εt
                                                                        i=1
                                                             p−1
                                                             X
                             ′              ′                  ′
                                                                 β ′ Γi ∆yt−i + β ′ εt
                                                    
                       =    β γ + ρ + β τ t + 1 + β α wt−1 +
                                                                                i=1

In all of our analyses we assume that τ = 0. The general system can then be written as
                                                                           
                   ∆yt            γ            Γ     α         ∆yt−1          εt
                          =              +                              +
                    wt         β′γ + ρ        β′Γ 1 + β′α       wt−1         β ′ εt

                                                          44
                               Table A.2: Lag-Order Selection Tests for VAR
                               Lag     P-Value         FPE        AIC     HQIC      SBIC
                                                          Full Sample
                                0                    .001762     -0.666   -0.635    -0.579
                                1         0.000      .000020     -5.169   -5.077    -4.911
                                2        0.004*     .000016* -5.370* -5.217* -4.939*
                                3         0.160      .000018     -5.333   -5.118    -4.729
                                                      College Sub-sample
                                0                    .001882     -0.600   -0.569    -0.514
                                1         0.000      .000015     -5.422  -5.330* -5.163*
                                2        0.078*     .000015* -5.432*      -5.279    -5.001
                                3         0.374      .000018     -5.248   -4.973    -4.744
                                                  High School Sub-sample
                                0                    .003469      0.012   0.042      0.098
                                1         0.000      .000028     -4.801   -4.709    -4.543
                                2        0.014*     .000025* -4.919* -4.766* -4.488*
                                3         0.132      .000028     -4.837   -4.561    -4.257
Notes: Lag order selected by each   criteria is denoted by *. P-values are from likelihood ratio tests of the null that true
lag length is p − 1 or less.


We adopt the Johansen (1995) normalization for β, which implies for the two variable case that we
can write
                                 ∆wt = ∆u1t + β2 log Rts + ρ
The model with p = 2 becomes
   ∆u1t                                                                             ∆u1t−1
                                                                                      
                         γ1               Γ11          Γ12           α1
 log Rts  =           γ2       +     Γ21          Γ22           α2                 s
                                                                                 log Rt−1 (6)
                                                                                             
    wt             γ1 + β2 γ2 + ρ     Γ11 + β2 Γ21 Γ12 + β2 Γ22 1 + α1 + β2 α2       wt−1
                                 
                         ε1t
                +       ε2t                                                               (7)
                     ε1t + β2 ε2t

A.3.2      Estimation of Aggregate Stochastic Process

We test for the lag order of the underlying VAR. Table A2 reports results from likelihood ratio tests
and a number of commonly used statistical information criteria. All criteria suggest a lag length of
p = 2. The college and high-school sub-samples, and alternative measures of aggregate earnings and
alternative sample periods all indicate the presence of two lags.
We also test for the presence of cointegration. Table A3 reports results from tests of the cointegrating
rank based on the methods in Johansen (1995). Our results suggest only very weak evidence for
cointegration. Alternative variable definitions, specifications and time periods lead to similar results.
Table A4 presents the average moments in the data together with the implied steady-state statistics
from the model for three different data samples: the full sample from the CPS 1967-2008, NIPA 1967-
2008 and NIPA 1929-2009. The NIPA measure of earnings growth is the change in the log of total
wages and salaries per member of the labor force.

A.3.3      Benzoni et. al. (2007)

We describe the construction of the system of equations underlying the results in Figure 9 from section
6. The three equations below are equation 2, 8 and 14 from Benzoni et al. (2007), where yt is log

                                                            45
                                    Table A.3: Cointegration Rank Selection Tests
               Maximum Rank           Trace Statistic 5% Critical Value Eigenvalue SBIC                   HQIC
                  Full Sample
                        0                   9.95*              15.41             0.220*       -5.05*       -5.21
                        1                    0.00               3.76              0.000        -5.02      -5.26*
             College Sub-sample
                        0                   9.49*              15.41             0.200*       -5.08*       -5.247
                        1                    0.55               3.76              0.014        -5.03      -5.274*
           High School Sub-sample
                        0                   9.91*              15.41             0.218*       -4.66*       -4.824
                        1                    0.07               3.76              0.002        -4.63      -4.875*
Notes: Rank of cointegration by each criteria is denoted by *. Trace statistic criteria is obtained by    selecting the lowest
rank that cannot be rejected.




       Table A.4: Implied Steady-State Statistics: Alternative Data Sources and Sample Periods

                                                                   No Cointegration
                                                 CPS: 1967-2008    NIPA: 1967-2008      NIPA: 1929-2009
                                                  Data   Model     Data    Model        Data    Model
                    E (log Rts )                 0.041   0.045    0.041    0.044       0.068    0.069
                    E ∆u1t                       -0.002  -0.004    0.004    0.001       0.012    0.012

                    sd ∆u1t
                             
                                                  0.025    0.025    0.024    0.025       0.029    0.029
                    sd (log Rts ):                0.187    0.187    0.187    0.187       0.178    0.178
                    corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                         
                                                  0.184    0.177    0.234    0.216       0.070    0.071
                    corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1            0.425    0.441    0.429    0.460       0.398    0.384
                    corr (log Rts , log Rt−1
                                          s
                                            )    0.057    0.055    0.058    0.057      -0.054   -0.052
                                       s
                    corr ∆u1t log Rt−1            0.372    0.398    0.640    0.685       0.680    0.675
                    corr log Rts , ∆u1t−1
                                            
                                                 -0.292   -0.270   -0.189   -0.194      -0.096   -0.096
                                                                   With Cointegration
                                                 CPS: 1967-2008    NIPA: 1967-2008      NIPA: 1929-2009
                                                  Data   Model      Data    Model       Data    Model
                    E (log Rts )                 0.041   0.070     0.041    0.070      0.068    0.045
                    E ∆u1t                       -0.002  -0.002     0.004    0.005      0.012    0.004

                    sd ∆u1t
                             
                                                  0.025    0.025    0.024    0.024       0.029    0.026
                    sd (log Rts ):                0.187    0.187    0.187    0.182       0.178    0.172
                    corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                         
                                                  0.184    0.155    0.234    0.178       0.070   -0.020
                    corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1            0.425    0.435    0.429    0.435       0.398    0.260
                    corr (log Rts , log Rt−1
                                          s
                                            )    0.057    0.005    0.058   -0.007      -0.054   -0.096
                                       s
                    corr ∆u1t log Rt−1            0.372    0.394    0.640    0.664       0.680    0.660
                    corr log Rts , ∆u1t−1
                                            
                                                 -0.292   -0.283   -0.189   -0.213      -0.096   -0.176

Notes: Table shows average moments in the data, together with implied steady-state statistics from the corresponding
estimated model. NIPA data is total wage and salaries per member of the labor force. When implementing the estimated
processes in the structural model, we adjust the constants (γ1 , γ2 ) so that all models have E[log Rts ] = 0.041 and
E[∆u1t ] = 0.




                                                              46
                          Table A.5: Implied Steady-State Statistics: Two Models

                                                          Benchmark Model   Benzoni Process
                             sd ∆u1t
                                      
                                                                0.025            0.069
                             sd (log Rts ):                     0.187            0.160
                             corr ∆u1t , log Rts 
                                                  
                                                                0.177            0.000
                             corr ∆u1t , ∆u1t−1                 0.441            0.327
                             corr (log Rts , log Rt−1
                                                   s
                                                     )         0.055            0.000
                                       1        s
                             corr ∆ut log Rt−1                 0.398            0.347
                             corr log Rts , ∆u1t−1             -0.270            0.000

Notes: Table shows implied steady-state statistics. When implementing the estimated processes in the structural model,
we adjust the constant terms so that all models have E[log Rts ] = 0.041 and E[∆u1t ] = 0.


dividends, Rt is the gross stock return and ut is the log of the common component of earnings. The
parameter κ is the key adjustment parameter controlling the strength of cointegration.

      dyt = (g − σ 2 /2)dt + σdz3

      Rt − 1 = µdt + σdz3

      d(ut − yt − uy)
                   ¯ = −κ(ut − yt − uy)dt
                                     ¯    + ν1 dz1 − ν3 dz3

The three equations below are a discrete-time approximation of this continuous-time process, where
(z1,t , z3,t ) are independent standard normal random variables. We rewrite this system of equations as
system (8) below, using ∆ut ≡ ut − ut−1 and wt ≡ (ut − yt − uy). ¯

      yt+1 − yt = g − σ 2 /2 + σz3,t+1

      log Rt+1 = µ + σdz3,t+1

      (ut+1 − yt+1 − uy)
                      ¯ − (ut − yt − uy)
                                      ¯ = −κ(ut − yt − uy)
                                                        ¯ + ν1 dz1,t+1 − ν3 dz3,t+1



                   g − σ 2 /2
                                                                             
     ∆ut+1                        0 0 −κ      ∆ut         ν1 z1,t+1 + (σ − ν3 )z3,t+1
   log Rt+1  =     µ       + 0 0  0   log Rt  +             σz3,t+1          
      wt+1             0          0 0 1−κ      wt             ν1 z1,t+1 − ν3 z3,t+1
                                                                                      (8)
System (8) produces the steady-state statistics listed in Table A5. This occurs when we set (κ, g, ν1 , ν3 , σ, µ) =
(.15, .018, .05, .16, .16, .07), which are the benchmark parameter values used by Benzoni et al. (2007),
and when we alter the constant terms in (8) to produce the same steady-state mean values (E[log R], E[∆u])
as in both of our benchmark models. This leaves the variance-covariance properties of the model un-
changed.




                                                              47
