                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MAJORITY CHOICE OF TAX SYSTEMS IN SINGLE- AND MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL
                             ECONOMIES

                                        Stephen Calabrese
                                          Dennis Epple
                                         Richard Romano

                                       Working Paper 21231
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21231


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2015




The authors thank seminar participants at Georgia State University. Epple and Romano thank the
National Science Foundation for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Majority Choice of Tax Systems in Single- and Multi-Jurisdictional Economies
Stephen Calabrese, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano
NBER Working Paper No. 21231
June 2015
JEL No. H2,H71

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine majority choice of tax instruments in single- and multi-jurisdictional economies with
heterogeneous households. In our framework majority voting equilibrium exists despite the multidimensional
policy choice set. We identify five competing incentives that influence choice of tax instruments. Equilibria
generally entail a mixture of tax types. With multiple jurisdictions, strong reliance on head taxation
in rich communities arises to deter poorer households from immigrating. Mobility fundamentally affects
the equilibrium tax system with redistribution incentives dominating choice of instruments when mobility
is limited. Limiting or eliminating head taxation fundamentally alters stratification, public good provision
levels, and tax systems.


Stephen Calabrese                                     Richard Romano
Tepper School of Business                             University of Florida
Carnegie Mellon University                            Department of Economics
Posner Hall, Room 243                                 Gainesville
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                  Florida 32611
sc45@qatar.cmu.edu                                    richard.romano@warrington.ufl.edu

Dennis Epple
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Posner Hall, Room 257B
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu
1. Introduction. Tax systems vary widely across local economies. While some economies rely mainly

on property taxes to finance public goods, others employ income taxes as the primary means of finance.

Taxation is also necessary to redistribute wealth, whether directly, or indirectly through uneven finance of

public goods. Taxation generally uses multiple tax instruments. Almost all of the 38,917 general-

purpose local government jurisdictions in the United States employ property taxes. These jurisdictions

include 3,031 counties and 35,886 municipalities, towns, or townships. These local property tax rates

vary between about 0.2% and 4% of home value. In most states, local governments are required to have

authorization from the state legislature to impose an income or payroll tax. In the 16 states that authorize

some form of local income tax and in which at least one general-purpose local government employs an

income tax, 3,984 out of a total of 17,560 local government jurisdictions use an income tax, usually in

conjunction with a property tax. Of these 17,560 general-purpose local governments, 1,009 are counties,

and 220 of these counties impose an income tax and property tax. In addition, three states (Iowa, Ohio,

and Pennsylvania) authorize school districts to use income taxes. These three states have a combined

1,548 independent school districts and 947 use an income tax as well as a property tax. Local income tax

rates in the U.S. vary between 0.01% and 3.6% with an average of approximately 1.5%.1 Over the past

four or five decades income taxation as a source of revenue for local governments has grown significantly

compared to property taxation. The ratio of local income tax revenue to local property tax revenue in the

United States was 1.6% in1960 compared to 8.4% in 2008.2

        Internationally local taxation of property is widespread. Additionally, in many countries local

governments have traditionally relied heavily on income tax. These include the Scandinavian countries,

Belgium, and Switzerland. The Scandinavian countries in general apply flat local taxes. Belgium and


1
  Siniavskaia, 2011, Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1988, U.S. Census Bureau, Local
Governments by Type and State, 2012, and Tax Foundation, Local Income Tax Rates by Jurisdiction, 2011.
2
  U.S. Census Bureau; Federal, State and Local Governments, “State Government Finances 2008,” June 2011, and
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics on Governmental Finances and Employment, an
annual report, Government Finances, 1968.




                                                                                                               1
Switzerland use progressive tax schemes at the municipal level (Schmidheiny, 2006). Canada had a

similar system as the Belgium and Switzerland systems at the provincial level between 1977 and 1996

(Boadway and Kitchen,1980) when personal income taxes in Canadian provinces were a percentage of

the progressive federal tax.

           Understanding the mixture and variation of taxes poses a difficult problem for economists.

Taking the position that tax systems are the outcome of a political process, we find and study the

determinants of majority choice equilibrium in an economy where voters have multiple tax instruments at

their disposal.

           We examine a closed economy. Households differ by income with utility over housing, a

(congested) public good, and a composite consumption good. They vote over a triplet of tax types,

namely an income tax, a property tax, and a head tax.3 Tax proceeds can be used to finance the public

good and direct redistribution. We examine equilibrium if the economy is just one jurisdiction or if it is

divided into multiple jurisdictions each with taxing and expenditure authority. In the multi-jurisdictional

analysis, households first decide where to live and, in the main analysis, can relocate after local policies

have been majority selected. We then find the economy’s Nash equilibrium among voters who take as

given the tax system in the jurisdictions where they do not vote. Because voters choose levels of multiple

tax instruments, we confront the standard existence problem of majority choice over a multi-dimensional

policy (see Plott, 1967). Majority choice equilibrium is shown to exist in our model because we adopt a

particular, but appealing, form of the household utility function (see (1) below).

           In addition to the need to raise revenue to finance local public goods, we identify five forces that

can be relevant to the structure of the equilibrium tax system. We note these here, while providing a more

thorough discussion as the analysis unfolds. Voters are influenced by an efficiency motive in raising tax

revenues, i.e., preferring non- or less-distorting taxation. This incentive pulls for a head tax. Second,

some voters desire redistribution, a force for an income and/or property tax and a negative head tax.

Third, voters that rent housing might pass along property taxes to housing suppliers; an “appropriation

3
    A consumption tax is redundant if there is no income tax distortion under conditions discussed in Section 5.

                                                                                                                   2
incentive” arises. The latter incentive is not present for housing owners; we consider both renter and

owner cases. The last two incentives are driven by mobility effects that arise in the multi-jurisdictional

analysis. If there are positive income and/or property taxes, then voters prefer to attract into their

jurisdiction richer households who confer a positive fiscal externality. Thus, a “household selection

incentive” exists. But the latter is opposed by a “congestion effect” in housing markets for renters, who

face higher rents as households relocate into their jurisdiction, richer immigrants having a stronger effect.

The congestion effect is the opposite for home owners who generally value increased demand for

housing. The force and relevance of these incentives varies with the jurisdictional (and economy) income

distribution, the elasticity of housing supply, income tax distortions, parameters of the utility function,

whether households are renters or owners, and the relevance of mobility. We clarify these incentives in a

series of theoretical results, for example, by examining incentives absent mobility. Where outcomes

depend on resolution of trade-offs, we examine equilibria in a computational version of the model. As

well, the computational analysis is used to verify existence of the Nash equilibrium among voters in

multiple jurisdictions and to illustrate theoretical findings.

         We view our contribution as providing a rich equilibrium analysis of tax systems in an interesting

setting. The utility specification that permits establishment of voting equilibrium is presented in an earlier

paper, Calabrese, Cassidy, and Epple (2002). We generalize that analysis is several ways. First, we

provide a characterization of equilibrium using composite public goods that result from the policy vector.

This approach facilitates using a single-crossing property of preferences that is illuminating and may help

to generalize this line of research. Second, we find Nash equilibrium in majority choice of tax

instruments among multiple jurisdictions.4 Third, we provide a framing of the competing incentives that

determine the structure of the equilibrium tax system. As part of this, we develop new theoretical results

regarding the equilibrium tax structure in cases with no household mobility. For example, despite the

availability of income and property taxes, housing owners would then rely exclusively on a head tax if the

4
 Calabrese, Cassidy, and Epple (2002) employ a “utility-taking” specification, where voters in a jurisdiction take as
given the equilibrium utility levels in other jurisdictions when voting. In contrast, voters in a jurisdiction take as
given the equilibrium tax vector in other jurisdictions in the present analysis.

                                                                                                                     3
median income exceeds the mean in a community. Fourth, we provide a new computational analysis of

equilibrium.

        We find in our computational analysis that household mobility radically affects the equilibrium

tax structure. In equilibrium with a single jurisdiction (or with multiple jurisdictions but without

mobility), equilibrium has a mixture of property and income taxes with direct redistribution. If we divide

the economy into multiple jurisdictions and allow households to move freely, they sort by income among

the jurisdictions. Income taxes disappear for most of the parameterizations and, rather than direct (i.e.,

cash transfer) redistribution, head taxes arise. In the case of housing renters, the dominant force in the

richer communities is to attract (repel) the relatively rich (poor) implying heavy reliance on a head tax to

finance the local public good. This is explained by the fiscal externality resulting from renters’ partial

reliance on property taxation, where relatively poorer household would move into richer suburbs to

consume their high quality local public good and free ride by consuming little housing. A head tax limits

this behavior. This is in spite of an incentive to redistribute income present in the suburbs, which have

right skewed income distributions. Head taxes also dominate in the suburbs with housing owners’, but

here it is to attract households with the highest housing demands to increase property values. Again, this

is in spite of an incentive to redistribute. Shutting down mobility, equilibrium with multiple jurisdictions

reverts to an equivalent allocation to that in the single jurisdiction case. Limiting the use of head taxes

more directly changes the tax system, while also preventing very elite communities from developing.

        This paper is related to the large theoretical “Tiebout (1956) literature” on multi-jurisdictional

economies with endogenous policy determination.5 Much of the literature on Tiebout economies is

focused on efficiency issues.6 Our focus is positive. In the positive Tiebout literature, there is a dearth of

research on multiple tax instruments, surely because of the Plott existence problem. Along the lines of


5
  Some important references not discussed elsewhere in this paper are Ellickson (1971), Inman (1989), deBartolome
(1990), Nechyba (1999,2000), Fernandez and Rogerson (1996,1998), and Epple and Platt (1998).
6
  Contributions are Oates, (1972), Hamilton (1975), Wooders (1980), Wildasin (1980), Boadway (1982), Brueckner
(1983), Gordon (1983), Zodrow (1984), Wilson (1997), Benabou (1993,1996), Epple and Romano (2003),
Brueckner (2004), and Calabrese, Epple, and Romano (2012). A strand of the literature concerns taxation of mobile
capital which is not an element of our model.

                                                                                                               4
the Plott conditions, Bucovetsky (1991) provides sufficient restrictions on voters’ utility function that

imply existence of majority choice equilibrium in a single jurisdiction setting with multiple policy

instruments. Bucovetsky then shows what his restrictions mean for some examples of tax and public

good provision problems. Our analysis here is more applied, focusing on the implications for taxation of

the multi-jurisdictional model we adopt.7 Krelove (1993) examines the preferred tax form in a multi-

jurisdictional model with community maximization of land rent. In addition to the alternative process that

determines the tax system, Krelove assumes identical households. This assumption eliminates incentives

to redistribute among households. Henderson (1994) also studies choice of tax instruments in a multi-

jurisdictional setting, comparing voting equilibrium to developer equilibrium. Henderson also assumes

identical households, this resolving the existence problem among voters. Nechyba (1997) shows in a

multi-jurisdictional model with mobile heterogeneous households that, with availability of both income

and property taxes, only property taxation arises unless communities collude (or there is another

centralized tier of government). In Nechyba’s model, voting is over just the property tax with community

planners (or a central authority) setting income taxes. The dominance of property taxes absent collusion

is due to household mobility. Our models differ in several ways, but we also find household mobility has

profound effects on the equilibrium tax system.8 Calabrese, Cassidy, and Epple (2002) is the most closely

related paper, as we have already discussed.

        Section 2 develops the basic model and examines the case with one jurisdiction. Section 3

extends the analysis to multiple jurisdictions. Section 4 examines the effect of having housing owners

rather than renters. Section 5 provides concluding remarks and discussion. Our investigation is limited in

various ways, while studying numerous alternatives is of interest. We discuss the potential for extending

the analysis in Section 5. We do not believe our analysis is definitive, but hope it provides some insights.

7
  As we have already noted, we develop a somewhat different perspective on the voting problem that uses composite
public goods and a single-crossing condition. But, our problem can be framed along the lines of Plott or
Bucovetsky, and, for example, the Plott sufficient conditions for equilibrium are satisfied.
8
  Nechyba’s consideration of state income taxation with local property taxation relates to the fiscal federalism
literature, which considers taxation with tiers of government. Seminal references are Musgrave (1971), Oates
(1972,1977), and Inman and Rubinfeld (1996). Cullen and Gordon (2012) provide a recent analysis. Our model has
one tier of government, an issue we return to in the concluding section.

                                                                                                                5
2. The Case of One Jurisdiction.

a. The Model. The economy consists of a continuum of households that differ in their endowed income y,

with population normalized to one. The economy pdf is denoted f(y), positive on its support S  R  .

Households obtain utility from consumption of the congested public good, g, the quality/quantity of units

of housing, h, and numeraire consumption, b. Households have the same utility function of form:

(1)      U (g, h , b)  v(g )u (h , b);

with all functions increasing and twice differentiable, and u(h,b) quasi-concave and homogeneous of

degree 1.9 While obviously restrictive, (1) permits substantial variation in preferences, and income

affects demands in a realistic way. The specification is consistent with the empirical evidence on housing

demand (Harmon, 1988), which suggests an income elasticity of housing demand close to 1. Higher

income households obtain a higher marginal benefit from increases in the local public good. Implications

of (1) for equilibrium will become apparent.

         We assume for now that all households rent housing, and examine the effects of ownership in

Section 4. Units of housing are supplied competitively by absentee housing owners, according to non-

decreasing housing supply function Hs(ph), where ph is the supplier price of housing services.

         The policy vector is a triplet, P  ( t, m , r ), where t is a property tax on housing services, m is a

proportional income tax, and r is a lump-sum income transfer or, if negative, a head tax. The level of the

local public good, g, is determined by government budget balance. While r can be positive or negative,

we require a non-negative income tax on [0,1] and a non-negative property tax. Since the existence of

head taxes is debatable, we consider cases without allowing them or with tight restrictions on their level.

A tax on consumption of the composite private good is discussed in the concluding section, which we do

not consider in the main analysis.

         Households first vote on the policy vector in Stage 1, equilibrium requiring a policy that is

weakly majority preferred to any other policy. Second, in Stage 2, housing markets clear, the government

9
 Our results apply to an extended version of the utility function with U = v·(u+φ), where φ is a constant. Other
extensions are discussed in Section 5.

                                                                                                                   6
budget balances determining g, and consumption results. Households correctly anticipate all continuation

equilibrium values.

            Property taxes are distorting in the usual way unless housing supply has 0 elasticity. The

consumer price of housing is denoted p, where:

(2)        p  (1  t )p h .


           Since endowed income is exogenous and there is no labor market in our model, the potential

deadweight loss from labor market distortions of income taxation is not directly captured. Following

Feldstein (1999), we introduce an income tax distortion by assuming the household budget constraint is

given by:

(3)        y  [1  (1  γ(m ))m ]  r  ph  b;

with γ(m )  0 is a non-decreasing and continuous function. Taxed income is then given by:

                     y  [1  (1  γ (m ))m ]
(4)        x (y)                                  .
                                  1 m

Feldstein (1999) shows that the deadweight loss of tax avoidance through changes in forms of

compensation (e.g., provision of health insurance by employers) and through changes in the patterns of

consumption that avoid taxation (e.g., leisure consumption) can be evaluated as the deadweight loss of an

excise tax on non-deductible consumption. Total non-deductible consumption is given by housing

expenditures (ph) plus consumption of the composite good b, but subtracting the lump-sum transfer r that

we assume is not taxed. Thus, (3) is the budget constraint. In turn, taxed income x satisfies (4).

           Government budget balance is:

(5)        rg             m x ( y )f ( y )dy  tpH s (p h ).
                         S




           Let h d ((1  m ) x ( y )  r, p ) denote the ordinary (Marshallian) demand for housing of household

with income (1  m )x ( y)  r that can be spent on housing and composite good consumption.10 We




10
     Housing demand does not depend on g due to the form of (1).

                                                                                                                  7
usually use the more compact notation h d ( y , p ) to denote this demand function, suppressing the tax rates.

The housing market is in competitive equilibrium:

(6)                   h d ( y, p )f ( y )dy  H S (p h ).
                   S



            We now provide a more formal description of equilibrium.

Definition of Equilibrium: In Stage 1, a policy vector P= (t,m,r) is established that is weakly majority

preferred by all households to all other allowed policies P  (i.e., with t ≥ 0 and m  [ 0 ,1 ] ), households

correctly anticipating continuation equilibrium values for all policies. In Stage 2, households maximize

utility over housing and composite commodity consumption, housing markets clear, and the government

budget balances simultaneously. Specifically, each household solves M ax b ,h v( g )u ( b ,h ) subject to (3),

taking as given (t,m,r,p,g). This determines housing demands and composite commodity consumption.

Housing market clearance satisfies (2) and (6) for given P and individual housing demands, determining

( p , p h ).       Government budget balance satisfies (4) and (5) for given ( P , f ( y ), x( y ), p , p h ), determining

g.

c. Theoretical Results. The assumed form of the utility function in (1) implies an indirect utility function

at Stage 1 over “composite local public goods” that tremendously facilitates the analysis.

Proposition 1. Indirect utility of a household is given by:

               V (Γ , Ω , y )  y  Γ  Ω ;
                       Γ  v (g )  [1  (1  γ (m ))m ]  w (p );
(7)
                       Ω  v (g )  r  w (p );
                       w here w (p )  0.


            Proof is provided in the appendix, while here we focus on interpretation and implications.

Expression (7) shows that preferences can be reduced to those over two composite public goods,
                                                                                            11
Γ and Ω , which are functions of the policy variables and gross housing price.                   Both composite public

goods are increasing in the amount of the public good (g) and decreasing in the housing price (p), and by



11
     The property tax rate does not appear explicitly but it affects g and p.

                                                                                                                             8
the same factor (v(g)w(p)). Ω is increasing (decreasing) in the lump-sum income transfer (head tax). Γ

is decreasing in the income-tax rate (m). The fact that Γ is multiplied by y in indirect utility implies that

higher income households have a relative preference for using head taxes as compared to property taxes

to finance the public good. Put differently, higher-income households have weaker preference for direct

redistribution financed by an income tax. The linear form in income of indirect utility over the composite

public goods implies “single-crossing preferences” and existence of majority-choice equilibrium, to

which we now turn.

          The three-tuple policy vector P typically precludes existence of majority choice equilibrium

(Plott, 1967). However, the form of the utility function implies this existence. Given policy P, it is easy

to see that the second-stage equations [(2),(4),(5),(6)] imply unique values for g and p. Using that

households anticipate the second-stage equilibrium when voting, one can see by inspection of (7) that the

composite public goods can be written as functions of the policy vector. Write (Γe (P ), Ω e (P )) to denote

these continuation equilibrium values.           A voter has preferred policy that solves:

         M ax P yΓ  Ω
(8)
             s.t. Γ  Γe (P ) and Ω  Ω e (P )


over allowed policies P. We then have:

Proposition 2: Majority choice equilibrium exists and is a preferred policy of the median income

household.

Proof of Proposition 2:12 Figure 1 graphs indifference curves yΓ  Ω  const. in composite-public-good

space for households with two different incomes.13 These have slope equal to -1/y, and thus flatten as

income increases. Thus, indifference curves cross at most once, the single-crossing property. Denote

median income ym. Refer to Figure 2, which depicts the choice set (Γe (P ), Ω e (P )) and preferred choice


12
   The structure of the proof uses the single-crossing property of preferences and is “standard” (see, e.g., Epple and
Romer (1991) and the references therein). The indirect utility function that is derived from (1), linear in the
composite public goods, is a special case of “intermediate preferences.” Such preferences are defined in Grandmont
(1978) and shown to imply majority choice equilibrium. The contribution here with respect to majority choice
equilibrium regards the application, not establishment of existence per se.
13
   The labeling of the two points will become clear in the multi-jurisdictional analysis.

                                                                                                                     9
of the median-income household assumed to be unique for now. Let Pe denote the median’s preferred

policy. We first argue that no feasible policy would be preferred by a strict majority to the median

household’s preferred policy, implying it is a majority choice equilibrium. Points to the “northeast” of

the median household’s indifference curve are infeasible. Consider all remaining points with Γ  Γe (Pe ).

All households with income lower than the median have steeper indifference curves through

(Γe (Pe ), Ω e (Pe )),   and thus prefer the latter policy. Thus, no such alternative points are strictly majority

preferred. The remaining points would be opposed by households with incomes higher than the median

who have flatter indifference curve through (Γe (Pe ), Ω e (Pe )), thus implying it is a majority choice

equilibrium. If the median income household has multiple preferred policies, then the same argument

applied to each of these policies and implies each is a majority choice equilibrium. It is easy to confirm

that any feasible policy that is not a preferred policy of the median income household would lose by strict

majority choice to any preferred point of the median income household, since the latter policy(ies) would

be strictly preferred by at least either all those with income higher than the median and all with income in

the vicinity of the median; or by all those with income lower than the median and all with income in the

vicinity of the median. Thus, only a preferred policy of the median income household is a majority

choice equilibrium. ■

          While the Proposition is focused on existence of majority choice equilibrium, it is implied that

equilibrium exists in the model. Moreover, it is clear that equilibrium is generically unique.

          The proof depends on the properties of indifference curves and, in particular, places no

restrictions on the choice set. We can then further restrict the policy alternatives (e.g., disallow head

taxes) or expand them (allow negative income and/or property taxes), and Propositions 1 and 2 remain

valid. Such restrictions affect the composite-goods set over which households vote, but this is irrelevant

to the existence argument. We will consider some of these variations.

           Relative to the equilibrium values of the composite public goods, those with higher income than

the median prefer higher Γ and lower Ω on the boundary of the choice set. The reverse holds for those


                                                                                                                     10
with lower income. This means that higher income types have a relative preference for lowering the

income tax, while decreasing (increasing) the lump-sum income transfer (the head tax), which is very

intuitive. If property taxes are to be used solely to finance the public good (m = r = 0), the preference for

this tradeoff does not vary with income. This follows since indirect utility is then v(g)w(p)y. However,

this will change when we consider housing owners. In addition, higher-income households have weaker

preference to employ property taxes to finance an income transfer.

         The effects of the relative preferences of different income households on the equilibrium policy

are particularly stark if there is no income tax distortion, i.e., γ (m )  0. Let y denote mean income and

εH   the elasticity of housing supply assumed to be constant. We have:

Proposition 3: Assuming no income-tax distortion, if ε H   , then:

a. m = 1, t = 0, and r > 0 whenever y m  y;

b. m = t = 0 and r = - g < 0 whenever y m  y.

         The Proof of Proposition 3 is in the on-line appendix. We provide an intuitive explanation here.

With no income-tax distortion, taxes can be raised efficiently with either an income tax or a head tax.

With housing supply infinitely elastic, renters bear the full burden of a property tax. Thus, appropriation

of housing supplier rents using property taxation is infeasible. If the median income household and thus

pivotal voter has lower income than the mean, then there is a redistribution incentive. By taxing income

at a rate of 100 percent, income is fully redistributed through positive r and with remaining tax revenues

used to provide the preferred level of g.14 Thus, in Case a of Proposition 3, there is complete

redistribution with efficient taxation. Of course, the extreme assumptions lead to an unrealistic outcome,

but the incentives that dominate here carry over to less extreme circumstances as we will see.

         If, alternatively, the median income is above the mean, the pivotal voter’s incentive to redistribute

disappears. Then all taxes are raised through a non-distorting head tax, r < 0, with r = - g. Since m = 0 is

optimal, the results in Proposition 4b do not require that income taxation is non-distorting.
14
 Anticipating the complete income redistribution, all households prefer the level of g engendered by the pivotal
voter.

                                                                                                                   11
Corollary 1: Proposition 3b applies as well without γ(m )  0.

         The next proposition is intended to bring out the incentive to appropriate rents from housing

suppliers.

Proposition 4: Assuming no income-tax distortion:

a. If y m  y , m = 1, r > 0; and, if ε H is sufficiently small, then t > 0.

b. If y m  y , m = 0. If ε H is sufficiently small, t > 0. If, instead, ε H is such that t = 0, then m = 0 and r = -

g. The results apply as well here with an income-tax distortion.

         The Proof of Proposition 4 is also in the on-line appendix. The incentives to redistribute (or not)

and tax efficiently remain. However, though renters bear part of the burden of taxing property unless

ε H  0, the   effective transfer from housing suppliers toward finance of the local public good (and toward

redistribution when y m  y ) outweighs the cost born by the pivotal voter for ε H sufficiently small. Here

an appropriation incentive plays a role.

d. Computational Model and Analysis. Development of more specific implications about the features of

equilibrium requires more specific information about preferences, the distribution of income, and the

housing supply. We therefore turn to numerical computations based on the theoretical model above to

illuminate properties of equilibrium. The parameterization utilizes functional forms and parameter values

that are broadly consistent with empirical evidence on housing supply, demand functions, government

expenditures, and the distribution of income in the U.S.

         We describe the baseline calibration, though we will consider some comparative statics. We

assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function, with parameters that satisfy the homogeneity assumption

required of (1):

(9)                                                           
                                           U (g , h , b )  g h b
                                                                    1 
                                                                           .




                                                                                                                  12
We chose values for  and  such that, if g, h, and b were all privately purchased goods, the gross-of-tax

expenditure on housing would be 20%15 and the fraction spent on local public goods would be 9%, which

is approximately the share of GDP spent on local public goods.16 This yields  = 0.21978 and  =

0.098901.

        To calibrate the housing supply function, we assume price taking housing producers combine the

given developable land and perfectly elastically supplied non-land factors to produce housing according

to a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function. Under these assumptions, housing

supply is given by a constant elasticity supply function:17

                                                              1 
                                                                              1 
(10)                                H s (p h )  L  (p h )
                                                               
                                                                     , H           ;
                                                                               

where  is the ratio of non-land to land expenditure in the production of housing and L is the inelastically

supplied land. Based on available evidence regarding the share of land and non-land inputs in housing

(Epple, Gordon, and Sieg, 2010),  H is set equal to three. We set L = 1 with no loss in generality.

        We assume the economy’s income distribution is lognormal. The distribution is calibrated using

the 2010 U.S. Census findings of mean and median household income of $67,392 and $49,276,

respectively.18 These values imply ln y ~ N(10.805, 0.791).

        To calibrate the income tax distortion, we assume for simplicity that  (m )   is constant. Using

the 2010 U.S. Census, we calculate aggregate household income of $7,865,744,350,464. Total U.S.

Federal Income tax receipts in 2010 were $898,549 million.19 Hence, we estimate the average 2010

household income tax rate as 11.4%. Given the other calibrated parameters, we find the γ such that the

baseline equilibrium has m = 11.4%. This implies  = 0.2471.




15
   The share of aggregate income spent on housing of 20% is in the range of values estimated in the literature.
16
   Data for this approximation are from the 2008 Statistical Abstract Tables 442 and 645 for 2004. We calibrate to
public expenditure on local public goods since we go on to analyze a multi-jurisdictional economy.
17
   See Epple and Zelenitz (1981). This derivation is provided in the on-line appendix.
18
   U.S. Census Bureau, 2011,Table H-6 from Historical Income Tables.
19
   Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal Year 2015, Historical tables, Table 2.1 Receipts by Source: 1934-2019.

                                                                                                                 13
         Table 1 reports our computational findings, with the first column values in the baseline

calibration.20 We report equilibrium per capita expenditure on the public good (g), the lump-sum income

transfer (r, or head-tax if negative), the income tax rate (m), property tax rate (t), the proportions of total

taxes collected by the head tax, income tax, and property tax, the gross price of housing services (p), and

the mean and median household incomes. The other columns report equilibrium values for parameter

variations, where in each column we vary just one parameter from the baseline values.

         In the baseline case, the income tax is rate is .11 to which we have calibrated. We find g equals

$4,799, about 7% of mean income. A substantial direct income transfer of $9,415 arises, about 14% of

mean income. The median income is below the mean income implying an incentive to redistribute.

Redistribution, while substantial, is far from complete, this because of the distortion from taxing income.

The property tax rate of .85 may appear very high, but this is a tax rate on services (rent), not value. In

his analysis of housing user cost, Poterba (1992) derives a conversion for which annualized rent (i.e., ph)

on housing services is 11% of housing value. 21 Hence, a .85 tax on rent translates to a .09 tax on value

( = (.11)(.09)). More meaningful are the proportions of taxes collected by the tax forms, which we then

focus our discussion on throughout the rest of the paper. We see that the tax proportions collected from

income and property taxes are close, with, obviously, 0 head-tax proportion. Property taxation has

attraction to the median voter both because it implies redistribution and because the non-infinite housing

supply elasticity implies part of the incidence is born by the absentee housing suppliers; the appropriation

incentive. On the other hand, the median voter does bear a cost of this taxation as rents rise, and the tax

provides a limited means to redistribute. We report the gross housing price for comparison across cases,

keeping in mind the calibration is such that 20% of income is spent on housing in the baseline.

         Turning to the comparative statics, keep in mind we maintain the income distribution so that an

incentive to redistribute persists. The first comparative static has a markedly lower income tax distortion
20
  The on-line appendix describes the structure of the programs we use.
21
  Letting z denote the “user cost factor” and V the value of housing, the equilibrium rental rate of housing equals its
user cost, according to: p h  z  V. The user cost factor is the sum of four values, z = z1+z2+z3+z4, where z1 is the
real interest rate, z2 the risk premium from housing investment, z3 is proportional maintenance cost, and z4 is
depreciation. Poterba’s calculation yields z  .1 1, the value for the conversion reported in the text.

                                                                                                                    14
parameter γ = .05, this leading to much higher income transfer, income tax rate and proportion, modestly

higher expenditure on the public good, and substantially lower property tax. The next case considers a

more modest increase in this distortion, with opposite and less extreme effects. In the fourth column we

cut in half the housing supply elasticity. With more power to appropriate economic rents from housing

suppliers, the property tax and its share in tax revenues rises, with the proceeds used to fund more public

good expenditure and especially a larger income transfer. Increasing by half the parameter that weights

the public good in utility (β) leads to virtually no change in taxes, but a shift in public expenditure from

the income transfer to the public good.22 Last, increasing the relative weight on housing (α) among private

goods in the utility function leads to a modest increase in the property tax rate, a modest decrease in the

income tax rate, but substantially higher property tax share and income transfer. These effects are driven

by higher expenditure on housing, which makes property taxation a more appealing means to transfer

income. Overall, the parameter changes affect the relative mix of income and property taxation, but

redistribution always arises; and, given the availability of the head tax, taxation is always inefficient.

         Since head taxes do not arise, restricting them has no effects. We could consider other limits on

taxation, but leave this for future research. Our analysis in this section is novel in its investigation of

voting over the full set of tax instruments in a single-jurisdiction setting. Given that head taxation does

not arise in the single-jurisdiction setting, this analysis then also unifies the treatment of income and

property taxes and public good provision in a single-jurisdiction setting without head taxes.23


22
  The small decline in total public expenditure is because the income tax actually declines from .114 to .113.
23
  Modeling of taxation by majority rule was initiated by Bowen (1943) in investigation of voting over a public good
and a proportional income tax (g and m in our notation) in a model with a public and a private good, and no tax
distortions. Romer (1975) investigates voting over properties of a linear income tax (m and r in our notation),
introducing deadweight loss of taxation via distortion of the labor-leisure choice. Romer’s analysis utilizes single-
peakedness, which is achieved by limiting the range of admissible taxes. Roberts (1977) generalizes Romer’s
analysis, establishing existence of majority voting equilibrium without invoking single-peakedness. Meltzer and
Richard (1981) build on the work of Romer and Roberts to provide a positive theory of the size of government.
Westhoff (1977) initiated study of multi-community equilibrium with income taxation and communities each
providing a pure public good utilizing. Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984) extend Westhoff by introducing housing
markets and studying voting over property tax and a congested local public good (t and g in our notation) in a multi-
community model. Goodspeed (1989) studies voting over income taxation and public good provision (m and g) in a
multi-community model. Westhoff (1977), Epple, Filimon and Romer (1984), and Goodspeed (1989) all study
voting using single-peakedness. Epple and Romer (1991) study voting over property taxation and redistribution (t
and r in our notation) when voters anticipate the effects of tax policy on relocation. They show that single-

                                                                                                                  15
3. Multi-Jurisdictional Economies

a. The Extended Model.         We now consider equilibrium in a Tiebout-like setting where the economy is

divided into an integer number of J jurisdictions, each with taxing authority and supplying locally the

(congested) public good. The focus is on cases with J  2, but the single-jurisdictional case above can be

regarded as a special case. The economy income distribution is unchanged, and household preferences

are the same. It is sometimes more natural to refer to a jurisdiction as a community, so we use the terms

interchangeably.

        A community is characterized by a housing supply H sj (p hj ), j  1, 2, ..., J, where j will generally

indicate a particular community. Housing suppliers are again absentee. The sense in which the economy

                                                                  J
                                                          
                                                                           j
is “divided” into communities is that we assume                   j 1
                                                                         H s (p h )  H s (p h ), the latter recall the economy


housing supply. One motivation for this, which underlies our computational analysis, assumes again a

community’s given developable land and perfectly elastically supplied non-land factors are used to

produce housing according to a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function. As

discussed above, then a community’s housing supply is given by a constant elasticity supply function:

                                                           1 
                                                                               1 
(11)                                   j   j     j    j
                                     H s (p )  L  (p )
                                                            
                                                                  , H               ;
                                                                                


where   L
            j
                is the land area of community j as a proportion of total (developable) land area in the

economy (normalized to 1), and  is the ratio of non-land to land expenditure in the production

of housing. Note that aggregating these community housing supplies returns the housing supply

function used in the J = 1 computations above.

        We consider two cases of the model, one with “mobility” and the other without it. The

timing of choices in the mobility case is described in Figure 3. In Stage 1, households select a



peakedness need not prevail, and instead provide a proof of existence of voting equilibrium by exploiting single-
crossing, akin to the strategy developed by Roberts (1977). Calabrese, Cassidy, and Epple (2002) study multiple tax
instruments, as in this paper, with differences in approach discussed previously.

                                                                                                                                  16
jurisdiction. In Stage 2, they vote over the local policy, Pj = (tj,mj,rj), taking as given equilibrium

policies in the other communities denoted P-j. In Stage 3, they can costly locate to any other jurisdiction.

In Stage 4, housing markets clear, local government budgets balance, and households consume. It is

natural to refer to Stage 4 as the consumption stage. Households correctly anticipate all continuation

equilibrium values.

                                                   Figure 3
       Stage 1                       Stage 2                     Stage 3                   Stage 4
   Households Select           Households Vote Over        Households Costlessly     Households Consume,
     Jurisdiction                  Local Policy                 Relocate              Government Budget
                                                                                    Balances, Markets Clear


        The no-mobility case simply eliminates Stage 3. Households are stuck in their initially chosen

community. Note that the model assumes income to be independent of community, so it is best applied to

local economies like metropolitan areas.

        Consider the results in the single-community case that carry over. Let fj(y) denote the

measure of households that live in community j in equilibrium (following any relocation in the

mobility case) and n j   f j ( y )d y the proportion of the population that lives there. Equilibrium
                           s



in the consumption stage in community j is exactly as in the single-community case using the

relevant type distribution, fj (y)/nj.

        We discuss majority choice equilibrium below, as its detail varies between the mobility

and no-mobility cases.

        A key issue is how households sort across the communities. Anticipating equilibrium

including the community j where they will live, household utility is given by: V j  yΓ j  Ω j ,

with the community j’s composite public good values evaluated at equilibrium in community j.

We refer to an equilibrium as “stratified” if Γ j  Γ i for all communities j  i, in which case we

number the communities so that         1   2        J
                                     Γ  Γ  ...  Γ .   We have:


                                                                                                          17
Proposition 5: A stratified equilibrium with all communities occupied is characterized by:

a. Income Stratification: Each community contains all households with incomes in a single interval,

incomes ascending across communities in the same order as Γ j .

b. Diverging Bundles: The Ωj’s descend strictly with j.

c. Boundary Indifference: Between each pair of communities in the income ordering is a single household

type y that is indifferent between the two communities.

Proof of Proposition 5: In choosing their equilibrium community, households anticipate the equilibrium

   j   j
(Γ , Ω )   in all communities and choose a community that maximizes indirect utility (whether in Stage 3

in the mobility case or Stage 1 in the no-mobility case). Since Γ 1  Γ 2  ...  Γ J , it must then be that the

Ωj’s strictly descend with j or at least one community would fail to attract residents. Thus diverging

bundles holds. Refer to Figure 1. Using that the indifference curves flatten as income increases it is

simple to confirm income stratification. Boundary indifference is implied by continuity of the indirect

utility function in y and that the density of y is positive on its support. ■

           Income stratification reflects the preference of higher income households for lower

income taxes relative to an income transfer. To say more about equilibrium, including when

stratified equilibria arise, we must consider mobility.

b. The No-Mobility Case. Keeping in mind that there is no Stage 3 in the no-mobility case,

observe that, once communities are selected in Stage 1, the continuation equilibrium in each

community is precisely as in the single-community equilibrium using the income distributions

determined in Stage 1. Majority choice equilibrium in each community holds as in Proposition

2. There is no need here to write out a formal definition of equilibrium.

           This case requires little discussion because we do not find stratified equilibria in our

computational analysis. Rather, the only equilibrium that arises is analogous to the single-

community equilibrium. More completely, each community has the same income distribution as


                                                                                                                   18
the population distribution with nj = Lj, and with policies and prices the same as in the single-

community equilibrium. Given the same income distributions and with populations proportional

to the housing supply, the continuation equilibrium beginning in Stage 2 is just as in the single-

community case. Anticipating the same outcome in each community, all households are

indifferent to their community choice in the Stage 1, implying sorting so that income

distributions are the same is in fact an equilibrium. Thus, for the same parameters as in Table 1,

each community has equilibrium values as reported there.

         Why do stratified equilibria fail to arise? First, we should note that we do not have a

general proof that a stratified equilibrium could never arise and do not claim generality. Rather,

our findings are based on our computational analysis, which we have attempted to make realistic

(and we have also considered substantial parameter variations). The intuition is that if

households do sort across communities it will be by income. Then, in the richest community

(and perhaps others), the income distribution will be right skewed implying an incentive to

redistribute. The income tax and transfer would be relatively high in the rich community, limited

only by the income-tax distortion. But this implies poorer households will have a strong

incentive to move to the richer community disrupting a stratified equilibrium. We take the

message of these findings to be that mobility is important to obtaining stratification when the tax

system permits substantial income redistribution.24 This interpretation is based in part on the

next analysis.

c. Multi-Jurisdictional Equilibrium with Mobility.




24
  Epple and Romer (1991) obtain stratified equilibria with income redistribution in a simplified variant of the no-
mobility model of this paper with only property taxation and no provision of a local public good. Redistribution is
due mainly to appropriation using property taxes from absentee housing suppliers. We show here that if income
taxation where also an option, the stratified equilibria are disrupted.

                                                                                                                  19
           Since households can costlessly relocate in Stage 3 of equilibrium (see Figure 3) and do not

individually affect voting equilibrium due to their atomism, they are actually indifferent to their initial

community choice. We then examine the “no-move equilibrium,” where households initially locate in the

community where they will prefer to stay in Stage 3. This focus is appealing for two reasons. First,

moving costs would induce such an initial community choice, though explicit consideration of moving

costs would introduce other effects on equilibrium and much complication.25 Second, if households were

allowed to vote to adjust policy after relocations, then the same equilibrium we examine would prevail. It

bears emphasis that since we assume households rationally anticipate continuation equilibrium values on

and off the equilibrium path our examination of the no-move equilibrium does not imply the option to

relocate in Stage 3 fails to effect on equilibrium. In fact, it has fundamental effects. We now provide a

more formal description of the mobility equilibrium.

Definition of Equilibrium: Timing of choices is as in Figure 3, with rational expectations of all

continuation equilibrium values. In Stage 1, households locate in a community that maximizes utility,

taking as given other households’ community choices, correctly anticipating equilibrium values, and with

no incentive to relocate in Stage 3 in equilibrium. In Stage 1, f j ( y ) and nj are determined. In Stage 2,

the policy Pj is established that is weakly majority preferred to all other allowed policies P j  by residents

of community j, taking as given majority choice policies P -j; correctly anticipating continuation

equilibrium values for all ( P j  , P  j ). In Stage 3, households initially located in community j relocate to

a utility maximizing community k  j, taking as given all policies P i ( i  { 1,2 ,..., J }) and all implied

continuation equilibrium values, if there exists a community k that would increase utility. In this stage,

the final community income distributions are determined. In Stage 4, utility maximization over housing

and composite commodity consumption takes place, housing markets clear, and the community

government budgets balance. Specifically, each household solves M axb ,h v( g j )u( b ,h ) subject to (3),

taking as given (tj,mj,rj,pj,gj). This determines housing demands and composite commodity consumption.

25
     See Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2012) for a Tiebout model that includes explicit moving costs.

                                                                                                                20
Housing market clearance satisfies (2) and (6) for given ( P j , f j ( y )) and individual housing demands,

determining ( p j , p hj ). Government budget balance satisfies (4) and (5) for given

             j       j            j
( P , f ( y ),n , x ( y ), p , p h ),
                                          j               j        j
                                                                       determining gj.

                         Consider majority choice equilibrium among communities at Stage 2, in light of household

relocation in the next stage. Assuming a voter in community j votes myopically as though he would never

relocate, his preferred policy would satisfy:

                                              j       j
                         M ax P j yΓ  Ω
(12)
                                      j           j   j       j           j     j   j   j
                              s.t. Γ  Γe (P , Pe ) and Ω  Ω e (P , Pe );


where Pe j is the vector of majority chosen policies in other communities than j and Γej ( ) an d Ω ej ( ) are the

equilibrium continuation values that take account of everyone’s final community choices.26 Because the

majority choice result in Proposition 2 does not depend on the character of the choice set, here

( Γe ( ), Ω e ( )) for
         j                j
                                          all Pj, it can be applied. Denote the majority choice for this artificial problem as P eja . If

we then assumed voters took proper account of others’ incentives to relocate but ignored their own

incentive to do so when voting, the equilibrium values of Pj would be P eja for all communities. Refer to

this allocation as the “artificial equilibrium.”

                         Now we provide a condition such that the actual equilibrium corresponds to the artificial

equilibrium. Let VF(Pj) denote the proportion of households that “vote for” P eja matched against any

     j
P  Pea
                 j
                         in the artificial equilibrium in community j. Let M ( P j )  V F ( P j )  .5  0 denote the majority

excess by which P eja defeats Pj in the artificial equilibrium. Let SW(Pj) denote the proportion of

households in j that would actually prefer to relocate to another community under Pj, weakly prefer P eja to

Pj in the artificial equilibrium, but would strictly prefer Pj to P eja given that they optimally relocate. The

condition is:


26
  The constraint set (Γej ( ), Ω ej ( )) is not itself influenced by the voter’s myopic behavior regarding his own potential
to move because any one household’s residence decision has no effect on equilibrium due to a household’s atomism.

                                                                                                                                        21
(C1)            j
          SW (P )  M (P )
                          j
                              in all communities j and for all policies P j  Peaj in the artificial equilibrium.

Proposition 6. If (C1) holds, the artificial equilibrium beginning at Stage 2 is an actual equilibrium.27

Proof of Proposition 6. The proportion VF(Pj) that would vote for P eja matched against any P j  Peaj in

actual equilibrium equals VF(Pj) – SW(Pj), which continues to be at least .5 under (C1). Thus, P eja

continues to be majority preferred in community j, and in all communities by the same argument. ▪

          While some households would relocate for non-equilibrium policies Pj and some would switch to

preferring Pj over the artificial equilibrium policy, the condition is just that these relocaters and switchers

are not enough to disrupt majority preference for the artificial equilibrium policy. As such, it is the actual

equilibrium policy. We verify computationally the condition is satisfied in our quantitative results that

follow.

          We now turn to computational analysis of equilibrium with mobility. The baseline calibration of

the utility function, economy income distribution, and economy housing supply function is the same as in

the single-community case. We assume J = 3, the idea to have a central city and two suburbs.28 We must

calibrate the land areas. If the land areas and thus housing supplies differ, then multiple stratified

equilibria can result that differ with respect to which income strata live in the variably “sized”

communities. With three different land areas, the poorest segment could live in any of the communities,

the next poorest segment in any of the remaining two communities, with then the richest segment living

in the remaining community. Thus, six alternative stratified equilibria could arise. To resolve this

multiplicity, we designate one community to be the city and assume it is the poorest community. 29 We

further assume the remaining two communities have the same land areas. We calibrate the land shares in

the city and in the suburbs so that the population proportions in the city and both suburbs approximate

empirical values. Based on the results of the 2010 U.S. Census, the total U.S. population living in


27
   Absent satisfaction of (C1), majority choice equilibrium fails to exist under our equilibrium requirement that no
one wants to relocate on the equilibrium path. This is proved in the on-line appendix.
28
   In an earlier version of this paper we had 5 communities, with the same character of results.
29
   DeBartolome and Ross (2002) provide a dynamic analysis that predicts the relative wealth of the city as compared
to the suburbs.

                                                                                                                    22
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA’s) was 258,317,763, of which 39%, or 100,742,583, live in principle

MSA cities. Hence, to calibrate land shares in the baseline computational equilibrium, we constrain the

city’s population to 40% of the total population, while assuming the land shares in the two suburbs to be

equal. This computation results in the city having 32.51% of the total metropolitan land area and each of

the suburbs having 33.74% of the land area.

          Table 2 reports equilibrium values, with the first column for the baseline calibration, which we

discuss first. We report in Table 2 most of the same values provided in Table 1 for the single-community

case but now for each community, while suppressing the tax rates. In addition, we report the economy

average g, the community populations and mean incomes, and in which communities the median income

is less than the mean implying an incentive to tax to redistribute. We obtain a stratified equilibrium.30

Thus, we find a non-trivial example of an equilibrium where Propositions 5 and 6 apply.31 The public

good expenditure rises steeply with the income strata and the community populations weakly shrink. The

richer suburb contains 20% of households, while having approximately the same land area and thus

housing supply as the other communities. What keeps the poorer households from moving to richer

communities to consume more of the public good? Note, first, that it is not increasing gross prices of

housing services that explains this, as the increase is very modest. Rather it is the character of the tax

system.

          Income taxes are zero and a substantial head tax is imposed in spite of the incentive to

redistribute in the suburbs. The over-riding incentive is to select relatively richer households and deter

relatively poorer households to increase the tax base and limit free riding. The threat of relocation keeps

the pivotal voter from trying to redistribute in the suburbs. The incentive to keep relatively richer

households from moving out and deter relatively poor households from immigrating is also in spite of the

congestion effect on the price of housing services. In the suburbs, a property tax is imposed as a result of


30
   Given space constraints, we do not consider the less interesting “clone community equilibrium” that might also
arise. Also, as indicated, the stratified equilibrium we examine has the poorest income segment in the “city.”
31
   We verify computationally that equilibrium satisfies (C1) as we indicated above. This applies to all the equilibria
we present.

                                                                                                                    23
the appropriation incentive, but the proportion of taxes so collected is not large. Keep in mind, too, that a

head tax is an efficient tax. In the city, property taxes are the primary source of revenues, though there is

a small head tax. Here there is no incentive to redistribute since the mean income ($24,950) is slightly

below the median income ($25,316).

         It is of interest to compare the equilibrium values in the mobility model to those values where

relocation is not permitted, keeping in mind the latter values in each community are the same as in the

single-community equilibrium (see the first column of Table 1).32 Absent relocation, income taxes are the

primary source of revenues and substantial redistribution results. Thus mobility induces stratification and

eliminates income taxation and redistribution. In addition to mobility eliminating direct redistribution,

the stratified equilibrium has rising public goods expenditure with the income strata. The economy

average expenditure on g is higher ($6,798 compared to $4,799), but the city residents who are the

poorest 40% of the population obtain less of the public good. Given our positive focus, we do not make

any welfare calculations, but it is obvious poorer households fair much worse under mobility.

         The next four columns in Table 2 vary one parameter from the baseline values as in Table 1.

The same fundamentals hold as in the baseline calibration, but with some substitution of taxes and some

direct redistribution in the city in some of the variants. Only when the income tax distortion is

substantially reduced (γ = .05, Column 2 of Table 2) does income taxation arise and only in the city.33

Most of these changes are easy to interpret. Lowering the housing supply elasticity (Column 3, Table 2)

induces increased reliance on property taxes and much higher gross housing prices. Increasing the

exponent on the public good (Column 4, Table 2) leads to substantially higher expenditures on the public

good and more reliance on head taxes, the latter due to stronger incentives to free ride.

         The last column severely restricts the use of head taxes. Specifically, it is assumed that the

maximum permitted head tax is fixed in each community, and we set that maximum at 5 percent of the


32
  Each community has population equal to the land share in the multi-community no-mobility case.
33
  Since there is no incentive to redistribute in the city, it must be that an income tax with some redistribution is the
majority choice to deter richer households to keep down the price of housing services. Here the congestion effect
plays a key role. This arises in the present case that has the poorest city in the comparative statics.

                                                                                                                       24
equilibrium expenditure on the public good. While we obtain a stratified equilibrium, it entails much

more free riding as evidenced by the large populations in the suburbs, especially the richest one. Income

taxation continues to not be used anywhere. The city is small and very poor, and does not use the head

tax, rather has a small direct redistribution. The suburbs are on the bound of the head tax constraint.

Housing prices rise more steeply as crowding of the suburbs bids them up. If we shut down head taxation

completely, then we do not obtain a stratified equilibrium.

         Are head taxes empirically relevant? In fact, local jurisdictions in the U.S. generally do not seem

to have the authority to impose head taxes.34 However, Hamilton (1975) argued some time ago that

zoning restrictions on housing consumption combined with a property tax provides a potential substitute

for head taxation. Building on the ideas in Hamilton, we (2007) showed the near equivalence of political

equilibrium with head taxes to that with property taxes and minimum housing quality restrictions in a

model with multiple jurisdictions.35 This provides an argument for the legitimacy of considering head

taxes in the presence of legal barriers, but the near equivalence breaks down in the case of renters who

might enact property taxes to appropriate housing supplier surplus. More research is needed here.36

4. Home Ownership

a. The Model with Home Ownership. Home owners have substantially different policy preferences so it

is important to consider them. We assume in this variation of the model that all households are owners.

We describe the extension in the context of the multi-community model with mobility. Refer, again, to

34
   Local taxing authority in the U.S. varies by state, with some federal constitutional restrictions. The preclusion of
local head taxes we note in the text is implicit in the character of what taxation is permitted in state constitutions.
There are “occupational privilege taxes” used in localities of some states, which are also sometimes of a fixed
amount. But these are collected by employers, on employees that earn a minimum amount, and generally linked to
location of the employer rather than the employee’s residence. It is an interesting legal question as to whether use of
local head taxes would satisfy federal law. Federal law requires that taxes are nondiscriminatory, but whether local
head taxes would be legally discriminatory is unclear.
35
   The majority choice existence problem with public choice of property tax and minimum housing quality is
resolved using a version of Besley and Coate’s (1997) representative democracy model.
36
   We have seen that with multiple tax instruments, renters combine head taxes and property taxes, the latter due to
incidence on housing suppliers (i.e., the appropriation incentive), while not using income taxes. If head taxes were
unavailable but minimum housing consumption could be required, renters would face a tradeoff between
appropriation via property taxation versus use of minimum housing consumption requirements to approximate head
taxation. In our 2007 paper, we did not consider multiple tax instruments so this trade off did not arise. In contrast
to renters, housing owners, examined next, do not have an incentive to use property taxes for appropriation, thus
making minimum housing requirements an attractive substitute for head taxes.

                                                                                                                    25
Figure 3. Stage 1 is modified to have households sign a contract with a competitive housing supplier in

the community they initially select to build them a house in Stage 4 of quality/quantity h, at agreed upon

price per unit of h.37 The contract may be renegotiated in Stage 4 when housing is actually built and

consumed. The price in the contract must equal the ultimate equilibrium housing price since all agents

have rational expectations, but it is convenient to have different notation for the equilibrium contract

price, p hj 1 . Stages 2 and 3 are the same as with renters. However, relocation and consumption

adjustments for out-of-equilibrium policies could change the supplier price of housing. Specifically,

housing value would change by ( p hj  p hj 1 ) h , out of equilibrium. In Stage 4, households optimally “buy

out” of their housing contract and adjust consumption to the level of h equal to demand at price (1  t j ) p hj

and with income including capital gain/loss equal to ( p hj  p hj 1 ) h . Housing suppliers are just as well off

under the buy-out, and owners are better off.38 If p hj  p hj 1 , owners experience a capital gain. The

housing supplier is just as well off paying the buyer (p hj  p hj 1 )h to not build since the supplier can instead

supply h at equilibrium price p hj . If p hj  p hj 1 , then the buyer must compensate the supplier (p hj 1  p hj )h to

not build as agreed upon. Buyers are better off since they can adjust their housing consumption reflecting

the change in housing price. Note that the buyer may have moved to another jurisdiction in Stage 3,

experiencing the same capital gain/loss, but then consuming housing at price pk in their new community.

         The single community case just drops Stage 1 (as everyone is stuck in one community) and Stage

3 (as there is nowhere to relocate). Nevertheless, the single-community equilibrium is different than with

renters because out-of-equilibrium policies engender capital gains/losses and housing renegotiation.

         The only difference in the primitive equations (i.e., (1)-(6)) is that y[1  (1  γ (m j ))m j ] is replaced

everywhere by y[1  (1  γ ( m j ) m j )]  ( p hj  p hj 1 ) h d ( y , p j ), where we are assuming households contract for




37
 The modeling here of housing owners is similar to that in Epple and Romer (1991).
38
  One might alternatively assume suppliers and buyers share in capital gains/losses, by specifying the capital
gain/loss to buyers equal to θ  (p hj  p h1j )h , w ith θ  (0,1); and with the remainder accruing to the supplier.

                                                                                                                           26
their equilibrium preferred level of housing initially.39 While no capital gain/loss arises in equilibrium,

the potential for a gain or loss will have a marked effect on equilibrium policies.

         As shown in the appendix, indirect utility is modified to be:

                     j   j               j       j
         V ( Γo , Ω o , y )  y  Γo  Ω o ;
             j               j                       j       j       j       j   j   j
           Γo  v (g )  [1  (1  γ (m ))m ]  [1  (p h 1  p h )G (p )]  w (p );
(13)             j           j       j       j           j       j       j
           Ω o  v (g )  r  [1  (p h 1  p h )G (p )]  w (p );
                                 j
           w here G  (p )  0.


Thus, Proposition 1 above is modified to have composite public goods that weigh capital gains/losses that

might arise. The main other Propositions, specifically 2,5, and 6, carry over as well (and their proofs)

with the redefined composite public goods.40

b. Single Community Case. We use the same calibration for comparison. Table 3 shows the same

equilibrium values as in Table 1 for the baseline calibration, but now with the second column for the

owners’ case.41 Owners are relatively reluctant to tax housing as doing so lowers the net price of housing

resulting in a capital loss (out of equilibrium). They have no appropriation incentive. In equilibrium,

housing is taxed by less than in the renters’ case, with lower tax level and share. Since an incentive to

redistribute is present, both an income and property tax is used to finance direct redistribution along with

the public good. Total public expenditure is lower with owners because property taxation is more costly.

Note, too, that restricting the head tax has no consequences since no head tax arises.

c. Multi-Community Case. Table 4 presents the results for the multi-community case with owners, where

we again compare to the renters’ case. To simplify the computations, we approximate by having

households ignore the out-of-equilibrium effects of capital gains/losses on others when they vote. Own

capital gains are taken account and play a key role in equilibrium!42 The first two columns compare the

stratified equilibria that arise in the baseline cases of renters and owners. Income taxes again fail to
39
   This is an optimal choice since no capital gains or losses actually materialize in equilibrium. As above, we
continue to write hd(y,p) for housing demand, but the relevant y is after taxes and any capital gains.
40
   Proposition 4 actually applies more generally, but not Proposition 5. The former is shown in the on-line appendix.
41
   We have done the same comparative statics as in Table 1, with qualitatively similar effects. These results are
available on request from the authors.
42
   The simplification is akin to ignoring an out-of-equilibrium income effect. In experimentation with simpler cases
with just two communities, we find this approximation to be very good.

                                                                                                                  27
materialize, with more reliance on head taxation relative to property taxation and markedly so in the city

and poorer suburb. Note, too, that equilibrium is “more stratified,” with a larger and poorer city and more

elite suburbs.

           In addition to a reluctance to tax housing to avoid capital losses, there is no congestion effect and

the “selection effect” is stronger. Owners generally have an incentive to attract residents to bid up

housing prices. The elimination of the congestion effect seems to be strongest in the city where

households are relatively poor, leading to a large change in reliance on the head tax relative to the

property tax, attracting households from the suburbs. The change in incentives is weakest in the elite

suburb that becomes more elite. It bears emphasis that no direct redistribution takes place anywhere,

though the median income is below the mean in all three communities.

           The last two columns compare the renters’ and owners’ cases with the severe restriction on head

taxes.43 With owners, all three communities are at the bound of the head tax. As in the renters’ case, the

stratification is very different with large suburbs and much free riding. Given the reluctance to tax

housing and the severe limit on head taxation, income taxation makes up a significant share of tax

revenues in the richer suburb. The income tax rate there is, however, only 3.07% (not in table), compared

to 11% in the single-community owners’ case. The level of expenditure in the richer suburb is below the

level in the single-community case with owners though the suburb is, of course, richer. Head taxes are

severely limited, and there is a reluctance to tax both income and property due to mobility.

5. Discussion and Summary

           We begin here by discussing two key issues of generality that we have examined theoretically.

The model can be generalized to allow a tax on consumption of the composite private good in addition (or

alternatively) to the other taxes. Assume that this consumption expenditure must be within one’s

community, then including the single-jurisdiction case. Let s denote this tax rate. Dropping j superscripts




43
     Again we have done other comparative statics as in Tables 1 and 2 that are available on request.

                                                                                                              28
if the application is to the multi-community case and taking the example of renters, it is straightforward to

show indirect utility is given by:44

         V (Γ , Ω , y )  y  Γs  Ω s ;
                            [1  (1  γ (m ))m ]            p
(14)       Γs  v (g )                              w(          );
                                   1 s                    1 s
                              r           p
           Ω s  v (g )           w(          ).
                            1 s         1 s

The analysis then proceeds as above. In addition, if there is no income-tax distortion, then it is

straightforward to show that taxing composite private-good consumption and income is

redundant; one can eliminate one of these taxes. Moreover, continuing to assume no income-tax

distortion, it is then implied a consumption tax would not characterize equilibrium in the multi-

community case if households can travel to consume. Given final community choice, a tax on

composite private good consumption would induce such travel, while income taxation cannot be

escaped. These results induced us to consider income taxation, without taxation of numeraire

consumption. However, the equivalence does break down with an income tax distortion. In

addition, if one considers retired voters with low incomes but relatively high levels of

consumption, such a tax may become attractive. Thus, it is of interest to consider further the

extension.

          What are the prospects for extending the analysis to taste differences? Suppose that

utility continues to be as in (1), but parameterized by tastes (T): U T  v(g; T )u (h , b; T ); where u(·)

is still linearly homogenous of degree 1 in (h,b). Then, assuming renters and one community to

convey the ideas, indirect utility can be written:45




44
  The results that follow concerning a numeraire consumption tax are shown in the on-line appendix.
45
  We again abstract from the just-discussed tax on numeraire consumption. More complete confirmation of the
results discussed here are in the on-line appendix.

                                                                                                              29
                   T       T                 T     T
         V (Γ , Ω , y; T )  y  Γ  Ω ;
(15)       Γ
               T
                        v (g; T )  [1  (1  γ (m ))m ]  w (p; T );
               T
           Ω  v (g; T )  r  w (p; T ).


Restrict taste variation, feasible policies46, and perhaps housing supply and the utility function so that:

(a1) any type T’s composite public good choice set is convex; and:

                    T    T      T       T          T    T        T        T
(a2) the signs of dΓ  Γg dg  Γp dp  Γm dm and dΩ  Ω g dg  Ω p dp  Ω r dr are invariant to type T.

With these restrictions, one can show majority choice equilibrium continues to exist. Using (a1), one can

map any type’s preferences over policies into one of the composite public goods for that type (e.g., into

     T
 ) and these preferences are single peaked. The derivatives of the composite public goods in (a2) are

with respect to policy changes, taking account of the implied effects on g and p. If (a2) is satisfied, types

assess policy changes similarly enough so that the Median Voter Theorem can be applied. The

restrictions are non-trivial. In the case of Cobb-Douglas utility, type differences correspond to differences

in (  ,  ). The restriction in (a2) is satisfied, for example, allowing variation in α (along with income) if

housing supply is perfectly elastic and only income and head taxes are allowed. The approach we have

taken does permit some generalization with respect to tastes. Taking a different angle, using composite

public goods in understanding and solving complicated public choice problems has also recently been

applied in Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2012).

         In our multi-jurisdictional analysis, we have assumed either no mobility following initial

community choice or costless mobility. In the latter case, an innovation of our analysis is that, when

voting, each voter takes account of the possibility that he or she may subsequently relocate. In prior

analyses of voting, this has not been considered (e.g., Epple and Romer, 1991). Extending the analysis to

have mobility costs that vary across households is of interest. Intuition suggests this would increase the

scope for local redistribution. Another extension would consider a mixture of housing owners and

renters. We have preliminary results for a version of the model with a mixture of housing owners and

46
  Weaker conditions permit existence of equilibrium when the choice set is restricted to only a policy pair as, for
example, in Epple and Platt (1998).

                                                                                                                      30
renters, where we use Besley and Coate’s (2003) representative democracy model to obtain public choice

equilibrium.

        Our paper contributes to the positive theoretical and quantitative analysis of tax systems. The

model has households that differ by income and has majority choice of multiple tax instruments. Income,

property, and head taxation are allowed, which can be used to finance a congested public good and direct

redistribution. The utility specification permits policy preferences to be specified over two composite

public good, this enabling demonstration of majority choice equilibrium with multiple tax instruments.

The analysis clarifies competing incentives to adopt tax forms.

        The initial analysis assumes voters rent housing that is supplied by absentee landlords, implying

an incentive to use property taxes to appropriate surplus. In the single-jurisdictional case we examine,

where the income distribution implies an incentive to redistribute, a mixture of income and property taxes

arises, with the proceeds used to provide the public good and to redistribute directly via cash transfers.

Both taxes are distortionary, which induces voters to limit their levels and redistribution. For the same

specification but with housing owners, property taxation is reduced, mainly leading to less direct

redistribution. Housing owners bear the full cost of imposing property taxes, and they accordingly vote to

limit property taxation.

        We also study equilibrium determination of tax systems in a multi-jurisdictional Tiebout-like

version of the model, with the economy geographically divided into communities that have taxing

authority. Households initially select where to reside and vote, thus permitting sorting by income across

communities. In one version of the model they can relocate after local policies are set. If that relocation

is not permitted, then the only equilibrium we find is no different from the single community case.

Tiebout-type sorting fails to arise. If households were to sort by income, then redistribution in a rich

community would attract poorer households that anticipate this redistribution, disrupting the potential for

such an equilibrium. If, however, households can relocate following policy choices, then equilibrium

with sorting by income arises and with taxation that is fundamentally different than in the single-

community case. Income taxation and direct redistribution fail to arise, rather property and head taxes are

                                                                                                             31
used to finance provision of the public good. The driving incentive of voters is to retain (deter) richer

(poorer) households to maintain the tax base, in spite of incentives to redistribute with sorting (except in

the poorest community). Thus, household mobility associated with the option to relocate radically

changes equilibrium both with respect to the extent of direct and indirect redistribution (the latter through

local provision of the public good), and the nature of public finance. Again, housing owners have weaker

incentives to tax property, while also having stronger incentives to retain and attract residents who bid up

property values whether rich or poor.

           In the multi-jurisdictional analysis head taxes arise and in fact are important to supporting

stratified equilibrium. The heavy reliance on the head taxes, especially in the owners’ case, provides a

theoretical vindication of Tiebout’s (1956) original analysis, which implicitly assumed head taxation.47

While we have discussed approximations to head taxes, their empirical relevance is an open and highly

debated issue. We continue to obtain stratified equilibrium with severe restrictions on the levels of

permitted head taxes, but the richer communities are over-populated relative to reality. One interesting

question is why income sorting arises in other multi-community models of majority choice without head

taxation (see, e.g., the references in footnote 23), while not so here. Our model is unique in having both

income and property taxes and with direct and indirect redistribution. Thus, the scope for redistribution is

extensive; this precludes stratification if head taxes are not allowed. On the other hand, if head taxes are

allowed, then sorting arises but direct income redistribution is severely limited if not eliminated. While

we believe these findings yield important insights, the question of generality is open.

           The latter issue points to an important simplification of our model and direction for more

research. The model assumes one tier of government, while many economies have both central and local

governments (if not more tiers) that have taxing authority. A central finding of the literature on fiscal

federalism is that redistribution is largely, though not exclusively, the domain of the central government

(see Boadway, Marchand, and Vigneaulty (1998) and Gordon and Cullen (2012) and the references

therein). This literature has not analyzed the types of taxes that arise endogenously at different tiers of

47
     Head taxation is implicit in Tiebout’s discussion of a benefits tax (p. 417).

                                                                                                              32
government. Extending the present model has the potential to investigate further this issue and perhaps

show the type of taxes that are adopted endogenously at the central and local levels. Calabrese (2014) has

taken a step toward studying this by examining a version of this problem that assumes federal income

taxation and local property taxation. A related and interesting feature of the U.S. system that could also

be investigated is that state governments can restrict the instruments available to local governments. We

think the analysis we have developed here can be helpful for framing future research of such issues.


Appendix.

Proof of Proposition 1: In Stage 2, a household chooses (b, h) to solve the following problem:

         M ax v (g )u (b, h )
(A.1)
              s.t. y[1  (1  γ (m ))m ]  r  ph  b;

where u is homogenous of degree 1 and quasi-concave. Below we suppress that γ is a function of m.
The conditions for the solution for h are:

(A.2)   -pub + uh = 0 and the constraint in (A.1).

The homogeneity assumption conforms to:

(A.3)    u (λb, λh )  λu (b, h ) for all λ.

Differentiating with respect to λ and then setting λ = 1 we obtain Euler’s Theorem:

(A.4)    u (b, h )  bu b (b, h )  hu h (b, h ).

The latter will be useful later. Differentiating (A.3) with respect to b yields:

(A.5)    u b (λb, λh )  u b (b, h ).

Then setting λ = 1/b implies:

(A.6)    u b (1, h / b)  u b (b, h ).

Likewise, one obtains:

(A.7)    u h (1, h / b)  u h (b, h ).

Now substitute (A.6) and (A.7) into the first-order condition (A.2) and rewrite it as:



                                                                                                          33
         u h (1, h / b )
(A.8)                       p.
         u b (1, h / b )

Call the left-hand side of (A.8) Z(h/b). From the quasi-concavity assumption: ubuhh – uhubh < 0; it is
simple to confirm that Z is a decreasing function. From (A.8), h = Z-1(p)b, where Z-1 is also a decreasing
function. Now substitute the constraint on (A.1) for b in the latter equation, and rearrange to obtain:

                                          Z  1 (p ) 
         h  ( y[1  (1  γ )m )  r ]         1    
                                          1  pZ (p ) 
(A.9)
                                                              Z  1 (p ) 
           [ y (1  (1  γ )m )  r ]G (p ) w here G (p )         1    .
                                                              1  pZ (p ) 
which is the demand for h. To confirm that G is a decreasing function, differentiate the term in brackets
and rearrange to get:

                       1              1   2
                    ( Z )  ( Z )
(A.10) G (p )                   1    2
                                                 0,
                      (1  pZ )
recalling that Z-1 is a decreasing function.

        Now substitute h = (y(1-m)+r)G(p) into the constraint on (A.1), solve it for b, and substitute b so
written and h so written into the utility function to obtain the indirect utility function:

         V  v (g )u  [ y (1  (1  γ )m ]  r )(1  pG (p )),[ y (1  (1  γ )m )  r ]G (p ) 
(A.11)      v (g )[ y (1  (1  γ )m )  r ]u (1  pG (p ), G (p ))
            v (g )[ y (1  (1  γ )m )  r ]w (p ) w here w (p )  u (1  pG (p ), G ( p )).

Note that the second line of (A.11) follows by the homogeneity assumption on u, i.e., by (A.3). Note that
w(p) is a decreasing function, as obviously utility declines with p. Thus we have found the indirect utility
function (7) in Proposition 1, completing the proof. ▪

b. Owners’ Case. In the owners’ case, the Stage 4 utility maximization problem is:

                   M ax v (g )u (b, h )
(A.12)                     s.t. y[1  (1  γ (m ))m ]  r  (p h 1  p h )h d ( y, p )  ph  b
                                h d ( y, p )  [ y (1  (1  γ )m )  r ]G (p );

where hd(y,p) is the housing level contracted in Stage 1, given by (A.9). (We write housing demand as a
function of (y,p) for simplicity, though disposable income is impacted by the policies.) Again applying
(A.9), the re-contracted housing consumption in Stage 4 is given by:

(A.13)                h  [ y(1  (1  γ)m )  r]  [1  (p h1  p h )G (p)]  G (p).

Numeraire consumption is given by:

(A.14)               b  [ y(1  (1  γ)m )  r]  [1  (p h1  p h )G (p)]  ph ,

                                                                                                         34
for h satisfying (A.13). Substituting these into the direct utility function and following the same logic of
(A.11) yields the modified indirect utility function in (13), completing the proof. ▪


References.

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, Local Revenue Diversification: Local Income
Taxes. Staff report, Washington, D.C (1988).

Benabou, Roland, “Equity and Efficiency in Human Capital Investment: The Local Connection,” Review
of Economic Studies, 63 (1996), 237-264.

_______, “Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
108 (1993), 619-652.

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, “An Economic Theory of Representative Democracy,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112, 1 (February 1997), 85-114.

Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, and Marianne Vigneaulty, “The Consequences of Overlapping Tax
Bases for Redistribution and Public Spending in a Federation,” Journal of Public Economics, 68(1998),
453-478.

Boadway, Robin W. and Harry Kitchen, “Canadian Tax Policy,” Canadian Tax Foundation, Toronto,
Canada (1980).

Bowen, Howard R., “The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of Economic Resources, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 58, No. 1 (Nov., 1943), pp. 27-48.

Bucovetsky, Sam, “Choosing Tax Rates and Public Expenditure Levels Using Majority Rule,” Journal of
Public Economics, 46 (1991), 113-131.

Calabrese, Stephen, “Political Economy of Centralized Redistribution and Local Government Fiscal
Structure,” working paper, Carnegie Mellon University, 2014.

Calabrese, Stephen, Glenn Cassidy, and Dennis Epple, “Local Government Fiscal Structure and
Metropolitan Consolidation,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 2002, 1-43.

Calabrese, Steve, Dennis Epple, and Richard Romano, “On the Political Economy of Zoning,” Journal of
Public Economics, 91 (February 2007), 25-49.

____________________________, “Inefficiencies from Metropolitan Political and Fiscal
Decentralization: Failures of Tiebout Competition,” Review of Economic Studies, 79 (July 2012), 1081-
1111.

deBartolome, Charles, “Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community with Peer Group Effects,” Journal
of Political Economy, 98 (1990), 110-133.

deBartolome, Charles and Stephen L. Ross, “The Race to the Suburb: The Location of the Poor in a
Metropolitan,” 2002, University of Connecticut Working Paper #2002-02.


                                                                                                           35
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Historical Statistics on Governmental Finances and
Employment, an annual report, Government Finances (1968).

Ellickson, Robert C., “Jurisdictional Fragmentation and Residential Choice,” American Economic
Review, 61, 2 (1971), 334-339.

Epple, Dennis, Gordon, Brett and Holger Sieg, “A New Approach for Estimating the Housing Production
Function,” American Economic Review, 100, 1(June 2010), 905-924.

Epple, Dennis and Glenn Platt, “Equilibrium and Local Redistribution in an Urban Economy when
Households Differ in both Preferences and Incomes,” Journal of Urban Economics, 43,1(1998), 23-51.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano, “Public School Choice and Finance Policies, Neighborhood
Formation, and the Distribution of Educational Benefits,” Chapter 7 in The Economics of School Choice,
Caroline Hoxby, ed., National Bureau of Economic Research, University of Chicago Press, 2003, 227-
286.

Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg, “The Intergenerational Conflict over the Provision of
Public Education,” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (April 2012), 255-268.

Epple, Dennis and Thomas Romer, “Mobility and Redistribution,” Journal of Political Economy, 99
(August 1991), 828-858.

Epple, Dennis and Allan Zelenitz, “The Implications of Competition among Jurisdictions: Does Tiebout
Need Politics?” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 6 (1981), 1197-1217.

Feldstein, Martin, “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81, 4 (November 1999), 674-680.

Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson, “Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality of Public
Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 1(February 1996), 135-164.

________________________ , “Public Education and Income Distribution: A Quantitative Analysis of
Education Finance Reform,” American Economic Review, 88 (1998), 813-833.

Goodspeed, Timothy J., “Local Income Taxation: An Externality, Pigouvian Solution, and Public
Policies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25 (1995), 279-296.

Gordon, Roger H., “An Optimal Taxation Approach to Fiscal Federalism,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 98 (1983), 567-586.

Gordon, Roger H. and Julie Cullen, “Income Redistribution in a Federal System of Governments,”
Journal of Public Economics, 96 (2012), 1100-1109.

Grandmont, Jean-Michel, “Intermediate Preferences and the Majority Rule,” Econometrica, 46, 2 (March
1978), 317-330.

Hamilton, Bruce, “Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments,” Urban Studies, 1-2
(June 1975), 205-211.



                                                                                                     36
Harmon, Oskar R., “The Income Elasticity of Demand for Single-Family Owner-Occupied Housing: An
Empirical Reconciliation,” Journal of Urban Economics, 38 (1988), 75-85.

Henderson, J. Vernon, “Community Choice of Revenue Instruments,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics, 24, 2 (1994), 159-183.

Krelove, Russell, “The Persistence and Inefficiency of Property Tax Finance of Local Public
Expenditures,” Journal of Public Economics, 51 (July 1993), 415-435.

Inman, Robert, “The Local Decision to Tax: Evidence from Large U.S. Cities,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 19, 3(1989), 455-491.

Inman, Robert and Daniel Rubinfeld, “Designing Tax Policies in Federalist Economies: An Overview,”
Journal of Public Economics, 60 (1996), 307-334.

Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard, “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 89, No. 5 (Oct., 1981), pp. 914-927

Musgrave, Richard A., “Economics of Fiscal Federalism,” Nebraska Journal of Economics and Business,
10 (1971), 3-13.

Nechyba, Thomas, “Local Property and State Income Taxes: The Role of Interjurisdictional Competition
and Collusion,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 2 (1997), 351-384.

__________, “School Finance Induced Migration Patterns: The Impact of Private School Vouchers,”
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 1,1 (1999), 5-50.

__________, “Mobility, Targeting, and Private School Vouchers,” American Economic Review, 90, 1
(2000), 130-46.

Oates, Wallace E, Fiscal Federalism, 1972, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

___________, “An Economist’s Perspective on Fiscal Federalism,” in Oates, W.E. (Ed), The Political
Economy of Fiscal Federalism, Lexington, MA, D.C. Heath, 1972, 3-20.

Plott, Charles, “A Notion of Equilibrium and its Possibility Under Majority Rule,” American Economic
Review, 57, 4 (September 1967), 787-806.

Poterba, James, “Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers,” American Economic Review, 82,
2 (1992), 237-242.

Roberts, Kevin W.S., "Voting Over Income Tax Schedules," Journal of Public Economics, Volume 8,
Issue 3, December 1977, Pages 329–340.

Romer, Thomas, "Individual Welfare, Majority Voting, and the Properties of a Linear Income Tax,"
Journal of Public Economics, Volume 4, Issue 2, February 1975, Pages 163–185.

Schmidheiny, Kurt,. "Income segregation and local progressive taxation: Empirical evidence from
Switzerland," Journal of Public Economics, 90, 3 (February 2006), 429-458.


                                                                                                       37
Siniavskaia, Natalia, “Property Tax Rates by County and City, 2011” Economics and Housing Policy
Group, National Association of Home Builders www.nahb.org

Tax Foundation, Local Income Tax Rates by Jurisdiction, 2011.        Compilation from State revenue
departments and other sources. www.TaxFoundation.org

Tiebout, Charles. M., “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of Political Economy, 64 (1956),
416-424.

Westhoff, Frank, “Existence of Equilibrium in Economies with a Local Public Good,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 14 (February 1977), 84-112.

Wildasin, David, “Locational Efficiency in a Federal System,” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
10 (1980), 453-471.

Wilson, J., “Property Taxation, Congestion, and Local Public Goods,” Journal of Public Economics, 64
(1997), 207-217.

Wooders, Myrna, “The Tiebout Hypothesis: Near-optimality in Local Public Good Economies,”
Econometrica, 48 (1980), 1467-1485.

Zodrow, George, “The Incidence of Metropolitan Property Tax Base Sharing and Rate Equalization,”
Journal of Urban Economics, 15, 2(1984), 210-229.




                                                                                                       38
        Γ




Γ   j
                      .         y2 > y1



Γj–1                            .                    I y2
                                          I y1
                                                            Ω
                          j         j–1
                      Ω         Ω


Figure 1: Indifference Curves over Composite Public Goods




        Γ




                                          Majority Choice
                                           Equilibrium


               Composite
                                .
              Public Good
             Consumption                           Iy
                                                        m
            Possibilities Set                               Ω

              Figure 2: Majority Choice Equilibrium

                                                                39
                               Table 1: Single Community with Renters*

                 Baseline         γ = 0.05         γ = 0.30       εH = 1.50      β = 0.15       α = 0.33
    g=           $ 4,799        $      5,294       $ 4,784         $ 4,954       $ 6,944       $    4,987
    r=           $ 9,415        $ 35,608           $ 5,149         $ 11,041      $ 7,084       $ 12,543

    m=              0.11            0.57             0.04            0.11          0.11            0.10
    t=              0.85            0.56             0.90            1.29          0.87            0.90
    r prop** =      0.00            0.00             0.00            0.00          0.00            0.00
    m prop =        0.52            0.88             0.28            0.47          0.53            0.36
    t prop =        0.48            0.12             0.72            0.53          0.47            0.64

    p=           $   17.5      $       15.1       $   17.9        $ 77.2        $ 17.5         $      20.1
    Mean y =     $ 67,392      $     67,392       $ 67,392        $ 67,392      $ 67,392       $    67,392
    Median y =   $ 49,276      $     49,276       $ 49,276        $ 49,276      $ 49,276       $    49,276
*
 Baseline values for parameters are γ = .247, β = .099, α = .220, and ε H = 3.00.
**
 ’Prop’ is shorthand for proportion of tax revenues with analogous notation used throughout.




                                                        40
                             Table 2: Multi-Community Case with Renters
                                                                                                       Restricted
                           Baseline*        γ = 0.05         εH = 1.50     β = 0.15      α = 0.33      Head Tax**

    g1 =                   $ 2,154         $ 2,134           $ 2,167      $ 3,149       $ 2,263        $ 1,081
    g2 =                   $ 6,333         $ 6,047           $ 7,100      $ 8,758        $ 6,958       $ 2,483
    g3=                    $ 17,015        $ 16,582          $ 19,939     $ 22,811       $ 18,962      $ 7,964
    g avg. =                $ 6,798         $ 6,812           $ 7,517      $ 9,522        $ 7,027      $ 5,658

    r1 =                   $ (333)           $ 166           $ 703        $ (1,525)      $ 894         $ 264
    r2 =                   $ (3,913)         $ (3,685)       $ (3,002)    $ (6,269)      $ (3,693)     $ (124)
    r3 =                   $ (12,282)        $ (11,846)      $ (12,666)   $ (16,769)     $ (14,556)    $ (398)

    r prop1*** =              0.15             0.00            0.00         0.48          0.00             0.00
    r prop2 =                 0.62             0.61             0.42        0.72          0.53             0.05
    r prop3 =                 0.72             0.71             0.64        0.74          0.77             0.05

    m prop1 =                 0.00            0.34             0.00          0.00         0.00             0.00
    m prop2 =                 0.00            0.00             0.00          0.00         0.00             0.00
    m prop3 =                 0.00            0.00             0.00          0.00         0.00             0.00

    t prop1 =                 0.85            0.66             1.00          0.52         1.00             1.00
    t prop2 =                 0.38            0.39             0.57          0.28         0.47             0.95
    t prop3 =                 0.28            0.29             0.36          0.26         0.23             0.95

    Pop prop1**** =           0.40            0.37             0.41          0.39           0.42           0.12
    Pop prop2 =               0.40            0.42             0.40          0.40           0.41           0.27
    Pop prop3 =               0.20            0.21             0.19          0.21           0.17           0.61

    p1 =                     $12.29          $11.36            $53.21       $11.81        $14.39           $8.95
    p2 =                     $13.03          $13.09            $59.76       $12.98        $14.31          $11.91
    p3 =                     $13.23         $13.38            $59.01       $13.88         $13.66          $19.50


    Mean y1 =               $24,950          $23,737          $25,497      $24,661        $25,737        $14,049
    Mean y2 =               $62,950          $60,291          $64,724      $61,384        $66,255        $29,689
    Mean y3 =              $162,849         $159,141         $166,727     $158,314       $171,573        $95,211

    Communities where          2,3             2,3              2,3           2,3           2,3             2,3
    Median y < Mean y
*
 Baseline values for parameters are γ = .247, β = .099, α = .220, ε H = 3, J=3, L1 = .325, and L2 = L3 = .337.
**
  Head tax restricted to not exceed 5% of equilibrium expenditure on g.
***
   ’Prop1’ is shorthand for proportion of tax revenues in community 1, with analogous notation used throughout.
****
     These are the population proportions.



                                                        41
    Table 3: Single Community: Comparing
               Renters to Owners

                         Renters*             Owners*
    g=                   $ 4,799              $ 4,642
    r=                   $ 9,415              $ 7,755

    m=                      0.11                0.11
    t=                      0.85                0.53
    r prop** =              0.00                0.00
    m prop =                0.52                0.60
    t prop =                0.48                0.40

    p=                 $ 17.5             $     15.1
    Mean y =           $ 67,392           $    67,392
    Median y =         $ 49,276           $    49,276
*
 Values for parameters are the baseline values, γ = .247, β = .099, α = .220, and ε H = 3.00.
**
 ’Prop’ is shorthand for proportion of tax revenues, with analogous notation used throughout.




                                                        42
           Table 4: Multi-Community: Comparing Renters to Owners
                                                                           Renters              Owners
                                    Renters           Owners              Restricted           Restricted
                                    Baseline*         Baseline*           Head Tax**           Head Tax**

    g1 =                          $ 2,154           $ 2,740                  $ 1,081             $1,194
    g2 =                          $ 6,333           $ 6,584                  $ 2,483             $2,446
    g3=                           $ 17,015          $ 14,116                 $ 7,964             $7,013
    g avg. =                      $ 6,798           $ 5,787                  $ 5,658             $ 4,699

    r1 =                          $ (333)           $ (2,670)                $ 264                $ (60)
    r2 =                          $ (3,913)         $ (6,186)                $ (124)             $ (122)
    r3 =                          $ (12,282)        $ (10,238)               $ (398)             $ (351)


    r prop1*** =                     0.15                0.97                  0.00                0.05
    r prop2 =                        0.62                0.94                  0.05                0.05
    r prop3 =                        0.72                0.73                  0.05                0.05

    m prop1 =                          0.00              0.00                  0.00                0.00
    m prop2 =                          0.00              0.00                  0.00                0.08
    m prop3 =                          0.00              0.00                  0.00                0.44

    t prop1 =                         0.85               0.03                  1.00                0.95
    t prop2 =                         0.38               0.06                  0.95                0.87
    t prop3 =                         0.28               0.27                  0.95                0.51

    Pop prop1**** =                    0.40              0.54                  0.12                0.17
    Pop prop2 =                        0.40              0.29                  0.27                0.29
    Pop prop3 =                        0.20              0.17                  0.61                0.54

    p1 =                             $12.29            $10.14                 $8.95                $8.37
    p2 =                             $13.03            $10.85                $11.91               $11.53
    p3 =                             $13.23            $12.63                $19.50               $15.63


    Mean y1 =                        $24,950           $30,572               $14,049             $15,884
    Mean y2 =                        $62,950           $74,317               $29,689             $33,589
    Mean y3 =                       $162,849          $172,268               $95,211            $101,134

     Communities where                 2,3              1,2,3                   2,3                 2,3
     Median y < Mean y
*
 Baseline values for parameters are γ = .247, β = .099, α = .220, ε H = 3, J=3, equal land areas.
**
  Head tax restricted to not exceed 5% of equilibrium expenditure on g.
***
    ’Prop1’ is shorthand for proportion of tax revenues in community 1, with analogous notation used throughout.
****
     These are the population proportions.

                                                                43
