                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CROSS-BORDER ACQUISITIONS AND LABOR REGULATIONS

                                              Ross Levine
                                               Chen Lin
                                              Beibei Shen

                                         Working Paper 21245
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w21245


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2015




We received helpful comments from Douglas Arner, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Yona Rubinstein,
David Sraer, Bernard Yeung and seminar and conference participants at the University of California,
Berkeley, the HKIMR-HKU International Conference on Finance, Institutions and Economic Growth
and the 2015 CEIBS finance conference in Shanghai. We thank the Clausen Center for International
Business and Policy at the University of California, Berkeley, for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Beibei Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Cross-border Acquisitions and Labor Regulations
Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Beibei Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 21245
June 2015
JEL No. F2,G34,G38,J6,J8

                                                ABSTRACT

Do labor regulations influence the reaction of stock markets and firm profitability to cross-border acquisitions?
We discover that acquiring firms enjoy smaller abnormal stock returns and profits when targets are
in countries with stronger labor protection regulations, i.e., in countries where laws, regulations, and
policies increase the costs to firms of adjusting their workforces. These effects are especially pronounced
when the target is in a labor-intensive or high labor-volatility industry. Consistent with labor regulations
shaping the success of cross-border deals, we find that firms make fewer and smaller cross-border
acquisitions into countries with strong labor regulations.


Ross Levine                                             Beibei Shen
Haas School of Business                                 Chinese University of Hong Kong
University of California at Berkeley                    Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)             beibei@baf.cuhk.edu.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu

Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
chenlin1@hku.hk
1. Introduction

       Cross-border acquisitions account for a large and growing proportion of all acquisitions.

The dollar value of cross-border acquisitions rose from an average of $300 billion per annum

during the 1990s to an average of almost $800 billion per annum since 2000. Furthermore, the

proportion of all acquisitions, domestic and international, accounted for by cross-border deals

rose from 24% to 39%. Firms increasing look beyond national borders in conducting mergers

and acquisitions.

       Researchers have focused on the financial and corporate governance determinants of

cross-border acquisitions. Erel et al. (2012) show that exchange rate changes and changes in

relative stock market valuations influence the incidence and direction of international deals.

Rossi and Volpin (2004), Bris and Cabolis (2008), and Chari et al. (2009) demonstrate that firms

in countries with stronger corporate governance systems have a higher likelihood of purchasing

firms in other countries. The nationalities of owners and directors matter too. Ferreira et al. (2010)

find that foreign institutional owners facilitate cross-border acquisitions, and Masulis et al. (2012)

find that firms with foreign independent directors make better cross-border acquisitions when the

target firms are from the directors’ home economies.

       But, researchers have not yet studied how the broad set of laws, regulations, and policies

that shape labor markets—“labor regulations”— influence cross-border acquisitions. Researchers

have dissected the impact of offshoring and multinational firms on wages and employment (e.g.,

Revenga 1992; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008; Desai et al. 2009; and Harrison and

McMillan 2011). But, they have not evaluated whether differences in the degree to which

countries protect the employed and assist the unemployed influence cross-border acquisitions.

       This is surprising. Besides influencing a large corporate expense—expenditures on wages

and benefits, labor regulations shape the costs of hiring, firing, and adjusting the hours of

workers, with potentially large effects on firm performance (Botero et al., 2004). Labor market

flexibility could be especially important for the success of acquisitions since acquiring firms

often restructure targets to minimize labor costs and maximize synergies. Thus, cross-country
                                                !                                                   "!
!
differences in labor markets might influence cross-border acquisitions and the profitability of

those deals.

       In this paper, we provide the first assessment of the relationship between cross-country

differences in labor regulations and cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Specifically, we

address the following questions: Are cross-country differences in labor regulations associated

with (1) how an acquiring firm’s stock price responds to a cross-border acquisition and (2) how

an acquiring firm’s profits change after a cross-border deal?

       To address these questions, we use a sample of cross-border transactions in the Securities

Data Company database across 50 countries over the period from 1991 through 2012. This

includes transactions between 2,450 (=50! 49) country-pairs. We examine individual deals. We

assess the cumulative abnormal stock returns (CARs) and the abnormal return on assets (ROAs)

of acquiring firms following cross-border acquisitions. To calculate CARs, we follow Bris and

Cabolis (2008) and use a two-factor international market model in which one factor is the local

market returns and the second factor is the world market return. To compute abnormal ROA, we

follow Lin et al. (2011) and Harford et al. (2012) and adjust the firm’s ROAs by median industry

ROAs. Before the cross-border deal, we calculate the abnormal ROAs of the (artificially)

combined firm based on the relative sizes and industrial compositions of the two firms. After the

acquisition, we use the acquiring firm’s abnormal ROA.

       We use three measures of labor regulations. First, Botero et al. (2004) provide cross-

country measures of the degree to which laws impede employers from firing workers, increasing

work hours, or using part-time workers. Such interventions increase the costs to employers of

adjusting their workforces. Second, the OECD provides panel measures of the strictness of

regulations on dismissals, including procedural inconveniences, notice and severance pay, and

the difficulty of firing workers. Third, Aleksynska and Schindler (2011) provide panel data on

the proportion of the unemployed covered by unemployment benefits. More generous

unemployment benefits might increase labor costs by boosting the reservation wages of the

unemployed. For brevity, we use the phrases “stronger” and “weaker” labor regulations to
                                               !                                                  #!
!
describe the degree to which laws and policies protect the employed and aid the unemployed.

        With these data, we evaluate how an acquiring firm’s CAR and abnormal ROAs respond

to a cross-border acquisition. The key explanatory variable is the difference in labor regulations

between the countries of the target and acquirer. The regressions control for acquirer country,

target country, year, and acquirer industry fixed effects, and in those specifications where it is

feasible, we also include acquirer-target pair effects to control for all country-pair traits. We

control for deal-specific traits, geographic distance between the acquirer and target, as well as

time-varying country characteristics, such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita.

        We find a strong empirical connection between labor regulations and both abnormal

stock returns and profits. An acquirer’s CARs and abnormal ROAs respond more positively

when the target is in a country with weaker labor regulations than those of the acquiring firm.

The abnormal ROAs results are robust across the different measures of labor regulations and

specifications. The results on the relationship between CARs and the labor protection law index

are more fragile. As we now discuss, this fragility reflects weakness in precisely identifying

those target firms within a country that are likely to be most influenced by labor regulations and

those that are likely to be influenced least.

        We extend these analyses by recognizing that labor regulations might differentially affect

firms. In particular, the success of firms in some industries might depend more on labor market

flexibility than the success of firms in other industries. If this is the case, then the stock market’s

reaction to a firm acquiring a target will be more sensitive to labor regulations when the target is

in an industry that relies heavily on labor market flexibility. Failure to account for these

differences might hinder the identification of the impact of differences in labor regulations on

acquirer CARs and abnormal ROAs.

        Thus, we examine the relationship between labor regulations and changes in an acquiring

firm’s CAR and abnormal ROAs while differentiating by the degree to which the target is in a

“labor dependent industry,” an industry in which firm performance depends heavily on labor

markets. We use U.S. data to create two benchmark measures of the degree to which a firm is in
                                                  !                                                   $!
!
a labor dependent industry: (1) “labor intensity” equals labor and pension expenses relative to

sales and (2) “labor volatility” equals the volatility of employment relative to assets. We then

redo the analyses of how an acquiring firm’s stock returns and profits respond to a cross-border

acquisition while further differentiating by the degree to which the target firm’s industry depends

on labor markets, as measured by labor intensity and labor volatility.

       We find that the CARs and abnormal ROAs of acquiring firms respond most positively to

cross-border acquisitions of targets in countries with comparatively weak labor regulations when

the target is in a labor dependent industry. In turn, when the target is in an industry in which

labor regulations are unlikely to influence firm profitability, the stock market and profits do not

respond much to cross-border differences in labor regulations. The relationship between cross-

border differences in regulation and acquirer CARs and abnormal ROAs is especially large when

theory suggests those differences should matter most—when the performance of the target

industry depends heavily on labor market flexibility.

       We also extend these analyses by assessing the relationship between differences in labor

regulations and the number and value of cross-border acquisitions. If labor regulations shape the

stock price reaction to cross-border acquisitions and profitability of such deals, then this should

be reflected the incidence and size of cross-border acquisitions when differentiating by country-

pairs. To check the consistency of our deal level analyses with firm-level decisions to engage in

cross-border mergers and acquisitions, we regress the number, value, and deal size of cross-

border acquisitions on!the difference between labor regulations in the target and acquirer

countries. Besides conditioning on acquirer country, target country, and acquirer industry fixed

effects, we control for acquirer and target country characteristics, such as gross domestic product

(GDP) per capita and population, as well as acquirer-target traits, such as geographic distance

and whether they have the same major language and religion.

       We find that a country’s firms acquire more firms and spend more on each acquisition in

a country if that target country has weaker labor regulations than the regulations in the acquirer

country. That is, firms find targets in countries with weaker labor regulations more appealing
                                                !                                                     %!
!
than similar targets in countries with comparatively strong labor regulations. For example, when

the target country has one-standard deviation lower labor protection laws than the median

country, our estimates suggest that the volume of cross border acquisitions will be almost 60%

higher. As another example, consider China, which has labor protections that are average in our

sample. About 67% of its cross-border acquisitions flow to countries with weak labor protection

laws (below the 25th percentile of the employment law distribution), while only 9% flow to

countries with strong labor protection laws (above the 75 percentile of the distribution). These

results are consistent with this paper’s core findings: acquiring firms enjoy larger CARs and

abnormal ROAs after a cross-border acquisition if the target is in a country with weaker labor

regulations than the acquirer country’s labor regulations.

       It is important to be clear about what our analyses show and do not show. We do not, and

do not seek to, evaluate the impact of a random firm acquiring another random firm in a different

country in a random year on the CARs and abnormal ROAs of the acquiring firm. These

acquisition choices are anything but random. Rather, we evaluate what happens to CARs and

abnormal ROAs when a firm chooses to acquire another firm and whether this relationship

differs by the comparative labor regulations in the two countries and by the degree to which the

target firm is in an industry that requires flexible labor markets. We find that labor regulations

are powerfully associated with (a) stock price reactions to cross-border acquisitions, (b) the

abnormal ROAs of such deals, and (c) the degree to which firms in one country acquire firms in

other countries.

       Our work relates to research on the role of labor in corporate decisions. Considerable

work shows that as labor and labor unions become more powerful, this influences corporate cash

holdings (Klasa et al., 2009), capital structure (Matsa 2010), tax aggressiveness (Chyz et al.,

2013), firm investments (Agrawal 2012, and Faleye, et al., 2006), and managerial performance

(Atanassov and Kim, 2009). Rather than focusing on how a firm’s labor unions alter its behavior,

we examine the association between cross-country differences in labor regulations and cross-

border acquisition activity, the stock market response to such deals, and changes in the
                                                !                                                    &!
!
profitability of the acquiring firm after it makes the purchase. A notable paper is John, Knyazeva,

and Knyazeva (2014). Using a sample of U.S. publicly listed firms, they find that acquirers from

the states with strong labor rights experience on average 0.5% lower acquisition announcement

returns (i.e. 5 day CARs), which suggest the stakeholder-shareholder conflict of interest in

acquisition decision making. Moreover, they find that the acquirers from the strong labor rights

states are more likely to bid for targets in the strong labor rights states and with high labor costs.

In contrast, using a comprehensive sample of international data, we find that acquirers from

countries with strong labor regulations are more likely to acquire a target in a weak labor

regulation country. Moreover, we find that an acquirer’s CARs and abnormal ROAs respond

more positively when the target is in a country with weaker labor regulations than those of the

acquiring firm. These international evidence complements the U.S. evidence documented by

John et al., (2014).

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the data.

We present the empirical analyses in section 3 and conclude in section 4.



        2. Data, Summary Statistics, and Preliminaries

        2.1 Labor regulations

        We use three measures of the degree to which labor market laws, regulations, and

policies protect workers and aid the unemployed. First, Employment law measures the degree to

which laws, regulations, and policies impede employers from firing workers, increasing work

hours, or using part-time workers. Employment law was constructed by Botero et al. (2004) to

reflect the incremental cost to employers of deviating from a hypothetical rigid contract, in

which the conditions of employment are specified for all employees and no employee can be

fired. More specifically, Employment law is larger when it is more costly for employers to (1)

use alternative employment contracts, such as part-time employment, to avoid limits on

terminating workers or providing mandatory benefits; (2) increase the number of hours worked,

either because of limits on hours worked or because of mandatory overtime premia; and (3) to
                                                 !                                                       '!
!
fire workers, where the costs reflect the notice period, severance pay, and any mandatory

penalties, as well as the costs associated with following the procedures associated with

dismissing workers. Thus, besides providing information on the degree to which laws protect

employees, Employment law is an index of the costs to firms of adjusting their labor forces.

               Our second measure of labor protection is the employment protection law index (EPL),

which measures the costs and impediments to dismissing workers. EPL was compiled by the

OECD and incorporates three aspects of dismissal protection:1 (1) procedural impediments that

employers face when starting to fire workers, such as notification procedures and consultation

requirements; (2) the length of the notice period and the generosity of severance pay, which vary

by the tenure of workers; and (3) the difficulty of dismissal, as determined by the circumstances

in which it is possible to fire workers and the compensation and reinstatement possibilities

following unfair dismissal. This EPL index is measured annually, so it captures country-level

changes in employment protection. This allows us to control for acquirer-target fixed effects.

               Third, Unemployment coverage equals the ratio of the number of recipients of

unemployment benefits to the number of unemployed and is from Aleksynska and Schindler

(2011). Unemployment coverage provides information on the generosity of unemployment

benefits. To the extent that such benefits increase the reservation wages of unemployed workers

and reduce the rate at which unemployed workers accept job offers, Unemployment coverage

provides information on the costs to firms of hiring workers. Since Unemployment coverage is

measured annually, we use it along with EPL to assess the time-series relationship between labor

protection policies and cross-border acquisitions. A disadvantage of Unemployment coverage is

that it only measures the proportion of unemployed workers who receive benefits; it does not

measure other factors that alter the costs to firms of changing labor contracts.

               Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics of country and country-pair characteristics.

Unemployment coverage is 0.38, indicating that across all country-year observations
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"
 !The OECD employment protection data can be downloaded on the website:
http://www.oecd.org/employment/protection.!!!

                                                                !                                       (!
!
unemployment insurance recipients represent 38% of the unemployed. The average level of

Employment law and EPL is 0.48 and 2.19, respectively. Appendix 2 provides the values of

Employment law, EPL, and Unemployment coverage across countries.



       2.2 Cross-Border acquisitions and firm performance

       The Securities Data Company (SDC) database provides information on cross-border

acquisitions. Cross-border acquisitions include deals both announced and completed from 1991

through 2012, in which the acquirer and target firm can be publicly listed, privately owned, or a

subsidiary. Following Erel, Liao, and Weisbach (2012), we exclude leveraged buyouts, spinoffs,

recapitalizations, repurchases, self-tenders, exchange offers, privatizations, and transactions that

do not disclose the value of the deal.

       After merging the SDC with the other data sources discussed below, we have a maximum

of 11,485 cross border deals in our regression analyses. There are 3,008 acquirers that make only

one cross-border acquisition during our sample period. There are 1,658 acquirers that make 2-4

cross-border deals and 509 acquirers that make five or more cross-border acquisitions.



       2.2.1 Acquirer CARs

       We use deal-level data to assess the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) and abnormal

returns on assets (ROAs) of acquiring firms following cross-border acquisitions. Based on

Masulis, et al. (2007) and Ishii and Xuan (2014), we further restrict our definition of a cross-

border acquisition in four ways. First, the cross-border deal must involve a!publicly listed

acquirer. Second, we only examine cases in which the acquirer obtains full control (100%

ownership of the target) and was not a majority stakeholder before the acquisition. Third, we

eliminate small deals (less than $1 million), since these might differ materially from the bulk of




                                                !                                                      )!
!
the sample. Fourth, we focus only on nonfinancial firms since financial firms are subject to a

wide array of regulatory restrictions on cross-border acquisitions.2

               To calculate acquirer CARs around the acquisition announcement dates, we start with

stock price data from Datastream for non-U.S. firms and from CRSP for U.S. companies. We use

international exchange rates from Datastream to compute all returns in U.S. dollars. Thus, the

dollar-denominated daily return for firm i in country j on day t is

                                                                                        !
                                                                             !!!!!! !
                                                                                        ! !
                                                                !!!!!! !                !
                                                                                                ! !,                (1)
                                                                           !!!!!!!! !
                                                                                        ! !!!




where Pi,j,t is the local currency stock price of firm i, in country j, on day t, and X($/j)t is the spot

exchange rate (dollars per local currency) on day t.

               We then estimate CARs using the two-factor international market model, as in Bris and

Cabolis (2008). The two factors are the local market return and the world market return, where

these returns are computed in U.S. dollars. We use the broadest equity market index available for

each country to proxy for the local market return and the MSCI world index to proxy for the

world market return. Thus, we run the following regression:


                                                        !!!"# ! !! ! !!! !!"# ! !!! !!" ! !!" ,                     (2)



where Rijt is the dollar-denominated daily stock return for firm i in country j, Rmjt is the local
market return in country j, and Rwt is the world market return. We estimate the model using 200

trading days from event day -210 to event day -11 and compute five-day CARs from the ε’s

during the event window (−2, +2), where event day 0 is the acquisition announcement date. Thus,

there is one CAR for each deal.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
#
 !The deal-level results are quite robust to alterations in these criteria. First, the results are robust to including
financial industry firms. Second, the results hold when defining an acquisition as obtaining a majority stake, rather
than defining an acquisition as when the acquiring firms holds 100% of the target’s shares after the transaction.

                                                                                   !                                     *!
!
        2.2.2 Acquire abnormal ROA

        To measure the change in a firm’s performance when it acquires another firm, we

construct a measure of abnormal operating performance based each firm’s ROAs, which equals

net income divided by the book value of total assets at the beginning of the fiscal year. We then

calculate abnormal operating performance (industry-median-adjusted ROAs) before and after a

cross-border acquisition. The two-digit SIC industry codes are based on the self-reported main

industry classification of the firm. In pre-merger years, industry-median-adjusted ROAs equal

the weighted average of the acquirer and target’s ROAs minus the weighted average of their

respective industry-median ROAs. The weights are based on the market values of each firm in

the year before the acquisition (year -1). The industry classification is based on two-digit SIC

codes. In post-merger years (years +1, +2 and +3), industry-median-adjusted ROAs are the

merged firm’s ROAs minus the weighted average of the acquirer’s and targets industry-median

ROAs.

        Specifically, pre-acquisition industry-median-adjusted ROA equals


                 !"#! ! !! ! !"#! ! !! ! !"#!!!" ! !! ! !"#!!"# ! !! ,                             (3)



while post-acquisition industry-median-adjusted ROA equals


                         !"#!"#$ ! !"#!!"# ! !! ! !"#!!"# ! !! !                                   (4)



The terms are defined as follows: !"#! is the acquirer’s ROAs; !"#! is the target’s ROAs;
!"#!!!"# is the acquirer’s industry-median ROAs; !"#!!!"# is the target’s industry-median
ROAs; !"#!"#$ is the merged firm’s ROAs; !! !is the weight of the acquirer firm; and !! !is the

weight of the target firm. The weights are the respective market value of the firm relative to the

market value of the combined firms in the year before the acquisition (year -1). Since (a) we only
                                                !                                                  "+!
!
have ROA for publicly-traded acquirers and targets and (b) the analyses of abnormal ROAs

require three years of data following the acquisition, the sample size drops appreciably from that

in the CAR analyses.




       2.2.3 Deal-level and firm-level characteristics
       The deal-level analyses control for firm-level and deal-level characteristics that past

researchers have used to explain firm performance and CARs (e.g., Masulis, et al. 2007). First,

we control for acquiring firm traits, such as firm size, cash flow, Tobin’s Q, and leverage, which

are obtained from Worldscope and Compustat. Second, we control for the acquiring firm’s pre-

announcement stock price run-up, which is measured as the acquirer’s market-adjusted buy-and-

hold return during the 200-day window from 210 days before the acquisition through 11 days

before the acquisition [-210, -11]. Third, we control for deal-level traits provided by SDC:

relative deal size equals the ratio of transaction value to the acquirer’s book value of total assets

in the fiscal year prior to the announcement date; industry relatedness equals one if the acquirer
and the target share a two-digit SIC industry classification; public target dummy, private target

dummy, and subsidiary target dummy equal one if the target is respectively a publicly-traded

parent company, privately-owned parent company, or a subsidiary firm; and, similarly, all cash
deal, friendly deal, and tender deal equal one respectively if the purchase is an all-cash deal, if

the target company’s board recommends the offer, and if the takeover bid is a public offer to

acquire a public firm’s shares made to equity holders during a specified time.

       Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics for the 11,485 cross-border deals. The

five-day CAR is 1.31% across all cross-border acquisitions, suggesting that on average cross-

border acquisitions enhance acquirer value. The average transaction value is 31.8% of the

acquiring firm’s total assets. The acquirer and target have different two-digit SIC industry codes

in 43% of the deals, which is reflected in the dummy variable Unrelated deal, and which is about

the same ratio as in domestic acquisitions. Publicly traded target firms account for about 10% of
                                                 !                                                    ""!
!
deals; thus, 90% of targets are privately held firms or subsidiaries of firms. We “winsorize”

continuous variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Furthermore, when we restrict the sample to

firms that do not conduct cross-border and domestic acquisitions within ten days of each other,

the results hold, yielding results that are similar both in terms of statistical significance and

economic magnitudes. Appendix 1 provides variable definitions. And Appendix 3 provides

information on the total number of cross-border deals for each acquirer country and target

country in our sample.



       2.3 Cross-border acquisition activity and country and country-pair control variables

       In extensions of our deal-level analyses of CARs and abnormal ROAs, we examine three

indicators of cross-border acquisition activity. Cross-border dollar volume measures the dollar

value of transactions and equals Log(1+ Value (a,t)), where Value (a,t) is the total dollar value of

all cross-border mergers during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with a target from country

t. Cross-border number measures the number of transactions and equals Log(1+ Number (a,t)),

where Number (a,t) is the total number of all cross-border mergers during the sample period for

acquirer firm a, with a target from country t. Cross-border deal size measures the average size of

transactions and equals!Log(1+ Deal size (a,t)), where Deal size (a,t) is the average dollar value

of all cross-border deals during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with a target from country

t.

       Figures 1 – 4 provide illustrative patterns. Cross-border acquisitions are large, growing,

and represent an increasing proportion of the value of all mergers and acquisitions. As shown in

Figure 2, during the early part of the sample (1991-1997), cross-border acquisitions were

typically less than $300 billion per annum, but this rose to about $800 billion per annum after the

early 2000s. Furthermore, Figure 1 shows that the value of cross-border deals rose from about 25%

of all acquisitions during the early part of the sample (1991-1997) to around 35% since then.

Figure 3 documents the value of acquisitions for the eleven largest countries in terms of the total

value of cross-border acquisitions over the period from 1991 through 2012. The U.S. and U.K.
                                                 !                                                  "#!
!
are the largest acquirers, with total values of over $2 trillion. Figure 4 shows that a larger volume

of acquisitions involves targets in countries with weaker labor regulations than targets in

countries with stronger labor regulations than the acquirer country.

       We also include data on country traits that have been used to explore the determinants of

cross-border acquisitions. First, considerable research indicates that geographic and cultural

proximity facilitate communication, deal-making, and hence cross-border acquisitions, as shown

in Erel et al. 2012. Consequently, we include three variables to capture these traits: (a) the

natural logarithm of the distance between the capitals of the acquirer and target countries,

Log[Geographic distance]; (b) an indicator variable that equals one if the acquirer and the target

have the same primary language (Same language); and (c) an indicator variable that equals one

if they have the same primary religion (Same religion). Second, we include Log[GDP per capita]

and Log[Population] to measure the level of economic development and size of the population

respectively. Third, since other country traits might influence the costs and benefits of cross-

border transactions, we include acquirer and target country fixed effects, and in some analyses,

we include acquirer-target fixed effects. In Panel B of Table 1, we observe that 4% of country-

pairs share the same language and about 20% of country-pairs share the same religion.



       2.4 Preliminaries: Do cross-border acquisitions predict changes in labor regulations?

       In this research, we seek to assess (1) whether the stock market response to a firm making

a cross-border acquisition differs depending on the comparative strength of labor regulations

between the acquiring and target countries, and (2) whether the change in the operating

performance of the acquiring firm depends on the differences in labor regulations in the

acquiring and target countries. If acquisition activity triggers changes in labor regulations,

however, this would complicate our ability to draw confident inferences about the impact of

comparative labor regulations on cross-border deals.

       Thus, we assess the degree to which acquisition activity forecasts changes in labor

regulations. We regress changes in Unemployment coverage (∆Unemployment coverage) and
                                                !                                                  "$!
!
changes in EPL (∆EPL) between period t-1 and t on the average value of cross-border

acquisitions between period t-4 and t-1 (Cross-border dollar volume_3y). We also control for

lagged values of Unemployment coverage (EPL), measures of economic and institutional

development, as well as year fixed effects. Data permitting, the regressions include 50 countries

over the period from 1993 to 2012.

        As shown in Table 2, there is no evidence that cross-border acquisition activity accounts

for changes in labor regulations. Indeed, the t-statistics on cross-border volume during the

previous three years are less than one in the regressions. The weakness of this relationship holds

when altering the conditioning information set. For example, the t-statistics remain less than one

when omitting the lagged labor regulation regressors or when omitting GDP growth. While these

results do not establish that labor regulations are exogenous, they do indicate that the value of

cross-border acquisitions is not strongly related to future changes in labor laws.



3. Empirical results !

        This section examines the relationship between labor regulations and (1) acquirer CARs

around the announcement of an acquisition and (2) acquirer abnormal ROAs following cross-

border acquisitions. In these analyses, we also test whether comparative labor regulations exert a

particularly pronounced effect on acquirer CARs and abnormal ROAs when the target firm is in

an industry in which labor flexibility is relatively important. If labor flexibility is especially

important for the success of some firms and stronger labor protection laws impede labor

flexibility, then an acquirer’s CARs and abnormal ROAs should be more sensitive to the target

country’s labor protection laws when the target is in an industry that relies heavily on labor

flexibility. In turn, if labor flexibility is relatively unimportant for a target firm’s success, then

labor regulations should be comparatively less important in shaping the acquirer’s CARs and

abnormal ROAs. We begin with baseline regressions that do not distinguish targets by industry

and then differentiate firms by their dependence on labor flexibility.


                                                  !                                                      "%!
!
       3.1. Labor regulations and CARs: Baseline Assessments

       In Table 3, we use the following specification:



                 CARd = β0 + β1Labor Regulation[t-a]d + β2Dd + β3Ad + β4Cd +
                                    + δa + δt + δy (+ δat) + ud,                                      (5)



where CARd is, for deal d, the acquirer’s five-day CAR (-2, +2) surrounding the cross-border

acquisition announcement, Labor Regulation[t-a]d is the difference between in labor regulations
(Unemployment coverage, Employment law, or EPL) between the target and acquiring firm

countries, Dd, Ad, and Cd are deal, acquiring firm, and country characteristics for countries of the

acquiring and target firms respectively, δa, δt, δy, and δat are fixed effects for the country of the
acquiring firm (a), the country of the target firm (t), the year (y), and acquirer-target country

fixed effects (at), and ud is the error term for deal d. To isolate the relationship between CAR

and labor regulation differences, we control for deal (Dd), acquirer (Ad), and country traits (Cd)

that past researchers have shown help explain acquisition announcement returns (e.g. Fuller,

Netter and Stegemoller, 2002; Masulis, Wang, and Xie, 2007). These controls were discussed in

Section 2 and are more completely defined in Appendix 1. We can control for acquirer-target
country fixed effects (δat), and therefore control for all country-pair traits, when (a) firms from
the acquiring country acquire firms from the target country in different years and (b) Labor

Regulation[t-a] varies over time.

       The results in Table 3 indicate that cumulative abnormal returns are materially smaller

when an acquiring firm announces the purchase of a target firm in a country with more generous

labor policies, as measured by Unemployment coverage, than the acquirer’s home country. That

is, the market tends to respond more favorably when a firm acquires a target in an economy in

which unemployment benefits cover a smaller proportion of uninsured workers. More

specifically, column (1) includes all of the control variables except country-level fixed effects;

column (4) also includes acquirer and target country effects; and column (7) includes acquirer-
                                                 !                                                      "&!
!
target fixed. Unemployment coverage enters all regressions negatively and significantly at the

five percent level. In terms of economic size, the estimate in column (7) suggests that when an

acquirer purchases a target in an economy with a one standard deviation larger value of

Unemployment coverage (0.42) than the value of its home country, its CAR will be about 0.34

(=0.42*(-0.804)) smaller than if the target is in a country with the same Unemployment coverage.

Figures 5a and 5b illustrate these findings: CARs tend to be larger when the target is in a country

with weaker labor regulations than the labor regulations in the acquiring firm’s home country.

       The control variables enter the CARs regressions in a manner that is consistent with

previous studies of cross-border acquisitions. For example, we find that large acquirers have

lower abnormal returns and acquisitions involving large targets (relative deal size) have higher

abnormal returns. We also confirm that announcement returns are significantly lower for

acquirers that experience a rapid pre-announcement rise in stock prices (Stock runup). In

addition, we find that acquisitions of private or subsidiary targets are associated with higher

announcement returns, while acquisitions of public targets are associated with lower

announcement returns.

       The baseline results on Employment law and EPL are not as strong. In particular, while

Employment law enters the CARs regression significantly at the one percent level when we do

not include country fixed effects (column 2), the estimate becomes insignificant when including

dummy variables for the acquiring and target countries in column (4). With respect to EPL,

Table 3 indicates that coefficient estimate on EPL is negative and statistically significant at the 1%

level when we include all of the control variables except country fixed effects. However, the

estimate becomes insignificant when we include country-level fixed effects. Since the EPL

measure captures some country-level changes in dismissal protection, we include the country-

pair fixed effects in column (8) and find that EPL enters the CAR regression significantly at the

ten percent level.

       One possible explanation for the weaker results on Employment law and EPL is that labor

protection laws primarily influence the CARs of the acquirer when the target’s profitability relies
                                                !                                                  "'!
!
heavily on the flexibility of labor markets. Perhaps, by failing to distinguish target firms by the

degree to which they benefit from the flexibility of labor markets, we have not identified the key

mechanism linking the stock market’s response to cross-border acquisitions and labor regulations.



         3.2. Labor regulations and CARs: The target’s labor intensity and volatility

         We now reassess the relationship between acquirer firm CARs and labor regulations

while differentiating by the degree to which the target firm is in an industry whose performance

is likely to depend heavily on labor regulations. To measure the degree to which an industry (3-

digit SIC code) is likely to depend heavily on labor regulations, we construct and use two

benchmark indicators of labor dependence based on U.S. data: (1) Labor intensity equals one if

the target industry’s average ratio of labor and pension expenses to sales is greater than the

sample median and zero otherwise; and (2) Labor volatility equals one if the target industry’s

average ratio of the standard deviation of the number of employees relative to the value of PPE

assets (plant, property, and equipment) is greater than the sample median and zero otherwise.

That is, using the U.S. economy to benchmark industries, we construct these two proxies of the

degree to which the performance of firms in a particular industry depends heavily on labor

market flexibility. If the difference in labor regulations between acquirer and target countries

materially influences the stock market’s reaction to a cross-border acquisitions, then we should

discover that acquirer CARs are particularly responsive when the target is in a labor intensive

industry or an industry that has comparatively volatile demand for labor.

         More specifically, we modify equation (5) to allow for the relationship between CARs

and labor regulation differences to vary with the degree to which the target is in a labor

dependent industry:



    CARd = β0 + β1Labor Regulation[t-a]d + β2Labor Regulation[t-a]d*Labor Dependence[t]d +
                       + β3Dd + β4Ad + β5Cd + δa + δt + δy (+ δat) + ud,                           (6)


                                                !                                                     "(!
!
where Labor Dependence[t]d is one of the proxies—Labor intensive or high labor volatility—

of the degree to which the industry of the target firm depends on labor market flexibility for its

success and the other variables are the same as those used in equation (5). In Table 4, Panel A

presents the results when interacting Labor intensive with Unemployment coverage, Employment

law and EPL respectively, while Panel B presents the results when interacting High labor

volatility with Unemployment coverage, Employment law and EPL respectively.

       We find that the sensitivity of acquirer announcement returns to differences in labor

regulations is much larger for targets in labor dependent industries. Consider first the

Unemployment coverage results, which Table 4 provides in columns (1) and (4) in both Panel A

and B. The difference between Unemployment coverage in the target and acquirer country enters

negatively and significantly in both the Labor intensive and high labor volatility regressions.

Moreover, the coefficients on the interaction terms enter negatively and significantly, at the 10%

level for the interaction between Unemployment coverage and Labor intensive (column 1, panel

A) and at the 1% level for the interaction between Unemployment coverage and High labor

volatility (Column 1, Panel B). After controlling for the country pair fixed effects, we continue to

find a 1% significance level for the interaction between Unemployment coverage and High labor

volatility (Column 4, Panel B).

       The economic impact is large: the estimated increase in an acquirer’s CARs for

purchasing a target in an economy with lower Unemployment coverage than its home country is

twice as large when the target is in a comparatively high volatility industry than when the target

is in a low volatility industry in the same target country. For example, consider a Swedish firm

(Sweden has an average value of Unemployment coverage of 0.796) acquiring a target firm in

the United States (which has an average value of Unemployment coverage of 0.362). The

estimates from Table 4 indicate that if the target is in the computer programming service industry

(SIC 737), which is a comparatively high labor-volatility industry, the additional increase in the

acquiring firm’s CAR (above the average increase) will be 0.61% (=(0.796-0.362) *

(0.660+0.757)). However, if the target is in the dairy products industry (SIC 202), which is a low
                                                !                                                    ")!
!
labor-volatility industry, the corresponding additional boost in CAR (above the average increase

associated with an acquisition) will be 0.29% (=(0.796-0.362)*0.660). Given that the average

CAR is 1.3%, the difference is economically significant.

       In assessing the relationship between the CAR of cross-border acquisitions and labor

regulations, we find that it is especially important to differentiate targets in high and low labor

dependent industries when considering the Employment law and EPL proxies of labor regulations.

As shown in Table 4, the interaction terms between Employment law and both labor intensive

and high labor volatility enter negatively and significantly. The stock market responds positively

when an acquiring firm purchases a target in an economy with weaker labor protection laws

when the target firm is in an industry in which labor protection laws are likely to exert a

pronounced effect on its performance. For EPL, the interaction terms between EPL and both

labor intensive and high labor volatility enter negatively and significantly (at the 1% level and 5%

level, respectively). After controlling for country pair fixed effects, we continue to find

significant interaction terms between EPL and both labor intensive and high labor volatility

(column 5, Panel A and B). Overall, these results indicate that the sensitivities of CARs to

differences in labor regulations are larger for targets in labor dependent industries.

       That is, the CARs of acquiring firms respond most strongly to cross-border acquisitions

when the target is in an industry and a country in which theories focusing on the importance of

labor regulations predict markets will be most sensitive. The economic impact is large. For

example, consider a firm in Germany (which has a value of Employment law of 0.702) acquiring

a target in Malaysia (which has a value of Employment law of 0.189). The estimates suggest that

acquirer CARs will rise by 0.44% (= (0.702-0.189)*0.864) more if the target firm is in a high-

volatility industry than if the same acquirer purchases a target in Malaysia but in a low-volatility

industry.



       3.3. Labor market regulations and ROA: Simple comparisons

       Having shown that stock prices respond more favorably to the cross-border acquisition of
                                                 !                                                    "*!
!
firms in target countries with weak labor protection laws, especially if those firms are in labor

intensive industries or industries with high labor volatility, we now examine firm performance.

We examine whether the abnormal ROAs of an acquiring firm varies negatively with the

comparative strength of labor regulations in the target and acquiring countries. Furthermore, we

assess whether the relationship between acquiring firm abnormal ROAs and the target-acquirer

difference in the strength of labor regulations varies by the industry of the target firm.

       We use two methods to evaluate whether acquiring firm performance following a cross-

border acquisition depends on the comparative strength of labor regulations in the target and

acquiring country. The first method simply examines changes in the abnormal ROAs of the

acquiring firm around cross-border acquisitions. In particular, we partition the sample into “T <

A” and “T > A” groups, where “T < A” means that the target country has weaker labor

regulations than the acquirer’s country, and “T > A” means that the target country has stronger

labor regulations than the acquirer’s country. We continue to use three measures of labor

regulations: Unemployment coverage, Employment law and EPL. We then compute for each of

these measures of labor regulations the change in abnormal ROA of the acquiring firm following

the acquisition announcement. We first present and discuss the results using this first method and

then describe the second method for examining abnormal ROAs and present those findings.

       As shown in Table 5, abnormal firm performance— the average industry-median-

adjusted ROAs—for the “T > A” group drops significantly after cross-border acquisitions, but

abnormal firm performance does not drop for the “T < A” group. The post-acquisition 3-year

median abnormal ROAs is significantly below the year -1 abnormal ROA for cross-border deals

involving targets from countries with relatively protective labor regulations and unemployment

benefits that cover a large proportion of the unemployed. In contrast, there is no significant

change in abnormal operating performance for deals in the “T < A” group. The tests of

significance for the post-acquisition 3-year median abnormal ROAs are conducted using a null




                                                 !                                                  #+!
!
hypothesis of zero change in abnormal ROA.3 These results are consistent with the view that

stronger labor regulations in the target country make post-merger integration more costly and

reduce the manifestation of synergies in the acquirer’s ROAs. For instance, if a firm from the

U.S. (which has weak labor regulations) acquires a firm in France (which has strong labor

regulations), then “T>A” for Employment law. The regression estimates then predict a decrease

in abnormal ROA of 0.0255 from the pre-acquisition period to the post-acquisition 3-year

median abnormal ROA. The estimate suggests that the post-acquisition abnormal ROA is 26.8%

(=100*0.0255/0.0953) lower than its pre-acquisition value average.

               Table 6 extends these analyses by further differentiating by the industry of the target firm.

In addition to examining abnormal firm performance when differentiating between cross-border

acquisitions when the target country has stronger labor regulations than the acquiring country (T >

A) or weaker labor regulations (T < A), we now differentiate by whether the target firm is in a

labor dependent industry as measured by labor intensity or labor volatility. As in the analyses of

acquirer CARs, this further cutting of the data provides a precise identification of whether cross-

country differences in labor regulations influence an acquiring firm’s performance in manner that

is consistent with the predictions emerging from several theories discussed in the Introduction.

               As shown in Table 6, the abnormal ROAs of the acquiring firm perform much worse

when the target is in a country with stronger labor protection laws and more expansive

unemployment benefits than those in acquiring firm’s home country, and these findings are

driven by target firms in labor intensive industries or industries with high labor volatility. In

particular, Table 6 shows that when either Unemployment coverage, Employment law, and EPL

are greater for the target country than the acquirer, abnormal ROAs of the acquirer are

significantly smaller when the target is in either a labor intensive industry or an high labor

volatility industry than when the target is in the same country but is not in a labor intensive or

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
$
 !When we test the differences between the T>A and T<A groups, we find that abnormal operating performance are
not significantly different for the Unemployment coverage analyses, but are significantly different at the 10% level
for the Employment law and EPL analyses. As shown in Table 6, these differences become more distinct when
differentiating by the labor dependence of the target firm.!

                                                                !                                                 #"!
!
high labor volatility industry. It is the combination of target country’s labor regulations/policies

and the degree to which the target firm is in a labor intensive or high labor volatility industry that

drives the acquiring firm’s response, as measured by abnormal ROAs, to the cross-border deal.



       3.4. Labor market regulations and ROA: Regression analyses

       The second method for assessing abnormal operating performance employs a regression

framework based on Healy, Palepu and Ruback (1992) and controls for deal and firm

characteristics. The dependent variable is the abnormal ROAs of the acquiring firm during the

three years following the acquisition, so that there is one observation per deal. Following Healy,

Palepu and Ruback (1992), the regression controls for the combined acquirer-target abnormal

ROAs in the year before the acquisition, i.e., pre-acquisition industry-median-adjusted ROA

defined in equation (3) above. The regression also controls for Log [Total Assets], which is the

natural logarithm of the book value of the assets of the acquiring firm (in millions of U.S. dollars)

in the year before the acquisition, Tobin’s Q, which is the market value of total assets divided by

the book value of total assets of the acquiring firm in the year before the acquisition; and two

dummy variables defining the nature of the acquisition Unrelated deal, which indicates whether

the deal involves distinct industries, and Friendly deal, which indicates whether the acquisition is

friendly.

       The estimated coefficient on the intercept represents the conditional average change in

abnormal operating performance following cross-border mergers. We provide these regressions

separately for targets from countries with higher labor regulation (Unemployment coverage,

Employment law, and EPL) values than those in acquirer countries and targets from countries

with less protective labor regulations than those in acquirer countries.

       The regression results from this second method indicate that acquirers that purchase

targets in countries with stronger labor protection regulations than their own country’s labor

regulations tend to suffer worse performance following the deal. The results in Table 7 indicate

that acquirer abnormal ROA falls when the target is in a country with more protective labor laws
                                                 !                                                 ##!
!
and more expansive unemployment benefits coverage. As shown, the estimated intercept is

negative and statistically significant for all the “T > A” groups and insignificant for all the “T <

A” groups. These results imply that acquirers from countries with weaker labor regulations

experience significantly worse operating performance following cross-border acquisitions, while

acquirers from countries with stronger labor regulations do not. Firm performance tends to drop

following cross-border deals in which the target is in a country with more generous

unemployment benefits and stronger employment laws.

       In Table 8, we extend these results and further differentiate by deals by whether the target

is in a labor dependent industry. The results are again striking. All of the estimated reduction in

abnormal ROAs from the acquisition of a firm in a country with strong labor protection policies

emerges from the purchase of firms in labor intensive and high labor volatility industries. Put

differently, the positive synergies from the cross-border acquisition of a firm in a country with

weaker labor protection laws and less expansive unemployment benefits are largely due to the

purchase of target firms in industries that rely heavily on flexible labor markets, such as labor

intensive industries and industries in which labor fluctuates relatively severely.



       3.5. A check: The number, volume, and size of cross-border acquisitions

       We now check whether our findings on CARs and ROAs are consistent with a firm’s

decisions regarding whether and where to engage in cross-border acquisitions. If labor

regulations shape the stock price reaction to cross-border acquisitions and profitability of such

deals, then this should be reflected the incidence and size of cross-border acquisitions when

differentiating country-pairs by labor regulations. To check the consistency of our deal level

analyses with firm-level decisions to undertake cross-border mergers and acquisitions, we

regress the number, value, and deal size of cross-border acquisitions on!the difference between

labor regulations in the target and acquirer countries, while controlling for an assortment of firms,

country, and country-pair characteristics.


                                                 !                                                  #$!
!
       We augment the standard gravity model of cross-border mergers and acquisition activity

to assess the relationship between labor market regulations and the number, volume, and size of

cross-border acquisitions. Our sample consists of public acquirers that consummate at least five

cross-border deals during our sample period. We consider every possible target country into

which these acquiring firms might choose to make an acquisition. Thus, the unit of analysis is an

acquiring firm (a) and its (potential) acquisition of firms in each target country (t). If a firm does

not acquire a target in a specific country, we assign a zero for number and value in acquisitions

to that country.

       We estimate the following equation



        yat = β0 + β1Labor Regulation[t-a]at + β3Dat + β4Aa + δa + δt + δi + eat,                  (7)



where the dependent variable, yat, is either Log(1+ Number (a,t)), Log(1+ Value (a,t)), or

Log(1+ Deal (a,t)); where Number (a,t), Value (a,t), and Deal (a,t) equal total number, total

dollar value, and average deal size of cross-border deals between acquiring firm a and firms in a

target country (t); Labor Regulation[t-a]at is the difference in labor regulations between the

countries of the target and acquiring firms (Unemployment coverage, Employment law, and EPL);
Aat represents information about the acquiring firms, such as firm size; and δa, δt, and δi are fixed
effects for the acquiring country, the target country, and the industry of the acquiring firm

respectively. For each acquiring firm, we use the average annual values for the full sample

period (1991-2012) for all time-variant variables.

       As shown in Table 9, a country’s firms acquire more firms and spend more on

acquisitions in another country if that target country’s labor regulations are relatively less

protective of labor. In particular, the first three columns present OLS regressions in which the

dependent variable is Log(1+ Number (a,t)), the next three present regressions in which the

dependent variable is Log(1+ Value (a,t)), and the final three present regressions in which the

dependent variable is Log(1+ Deal (a,t)). Across all nine specifications, the estimated
                                                 !                                                  #%!
!
coefficients on labor market regulation differences are negative and statistically significant.

These results imply that, the number and volume of cross-border acquisitions are lower when

targets are in countries with greater Unemployment coverage, Employment law, and EPL values

than the regulations in the acquirer country. Consistent with our findings that stock returns and

profits rise more when the acquiring firm’s country has more protective labor regulations than

the target’s country, we also find that comparative labor regulations are closely linked with

cross-border acquisition activity.

       The relationship between labor regulation differences and cross-border acquisition flows

is economically large. Two examples illustrate the economic magnitudes from estimates in Table

9. First, consider a target country that has a one standard deviation lower value of Employment

law than the acquirer (0.18). The estimates indicate that Value (a,t)) will be about 69%

(=0.18*3.82) larger than when the two economies have the same labor protection laws. Second,

consider France, which is at the 90th percentile of the Employment law distribution (e.g.,

France’s Employment law index equals 0.744). From the regression estimates in Table 9, we can

compute the drop in foreign firm acquisitions of French companies due to its comparatively

strong labor protection laws, where the average country has an employment law index of 0.478.

The estimates suggest that relative to an average country, France is associated with 102% (=

(0.744-0.478)*3.82 lower foreign capital inflows from cross-border acquisitions due to its

comparatively strong labor regulations. For countries at the 75th percentile of the Employment

law distribution (e.g., Italy, has an employment law index of 0.65), they are associated with 66%

(= (0.65-0.478)*3.82) less foreign capital inflows from cross-border acquisitions due to their

labor regulations.

       We also explore whether differences in labor regulation between acquirer country and

target country operate at the intensive margin, the extensive margin, or both. That is, we examine

whether differences in labor regulations shape average deal size. As shown in the last three

columns of Table 9, labor regulations operate on both margins. The average deal size of cross-

border acquisitions tends to be smaller when targets are in countries with stronger labor
                                                !                                                   #&!
!
protection laws than the regulations in the acquirer country. Stronger labor regulations in a

country reduce the dollar value, the number, and the average size of acquisitions by foreign firms

in that country.



5. Conclusion

       Using a comprehensive sample of cross-border acquisitions from 50 countries occurring

from 1991 through 2012, we discover that cross-country differences in labor market regulations

help account for (1) the stock price response of the acquiring firm to a cross-border deal and (2)

the change in the operating performance of the acquiring firm after it makes a cross-border

acquisition. Specifically, the abnormal stock returns and profits of acquiring firms increase more

when the target country has weaker labor protection laws.

       These effects are more pronounced when the target firm is in an industry that relies

heavily on flexible labor markets for its performance. In particular, when the target firm is in an

industry in which labor costs account for a large fraction of total costs or an industry in which the

volatility of employment is relatively high, the results suggest that the impact of comparative

labor regulations on both abnormal stock returns and profits is much larger. The results are

consistent with the view the broad array of labor laws, regulations, and policies that shape the

operation of labor markets materially shape the direction, performance, and synergies of cross-

border acquisitions. As a check, we also find that the number, volume, and deal size of cross-

border acquisitions are significantly lower when target countries have stronger labor regulations.




                                                !                                                  #'!
!
References

Agrawal, A., 2012. Corporate governance objectives of labor union shareholders: Evidence from
proxy voting. Review of Financial Studies 25, 187–226.

Aleksynska, M., Schindler, M., 2011. Labor market regulations in low-, middle- and high-
income countries: A new panel database. IMF working paper No. 11/154.

Atanassov, J., Kim, E.H., 2009. Labor and corporate governance: international evidence from
restructuring decisions. Journal of Finance 64, 341-374.

Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2004. The regulation of
labor. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1339–1382.

Bris, A., Cabolis, C., 2008. The value of investor protection: Firm evidence from cross-border
mergers. Review of Financial Studies 21, 605-648.

Chari, A., Ouimet, P., Tesar, L., 2009. The value of control in emerging markets. Review of
Financial Studies 23, 1741–1770.

Chyz, J.A., Leung, W.S.C., Li, O.Z., Rui, O.M., 2013. Labor unions and tax aggressiveness.
Journal of Financial Economics 108, 675–698.

Faleye, O., Mehrotra, V., Morck, R., 2006. When labor has a voice in corporate governance.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41, 489-510.

Desai, M.A., Foley, C.F., Hines, J.R., 2009. Domestic Effects of the Foreign Activities of US
Multinationals. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1, 181-203.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The law and economics of
self-dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430–465.

Djankov, S., McLeish, C., Shleifer, A., 2007. Private credit in 129 countries. Journal of Financial
Economics 84, 299–329.

Erel, I., Liao, R., Weisbach, M., 2012. Determinants of cross-border mergers and acquisitions.
Journal of Finance 67, 1031–1043.

Ferreira, M., Massa, M., Matos, P., 2010. Shareholders at the gate? Institutional investors and
cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Review of Financial Studies 23, 601–644.

Fuller, K., Netter, J., Stegemoller, M., 2002. What do returns to acquiring ﬁrms tell us? Evidence
from ﬁrms that make many acquisitions. Journal of Finance 57, 1763–1794.

Grossman, G., Rossi-Hansberg, E., 2008. Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring.
American Economic Review 98, 1978-1997.

                                               !                                                #(!
!
Harford, J., Humphery, M., Powell, R., 2012. The sources of value destruction in acquisitions by
entrenched managers. Journal of Financial Economics 106, 247-261.

Harrison, A., McMillan, M., 2011. Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and U.S. Manufacturing
Employment. Review of Economics and Statistics 93, 857-875.

Healy, P., Palepu, K., Ruback, R., 1992. Does corporate performance improve after mergers?
Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135-175.

Ishii, J., Xuan, Y., 2014. Acquirer-target social ties and merger outcomes. Journal of Financial
Economics 112, 344–363.

John, K., Knyazeva, A., Knyazeva, D., 2014. Employee rights and acquisitions. Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Mastruzzi, M., 2009. Governance Matters VIII: Aggregate and
Individual Governance Indicators 1996-2008. Unpublished Working Paper, World Bank.

Klasa, S., Maxwell, W.F., Ortiz-Molina, H., 2009. The strategic use of corporate cash holdings in
collective bargaining with labor unions. Journal of Financial Economics 92, 421-442.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and ﬁnance. Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113–1155.

Lin, C., Officer, M., Zou, H., 2011. Directors’ and officers’ liability insurance and acquisition
outcomes. Journal of Financial Economics 102, 507-525.

Masulis, R., Wang, C., Xie, F., 2007. Corporate governance and acquirer returns. Journal of
Finance 62, 1851-1889.

Masulis, R., Wang, C., Xie, F., 2012. Globalizing the boardroom— the effects of foreign
directors on corporate governance and firm performance. Journal of Accounting and Economics
53, 527-554.

Matsa, D., 2010. Capital structure as a strategic variable: Evidence from collective bargaining.
Journal of Finance 65, 1197–1232.

Revenga, A. 1992. Exporting jobs? The impact of import competition on employment and wages
in U.S. manufacturing. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 255–284.

Rossi, S., Volpin, P.F., 2004. Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions. Journal of
Financial Economics 74, 277–304.!!




                                              !                                               #)!
!
Table 1
Summary statistics
This table presents summary statistics for each variable. In Panel A, the sample contains all completed
cross-border acquisitions from SDC between 1991 and 2012. In Panel B, the sample contains relevant
country-level or country-pair level data.

Variable                              N          Mean       Std.       P25        Median      P75
                                                            dev.
Panel A: Deal- / firm- level variables

CAR(-2,+2) (%percentage)              11485      1.306      7.864      -2.351     0.564       4.209
Unemployment coverage_[t-a]           11485      0.001      0.444      -0.19      -0.004      0.19

Employment law_[t-a]                  11480      -0.041     0.267      -0.191     -0.038      0.065
EPL_[t-a]                             10044      -0.137     1.298      -1.032     -0.158      0.775
Log [Total Assets]                    11485      6.444      2.228      4.918      6.425       7.983
Cash flow                             11485      0.083      0.138      0.06       0.099       0.141

Tobin's Q                             11485      2.407      2.329      1.28       1.696       2.544
Leverage                              11485      0.199      0.164      0.051      0.184       0.303

Stock runup                           11485      0.145      0.613      -0.153     0.031       0.257
Relative size                         11485      0.318      1.038      0.016      0.056       0.193
Unrelated deal                        11485      0.432      0.495      0          0           1

Private target dummy                  11485      0.494      0.5        0          0           1
Subsidiary target dummy               11485      0.408      0.491      0          0           1

Public target dummy                   11485      0.099      0.298      0          0           0
All cash deal                         11485      0.328      0.47       0          0           1

Friendly deal                         11485      0.994      0.077      1          1           1

Tender offer                          11485      0.051      0.22       0          0           0

Panel B: Country-pair / country-level variables

Unemployment coverage                 1087       0.382      0.422      0          0.346       0.594
Employment law                        49         0.479      0.186      0.343      0.468       0.65

EPL                                   618        2.192      0.839      1.595      2.23        2.75
Log [GDP per capita]                  1087       9.059      1.343      8.024      9.367       10.177

Log [Population]                      1087       17.034     1.343      15.939     17.077      17.915


                                                   !                                                      #*!
!
Log [Geographic distance]   2450    8.611   0.96    7.95   8.989   9.266
Same language               2450    0.04    0.196   0      0       0

Same religion               2450    0.193   0.395   0      0       0
Log(1+ Value (a,t))         26068   0.389   1.393   0      0       0
Log(1+ Number (a,t))        26068   0.082   0.295   0      0       0
Log(1+ Deal size (a,t))     26068   0.355   1.273   0      0       0




                                      !                                    $+!
!
    Table 2

    The validity test: impact of historical cross-border acquisition volume on labor regulation change

    This table reports the validity test of using labor market regulations to explain cross-border acquisition
    volume. Specifically, we examine the effect of cross-border acquisition volume on the change of labor
    regulations for target countries during our sample period. The dependent variables are unemployment
    benefits coverage change (∆Unemployment coverage) in Columns (1)-(3) and EPL change (∆EPL) in
    Columns (4)-(6). Cross-border dollar volume_3y is the annual average dollar volume of cross-border
    acquisitions that occurred in the target country during the past three years. Heteroskedasticity-consistent
    standard errors are reported in brackets. The coefficient on the constant is suppressed for brevity. *, **,
    and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:                       ∆Unemployment coverage                                ∆EPL
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)                 (4)           (5)              (6)
Cross-border dollar volume_3y          0.002         -0.000        -0.001        0.002          0.003         0.002
                                     [0.001]        [0.002]       [0.002]       [0.004]        [0.005]       [0.005]
Lagged Unemployment coverage          -0.018         -0.020        -0.020
                                     [0.013]        [0.014]       [0.015]
Lagged EPL                                                                      -0.016**      -0.017**      -0.017**
                                                                                 [0.007]       [0.007]       [0.007]
Log [GDP per capita]                                 0.004         0.004                       -0.004         -0.004
                                                    [0.003]       [0.004]                      [0.005]       [0.008]
Log [Population]                                     0.002         0.003                        0.001          0.001
                                                    [0.002]       [0.002]                      [0.004]       [0.005]
GDP growth                                                         0.001                                       0.003
                                                                  [0.001]                                    [0.002]
WGI                                                                0.000                                       0.001
                                                                  [0.001]                                    [0.002]
Year dummies                           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                           988            988           988           570            570            570
R-squared                             0.034          0.036         0.039         0.050          0.052          0.057


    !

    !

    !

    !

    !

    !




                                                        !                                                     $"!
    !
Table 3

The effect of labor protection on acquirer announcement returns

This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the effect of labor protection on acquirer abnormal announcement returns. The dependent
variable is the acquirer’s five-day CAR (-2, +2). Unemployment coverage is unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of
the number of UI (unemployment insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed. Unemployment coverage_[t-a] is the difference
between the unemployment benefits coverage for the target and acquirer countries. Employment law is employment laws index, which measures
the protection of the individual employment contract (Botero et al., 2004). Employment law_[t-a] is the difference between the employment laws
index for the target and acquirer countries. EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of employment protection
against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). EPL_[t-a] is the difference between the OECD employment protection index for the target
and acquirer countries. All variables are defined in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the acquirer country
level are reported in brackets. The coefficient on the constant is suppressed for brevity. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:                                                                      CAR(-2,+2)
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)               (6)           (7)           (8)
Unemployment coverage_[t-a]             -0.593***                                  -1.003***                                   -0.804**
                                          [0.113]                                    [0.299]                                    [0.331]
Employment law_[t-a]                                   -0.862***                                    -2.711
                                                         [0.195]                                   [2.118]
EPL_[t-a]                                                            -0.230***                                     -0.363                     -0.617*
                                                                       [0.048]                                    [0.371]                      [0.358]
Log [Total Assets]                      -0.382***      -0.386***     -0.353***     -0.378***      -0.379***     -0.351***     -0.381***      -0.356***
                                          [0.062]        [0.064]       [0.059]       [0.061]        [0.060]       [0.054]       [0.062]        [0.054]
Cash flow                                -1.210**       -1.148*       -1.020*       -1.122**       -1.097**       -0.979*      -1.151**       -1.066*
                                          [0.566]        [0.571]       [0.588]       [0.523]        [0.525]       [0.545]       [0.549]        [0.582]
Tobin's Q                                 -0.133*       -0.131*       -0.093*        -0.132*        -0.133*      -0.098**       -0.108*       -0.083*
                                          [0.070]        [0.067]       [0.051]       [0.067]        [0.066]       [0.048]       [0.058]        [0.046]
Leverage                                   0.042          0.009         -0.221        -0.085         -0.087        -0.294        -0.189         -0.407
                                          [0.584]        [0.574]       [0.674]       [0.584]        [0.587]       [0.674]       [0.592]        [0.658]
Stock runup                             -1.764***      -1.769***     -1.689***     -1.750***      -1.747***     -1.670***     -1.736***      -1.686***
Relative size                        0.634**    0.630**     0.622*    0.609**    0.610**     0.594*    0.588**    0.578*
                                     [0.252]    [0.253]    [0.317]    [0.245]    [0.246]    [0.308]    [0.257]    [0.314]
Unrelated deal                        -0.117     -0.115     -0.146     -0.094     -0.094     -0.110     -0.110     -0.136
                                     [0.142]    [0.140]    [0.128]    [0.149]    [0.149]    [0.139]    [0.161]    [0.154]
Private target dummy                1.713***   1.760***   1.896***   1.674***   1.671***   1.762***   1.617***   1.738***
                                     [0.520]    [0.511]    [0.550]    [0.512]    [0.510]    [0.550]    [0.553]    [0.582]
Subsidiary target dummy             2.317***   2.364***   2.612***   2.262***   2.264***   2.464***   2.187***   2.392***
                                     [0.438]    [0.432]    [0.489]    [0.432]    [0.432]    [0.487]    [0.479]    [0.528]
All cash deal                         -0.018     -0.004     -0.012      0.029      0.028      0.023      0.080      0.110
                                     [0.132]    [0.133]    [0.137]    [0.141]    [0.140]    [0.144]    [0.138]    [0.149]
Friendly deal                         -0.440     -0.442     -0.090     -0.557     -0.542     -0.225     -0.508     -0.084
                                     [0.746]    [0.763]    [0.686]    [0.731]    [0.728]    [0.652]    [0.806]    [0.767]
Tender offer                         0.956**    0.937**    1.214**    0.979**    0.984**    1.117**     0.876*    1.005*
                                     [0.451]    [0.448]    [0.478]    [0.427]    [0.425]    [0.456]    [0.453]    [0.497]
Log [GDP per capita]_acquirer          0.025      0.160    0.665**     -0.719     -0.474      0.207     -0.617      0.431
                                     [0.149]    [0.157]    [0.274]    [0.619]    [0.565]    [0.538]    [0.640]    [0.627]
Log [GDP per capita]_target          0.246**     0.152*      0.125     -0.279     -0.388      0.357     -0.075      0.706
                                     [0.091]    [0.085]    [0.144]    [0.451]    [0.458]    [0.465]    [0.573]    [0.596]
Log [Geographic distance]              0.045      0.037      0.018     -0.001      0.001      0.049
                                     [0.052]    [0.050]    [0.040]    [0.068]    [0.067]    [0.069]
Acquirer country dummies                No         No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes       No         No
Target country dummies                  No         No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes       No         No
Year dummies                            Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
Industry dummies                        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes
Country pair dummies                    No         No         No         No         No         No       Yes        Yes
Observations                          11,485     11,480     10,044     11,485     11,480     10,044    11,485     10,044
Adjusted R2                           0.0448     0.0447     0.0407     0.0494     0.0491     0.0424    0.0471     0.0369


!

!                               !


                                                             !                                                         ""!
!
Table 4

The effect of labor protection on acquirer announcement returns: labor intensity and labor volatility

This table reports the results of OLS regressions of the effect of labor protection on acquirer abnormal announcement returns. The dependent
variable is the acquirer’s five-day CAR (-2, +2). Unemployment coverage is unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of
the number of UI (unemployment insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed. Unemployment coverage_[t-a] is the difference
between the unemployment benefits coverage for the target and acquirer countries. Employment law is employment laws index, which measures
the protection of the individual employment contract (Botero et al., 2004). Employment law_[t-a] is the difference between the employment laws
index for the target and acquirer countries. EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of employment protection
against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). EPL_[t-a] is the difference between the OECD employment protection index for the target
and acquirer countries. Labor intensive is an indicator variable that equals one if target industry’s average labor intensity is above sample median.
We calculate labor intensity as the ratio of labor and pension expenses to sales. Labor volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the number
of employees scaled by PPE (plant, property, and equipment). High labor volatility is an indicator variable that equals one if target industry’s
average labor volatility is above sample median. All variables are defined in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered
at the acquirer country level are reported in brackets. The coefficient on the constant is suppressed for brevity. *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: labor intensity

    Dependent variable:                                                                            CAR(-2,+2)
                                                                    (1)               (2)             (3)                 (4)               (5)
    Unemployment coverage_[t-a]                                  -0.698**                                              -0.592*
                                                                  [0.321]                                              [0.332]
    Employment law_[t-a]                                                             -3.066
                                                                                    [1.986]
    EPL_[t-a]                                                                                          -0.753                            -0.998**
                                                                                                      [0.451]                             [0.424]
    Unemployment coverage_[t-a] * Labor intensive                -0.471*                                                 -0.423
                                                                 [0.238]                                                [0.257]
    Employment law_[t-a] * Labor intensive                                         -0.787**
                                                                                    [0.384]
    EPL_[t-a]* Labor intensive                                                                      -0.206***                           -0.207***
                                                                                                      [0.067]                             [0.076]


                                                                         !                                                                          "$!
!
    Labor intensive                     0.057       0.098       0.109       0.053       0.085
                                      [0.120]     [0.121]     [0.131]     [0.134]     [0.139]
    Log [Total Assets]              -0.362***   -0.362***   -0.343***   -0.365***   -0.342***
                                      [0.065]     [0.064]     [0.060]     [0.066]     [0.060]
    Cash flow                        -1.433**    -1.411**      -1.010    -1.528**      -1.104
                                      [0.574]     [0.578]     [0.599]     [0.609]     [0.666]
    Tobin's Q                         -0.121*     -0.123*      -0.092      -0.090      -0.077
                                      [0.069]     [0.069]     [0.058]     [0.063]     [0.060]
    Leverage                           -0.017      -0.009      -0.116      -0.110      -0.251
                                      [0.773]     [0.778]     [0.900]     [0.825]     [0.923]
    Stock runup                     -1.790***   -1.789***   -1.744***   -1.791***   -1.766***
                                      [0.165]     [0.164]     [0.122]     [0.170]     [0.122]
    Relative size                    0.640***    0.640***    0.680***    0.629***    0.672***
                                      [0.198]     [0.198]     [0.239]     [0.211]     [0.241]
    Unrelated deal                     -0.231      -0.234      -0.185     -0.268*      -0.219
                                      [0.139]     [0.141]     [0.143]     [0.143]     [0.150]
    Private target dummy             1.926***    1.926***    2.137***    1.945***    2.146***
                                      [0.558]     [0.560]     [0.622]     [0.603]     [0.668]
    Subsidiary target dummy          2.515***    2.517***    2.803***    2.505***    2.747***
                                      [0.479]     [0.482]     [0.567]     [0.537]     [0.636]
    All cash deal                       0.008       0.007       0.031       0.099       0.102
                                      [0.118]     [0.117]     [0.132]     [0.123]     [0.144]
    Friendly deal                      -0.526      -0.520      -0.157      -0.644      -0.154
                                      [0.947]     [0.943]     [0.923]     [1.070]     [1.042]
    Tender offer                     1.360***    1.385***    1.629***    1.320***    1.564***
                                      [0.442]     [0.442]     [0.486]     [0.431]     [0.498]
    Log [GDP per capita]_acquirer      -0.555      -0.323       0.053      -0.611       0.371
                                      [0.669]     [0.610]     [0.584]     [0.672]     [0.645]
    Log [GDP per capita]_target        -0.395      -0.498       0.669      -0.140       0.985
                                      [0.436]     [0.425]     [0.539]     [0.506]     [0.628]
    Log [Geographic distance]           0.028       0.033       0.086
                                      [0.068]     [0.068]     [0.073]
    Acquirer country dummies             Yes         Yes         Yes      No          No
    Target country dummies               Yes         Yes         Yes      No          No
    Year dummies                         Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes


                                           !                                                    "%!
!
    Industry dummies                                        Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
    Country pair dummies                                     No            No           No         Yes          Yes
    Observations                                           10,114        10,110        8,884      10,114       8,884
    Adjusted R2                                            0.0520        0.0520       0.0470      0.0470      0.0425


Panel B: labor volatility

    Dependent variable:                                                             CAR(-2,+2)
                                                             (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)
    Unemployment coverage_[t-a]                           -0.660**                                 -0.513
                                                           [0.301]                                [0.321]
    Employment law_[t-a]                                                  -2.258
                                                                         [1.925]
    EPL_[t-a]                                                                        -0.740*                 -1.058**
                                                                                     [0.419]                  [0.406]
    Unemployment coverage_[t-a] * High labor volatility   -0.757***                              -0.763***
                                                            [0.224]                                [0.243]
    Employment law_[t-a] * High labor volatility                        -0.864**
                                                                         [0.367]
    EPL_[t-a]* High labor volatility                                                 -0.199**                 -0.207**
                                                                                      [0.075]                  [0.086]
    High labor volatility                                    -0.041        -0.007      -0.089       -0.065      -0.101
                                                            [0.120]       [0.122]     [0.132]      [0.132]     [0.141]
    Log [Total Assets]                                    -0.373***     -0.373***   -0.359***    -0.380***   -0.360***
                                                            [0.067]       [0.066]     [0.061]      [0.068]     [0.060]
    Cash flow                                              -1.372**      -1.342**      -0.978     -1.382**      -1.019
                                                            [0.544]       [0.550]     [0.594]      [0.575]     [0.657]
    Tobin's Q                                               -0.131*       -0.132*      -0.092       -0.106      -0.079
                                                            [0.072]       [0.071]     [0.056]      [0.066]     [0.056]
    Leverage                                                 -0.146        -0.144      -0.302       -0.130      -0.385
                                                            [0.727]       [0.731]     [0.851]      [0.765]     [0.864]
    Stock runup                                           -1.772***     -1.769***   -1.718***    -1.771***   -1.742***
                                                            [0.174]       [0.172]     [0.127]      [0.179]     [0.125]
    Relative size                                          0.657***      0.656***    0.678***     0.648***    0.676***
                                                            [0.194]       [0.194]     [0.231]      [0.206]     [0.233]

                                                                    !                                                    "&!
!
    Unrelated deal                    -0.172     -0.170     -0.148     -0.172     -0.165
                                     [0.160]    [0.162]    [0.151]    [0.173]    [0.163]
    Private target dummy            1.779***   1.769***   1.919***   1.775***   1.935***
                                     [0.519]    [0.516]    [0.559]    [0.570]    [0.605]
    Subsidiary target dummy         2.374***   2.364***   2.606***   2.330***   2.572***
                                     [0.442]    [0.441]    [0.504]    [0.500]    [0.567]
    All cash deal                      0.046      0.044      0.062      0.116      0.134
                                     [0.132]    [0.131]    [0.141]    [0.132]    [0.145]
    Friendly deal                     -0.530     -0.537     -0.162     -0.581     -0.092
                                     [0.827]    [0.844]    [0.783]    [0.917]    [0.888]
    Tender offer                    1.151***   1.171***   1.370***    1.077**    1.283**
                                     [0.419]    [0.414]    [0.448]    [0.433]    [0.486]
    Log [GDP per capita]_acquirer     -0.683     -0.422      0.167     -0.706      0.486
                                     [0.669]    [0.609]    [0.545]    [0.679]    [0.645]
    Log [GDP per capita]_target       -0.227     -0.341      0.769      0.019     1.070*
                                     [0.422]    [0.415]    [0.478]    [0.511]    [0.612]
    Log [Geographic distance]          0.020      0.023      0.076
                                     [0.070]    [0.070]    [0.069]
    Acquirer country dummies            Yes        Yes        Yes       No         No
    Target country dummies              Yes        Yes        Yes       No         No
    Year dummies                        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
    Industry dummies                    Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
    Country pair dummies                No         No         No       Yes         Yes
    Observations                     10,765     10,761       9,439    10,765      9,439
    Adjusted R2                      0.0519     0.0515     0.0459     0.0456     0.0408
!

!




                                          !                                                "'!
!
   Table 5

   Pre- and post-acquisition abnormal operating performance

   This table reports average industry-median-adjusted operating performance around cross-border merge
   for deals that the acquirer country labor protection is stronger than the target country and deals that the
   acquirer country labor protection is weaker than the target country (Panel A presents summary statistic
   and Panel B presents industry-adjusted ROA for “T < A” and “T > A”). Year 0 is the year in which the
   acquisition is completed. ROA is net income divided by the book value of total assets at the beginning
   the fiscal year. In pre-merger years, industry-median-adjusted ROA is calculated as the weighted avera
   of the acquirer’s and target’s operating performance minus the weighted average of the industry-media
   operating performance using the acquirer’s and target’s industry. The weights are based on the market
   value of total assets of each firm at the year -1. In post-merger years, industry-median-adjusted ROA is
   the merged firm’s operating performance minus the weighted average of the acquirer’s and target’s
   industry-median operating performance. Industry classification is based on two-digit SIC codes.!
   Unemployment coverage is unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of the
   number of UI (unemployment insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed. Employmen
   law is employment laws index, which measures the protection of the individual employment contract
   (Botero et al., 2004). EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of
   employment protection against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). *, **, and *** represent
   statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

   Panel A:

   Variable                               N             Mean         Std.      P25         Median        P75
                                                                     dev.
   Industry-adjusted ROA (year +3)        360           0.056        0.118     -0.005      0.034         0.11
   Industry-adjusted ROA (year +2)        360           0.058        0.128     -0.007      0.032         0.104
   Industry-adjusted ROA (year +1)        360           0.067        0.154     -0.009      0.041         0.131
   Industry-adjusted ROA (year -1)        360           0.068        0.151     -0.003      0.042         0.122


   Panel B:

 Industry-adjusted ROA          (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)              (6)
                                                      Target country - Acquirer country
                                Unemployment
                                   coverage                     Employment law                    EPL
          Year                T<A         T>A                  T<A       T>A            T<A             T>A
            -1                0.0598      0.0833               0.0564    0.0953         0.0565          0.0909
             1                0.0616      0.0757               0.0573    0.0880         0.0606          0.0753
             2                0.0537      0.0664               0.0537    0.0687         0.0524          0.0611
             3                0.0515      0.0647               0.0518    0.0665         0.0479          0.0664
Post 3-year median minus
         year -1              -0.0064     -0.0181**            -0.0040   -0.0255**      -0.0052     -0.0262**
      Observations              230          130                 250        110           231          103


                                                           !
   !
Table 6

Pre- and post-acquisition abnormal operating performance: labor intensity and labor volatility

This table reports average industry-median-adjusted operating performance around cross-border mergers
for deals that the acquirer country labor protection is weaker than the target country. Year 0 is the year in
which the acquisition is completed. ROA is net income divided by the book value of total assets at the
beginning of the fiscal year. In pre-merger years, industry-median-adjusted ROA is calculated as the
weighted average of the acquirer’s and target’s operating performance minus the weighted average of the
industry-median operating performance using the acquirer’s and target’s industry. The weights are based
on the market value of total assets of each firm at the year -1. In post-merger years, industry-median-
adjusted ROA is the merged firm’s operating performance minus the weighted average of the acquirer’s
and target’s industry-median operating performance. Industry classification is based on two-digit SIC
codes.!Unemployment coverage is unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of
the number of UI (unemployment insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed.
Employment law is employment laws index, which measures the protection of the individual employment
contract (Botero et al., 2004). EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of
employment protection against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). Labor intensity is defined
as the ratio of labor and pension expenses to sales. Labor volatility is defined as the standard deviation of
the number of employees scaled by PPE (plant, property, and equipment). In Panel A, the subsamples are
formed based on whether target industry’s average labor intensity is above or below sample median. In
Panel B, the subsamples are formed based on whether target industry’s average labor volatility is above or
below sample median. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Panel A:

     Industry-adjusted ROA         (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)               (6)
                                                         Target country > Acquirer country
                               Unemployment coverage             Employment law                       EPL
                                                                 Labor intensity
              Year                High          Low             High         Low              High           Low
                -1               0.1254        0.0565          0.1442       0.0544           0.1513         0.0439
                 1               0.0899        0.0638          0.1229       0.0619           0.1102         0.0476
                 2               0.0922        0.0438          0.1037       0.0493           0.1027         0.0362
                 3               0.0987        0.0382          0.1129       0.0321           0.1153         0.0321
    Post 3-year median minus
             year -1           -0.0383**       -0.0103       -0.0388**       -0.0085     -0.0486***         -0.005
          Observations             54             64             40             64           42               54




                                                    !                                                       "$!
!
Panel B:

     Industry-adjusted ROA        (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                      Target country > Acquirer country
                               Unemployment coverage          Employment law                       EPL
                                                              Labor volatility
              Year               High        Low             High         Low              High           Low
                -1              0.0919      0.0778          0.0937      0.0914            0.1032         0.0770
                 1              0.0643      0.0803          0.0688      0.1025            0.0689         0.0775
                 2              0.0737      0.0537          0.0718      0.0736            0.0776         0.0539
                 3              0.0583      0.0676          0.0560      0.0772            0.0637         0.0719
    Post 3-year median minus
             year -1           -0.0274**    -0.0175       -0.0272**      -0.0159      -0.0315**          -0.0158
          Observations             61          63             49            58            46                53




                                                !                                                        %&!
!
  Table 7

  The effect of labor protection on acquisition synergies

  This table reports the results of Healy, Palepu and Ruback’s (1992) regressions for measuring changes in
  operating performance around cross-border mergers for acquirers with stronger labor protection compared
  to targets and acquirers with weaker labor protection compared to targets, where post-merger 3-year
  median abnormal operating performance (ROA) is regressed on the combined acquirer-target industry-
  median-adjusted operating performance (ROA) in year -1. The intercept represents the average change in
  abnormal operating performance following cross-border mergers, controlling for pre-merger operating
  performance. Industry classification is based on two-digit SIC codes. Unemployment coverage is
  unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of the number of UI (unemployment
  insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed. Employment law is employment laws index,
  which measures the protection of the individual employment contract (Botero et al., 2004). EPL is
  employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of employment protection against
  individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at
  the acquirer country level are reported in brackets. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
  10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent variable:         (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
ROA_3y                                             Target country - Acquirer country
                        Unemployment coverage                 Employment law                      EPL
                          T<A         T>A                   T<A          T>A            T<A            T>A
Intercept                 -0.014   -0.104***                -0.018    -0.087***         -0.036      -0.095***
                         [0.040]     [0.036]               [0.034]      [0.014]        [0.030]        [0.027]
Industry-adjusted
ROA in year -1           0.483***       0.537***           0.519***   0.496***         0.536***         0.486***
                          [0.053]        [0.106]            [0.055]    [0.108]          [0.054]          [0.121]
Log [Total Assets]          0.003        0.009**              0.003   0.008***            0.004         0.008***
                          [0.003]        [0.003]            [0.003]    [0.002]          [0.003]          [0.002]
Tobin's Q                   0.001          0.015              0.003    0.008*             0.003           0.008*
                          [0.006]        [0.010]            [0.007]    [0.004]          [0.007]          [0.004]
Unrelated deal             -0.012         -0.016             -0.008   -0.022**           -0.007          -0.020*
                          [0.010]        [0.012]            [0.009]    [0.008]          [0.009]          [0.011]
Friendly deal               0.016        0.030**              0.011   0.036***            0.019          0.041**
                          [0.017]        [0.013]            [0.015]    [0.011]          [0.015]          [0.019]
Observations                 230            130                250       110               231              103
Adjusted R2                 0.411          0.474              0.401     0.484             0.447            0.473




                                                       !                                                        %'!
  !
Table 8

The effect of labor protection on acquisition synergies: labor intensity and labor volatility

This table reports the results of Healy, Palepu and Ruback’s (1992) regressions for measuring changes in
operating performance around cross-border mergers for acquirers with weaker labor protection compared
to targets, where post-merger 3-year median abnormal operating performance (ROA) is regressed on the
combined acquirer-target industry-median-adjusted operating performance (ROA) in year -1. The
intercept represents the average change in abnormal operating performance following cross-border
mergers, controlling for pre-merger operating performance. Industry classification is based on two-digit
SIC codes. Unemployment coverage is unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio
of the number of UI (unemployment insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed.
Employment law is employment laws index, which measures the protection of the individual employment
contract (Botero et al., 2004). EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of
employment protection against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). Labor intensity is defined
as the ratio of labor and pension expenses to sales. Labor volatility is defined as the standard deviation of
the number of employees scaled by PPE (plant, property, and equipment). In Panel A, the subsamples are
formed based on whether target industry’s average labor intensity is above or below sample median. In
Panel B, the subsamples are formed based on whether target industry’s average labor volatility is above or
below sample median. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the acquirer country level
are reported in brackets. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

Panel A:

Dependent variable:          (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
ROA_3y                                        Target country > Acquirer country
                         Unemployment coverage        Employment law                    EPL
                                                       Labor intensity
                           High        Low           High          Low           High         Low
Intercept                -0.143**      0.066       -0.095**       -0.061       -0.100**      -0.011
                          [0.052]     [0.049]       [0.022]      [0.056]        [0.032]     [0.034]
Industry-adjusted
ROA in year -1             0.625***      0.235**         0.640***      0.293**       0.668***        0.287**
                            [0.134]       [0.097]         [0.123]      [0.118]        [0.121]        [0.112]
Log [Total Assets]          0.016**        -0.007        0.015***        0.003       0.013***         -0.003
                            [0.007]       [0.005]         [0.002]      [0.004]        [0.003]        [0.002]
Tobin's Q                     0.021       0.011*            0.013      0.009**          0.011          0.008
                            [0.012]       [0.006]         [0.010]      [0.004]        [0.009]        [0.005]
Unrelated deal               -0.004     -0.034***          -0.017       -0.017         -0.007         -0.018
                            [0.024]       [0.010]         [0.014]      [0.012]        [0.020]        [0.013]
Friendly deal             -0.023***         0.021       -0.032***      0.060**       -0.027**       0.056***
                            [0.007]       [0.021]         [0.007]      [0.024]        [0.010]        [0.017]
Observations                    54            64              40           64             42             54
Adjusted R2                   0.618         0.251           0.625        0.278          0.618          0.272



                                                    !                                                     %(!
!
Panel B:

Dependent variable:      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
ROA_3y                                     Target country > Acquirer country
                      Unemployment coverage        Employment law                    EPL
                                                    Labor volatility
                         High        Low          High          Low           High         Low
Intercept             -0.183***     -0.015     -0.148***       -0.002       -0.108**      -0.029
                        [0.053]    [0.056]       [0.031]      [0.023]        [0.034]     [0.068]
Industry-adjusted
ROA in year -1        0.521***     0.516***       0.589***    0.510***     0.609***     0.496***
                       [0.135]      [0.138]        [0.026]     [0.123]      [0.031]      [0.132]
Log [Total Assets]     0.015**        0.000       0.014***      -0.002     0.010***        0.001
                       [0.005]      [0.006]        [0.002]     [0.003]      [0.002]      [0.007]
Tobin's Q                0.019      0.011*          0.010*       0.003        0.008        0.002
                       [0.012]      [0.006]        [0.005]     [0.002]      [0.004]      [0.004]
Unrelated deal          -0.020       -0.015        -0.022*      -0.013       -0.012       -0.017
                       [0.021]      [0.015]        [0.011]     [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.017]
Friendly deal          0.039**        0.018       0.032***    0.047***      0.026**      0.053*
                       [0.014]      [0.022]        [0.008]     [0.014]      [0.010]      [0.025]
Observations               61           63             49          58           46           53
Adjusted R2              0.495        0.505          0.478       0.548        0.449        0.544




                                              !                                               %"!
!
Table 9

The determinants of cross-border mergers: firm-level analysis

This table reports OLS analysis of the determinants of cross-border mergers and acquisitions. The sample
includes public acquirer firms which consummate at least five cross-border deals during our sample
period (1991-2012).The dependent variables are Log(1+ Number (a,t)) in Columns (1)-(3), Log(1+ Value
(a,t)) in Columns (4)-(6) and Log(1+ Deal size (a,t)) in Columns (7)-(9). Number (a,t) is the total number
of all cross-border mergers during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with the target from country t.
Value (a,t) is the total dollar value of all cross-border mergers during the sample period for acquirer firm
a, with the target from country t. Deal size (a,t) is the average dollar value of all cross-border deals during
the sample period for acquirer firm a, with the target from country t. Unemployment coverage is
unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of the number of UI (unemployment
insurance) benefit recipients to the number of unemployed. Unemployment coverage_[t-a] is the
difference between the unemployment benefits coverage for the target and acquirer countries.
Employment law is employment laws index, which measures the protection of the individual employment
contract (Botero et al., 2004). Employment law_[t-a] is the difference between the employment laws
index for the target and acquirer countries. EPL is employment protection laws index, which measures the
strictness of employment protection against individual dismissal (compiled by the OECD). EPL_[t-a] is
the difference between the OECD employment protection index for the target and acquirer countries. All
variables are defined in the Appendix. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
acquirer country level are reported in brackets. The coefficient on the constant is suppressed for brevity. *,
**, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                     !                                                     %%!
!
Dependent variable:                    Log(1+ Number (a,t))                  Log(1+ Value (a,t))                  Log(1+ Deal size (a,t))
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)           (8)             (9)
Unemployment coverage_[t-a]   -0.254***                             -0.938***                            -0.723***
                                [0.023]                               [0.063]                              [0.053]
Employment law_[t-a]                        -1.033***                            -3.823***                              -2.852***
                                              [0.110]                              [0.435]                                [0.408]
EPL_[t-a]                                               -0.150***                            -0.607***                                -0.487***
                                                          [0.012]                              [0.036]                                  [0.033]
Firm size_acquirer             0.008***      0.008***    0.010***    0.077***     0.078***    0.106***    0.074***       0.075***      0.102***
                                [0.001]       [0.001]     [0.002]     [0.005]      [0.005]     [0.006]     [0.004]        [0.004]       [0.006]
Log [GDP per capita]_[t-a]     0.213***      0.124***    0.233***    0.825***     0.501***    0.915***    0.659***       0.422***      0.724***
                                [0.017]       [0.014]     [0.018]     [0.031]      [0.049]     [0.053]     [0.030]        [0.045]       [0.051]
Log [Population]_[t-a]         0.195***      0.257***    0.101***    0.773***     0.992***    0.408***    0.616***       0.768***      0.333***
                                [0.014]       [0.022]     [0.007]     [0.037]      [0.075]     [0.019]     [0.037]        [0.073]       [0.019]
Log [Geographic distance]     -0.038***     -0.039***   -0.044***   -0.143***    -0.147***   -0.159***   -0.123***      -0.127***     -0.136***
                                [0.008]       [0.008]     [0.009]     [0.027]      [0.029]     [0.028]     [0.023]        [0.024]       [0.021]
Same language                  0.126***      0.126***    0.142***     0.341**      0.341**     0.363**     0.249*         0.249*        0.254*
                                [0.022]       [0.022]     [0.029]     [0.129]      [0.129]     [0.142]     [0.124]        [0.123]       [0.130]
Same religion                   0.012*        0.013*      0.016*     0.115***     0.122***    0.133***    0.117***       0.124***      0.133***
                                [0.007]       [0.007]     [0.008]     [0.038]      [0.041]     [0.042]     [0.037]        [0.040]       [0.040]
Acquirer country dummies          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes
Target country dummies            Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes
Industry dummies                  Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                    26,068        25,536      17,850       26,068       25,536      17,850     26,068         25,536        17,850
Adjusted R2                      0.391         0.391       0.389        0.318        0.318       0.317      0.276          0.275         0.274
  !

  !
Appendix 1: Variable definitions

Variables                   Definitions

Cross-border flow
Log(1+ Number (a,t))        Number (a,t) is the total number of all cross-border mergers during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with the
                            target from country t.
Log(1+ Value (a,t))         Value (a,t) is the total dollar value of all cross-border mergers during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with the
                            target from country t.
Log(1+ Deal size (a,t))     Deal size (a,t) is the average dollar value of all cross-border deals during the sample period for acquirer firm a, with
                            the target from country t.
Labor protection measures
Unemployment coverage       Unemployment benefits coverage, which is calculated as the ratio of the number of UI (unemployment insurance)
                            benefit recipients to the number of unemployed
Employment law              Employment laws index, which measures the protection of the individual employment contract (Botero et al., 2004).
                            Higher value indicates stronger employee protections.
EPL                         Employment protection laws index, which measures the strictness of employment protection against individual
                            dismissal. This index is compiled by the OECD. Higher value indicates stronger employment protections.
Country-level characteristics

Log [GDP per capita]        The logarithm of annual Gross Domestic Product (in U.S. dollars) divided by the population

Log [Population]            The logarithm of population
Log [Geographic distance]   The logarithm of geographic distance between the capitals of the acquirer and the target countries. We obtain
                            latitudes and longitudes of the capital cities and use the great circle formula to calculate the distance.
Same language               A dummy variable equal to one if the acquirer and the target have the same primary language
Same religion               A dummy variable equal to one if the acquirer and the target have the same primary religion

WGI                         The sum of all six Kaufmann et al. (2009) worldwide governance indicators: voice and accountability; political
                            stability and absence of violence/terrorism; government effectiveness; regulatory quality; rule of law, and control of
                            corruption. Each index ranges from -2.5 to 2.5. Higher value indicates better country governance.
Voice and accountability    The extent to which a country's citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of
                            expression, freedom of association, and a free media (Kaufmann et al., 2009).
Political stability and     The likelihood that the government will be destabilized or overthrown by unconstitutional or violent means, including
absence of violence         politically-motivated violence and terrorism (Kaufmann et al., 2009).

                                                                        !                                                                              "$!
!
Rule of law              The extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of
                         contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence
                         (Kaufmann et al., 2009).
Regulatory quality       The ability of the government to formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote
                         private sector development (Kaufmann et al., 2009).
Control of corruption    The extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as
                         well as "capture" of the state by elites and private interests (Kaufmann et al., 2009).
Government effectiveness The quality of public services, the quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political
                         pressures, the quality of policy formulation and implementation, and the credibility of the government's commitment
                         to such policies (Kaufmann et al., 2009).
Cumulative abnormal returns
CAR(-2,+2) (%)             5-day cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) estimated using the market model over the period [-210,-11], where event
                           day 0 is the acquisition announcement date
Firm-level (acquirer) characteristics
Log [Total Assets]           The natural log of book value of total assets (in millions of U.S. dollars)

Cash flow                    Funds from operations divided by total assets
Tobin's Q                    Market value of total assets (total assets - book value of common equity + market value of common equity) divided
                             by book value of total assets
Leverage                     The ratio of total debt to total assets

Stock runup                  Acquirer's buy-and-hold return during the [-210,-11] window minus the market buy-and-hold return over the same
                             period
Deal-level characteristics
Relative size                The ratio of SDC deal value to the acquirer’s book value of total assets at the fiscal year-end prior to the
                             announcement date
Unrelated deal               A dummy variable equal to one for deals in which the acquirer and the target do not have the same two-digit SIC
                             industry
Private target dummy         A dummy variable equal to one if the target is a private firm
Subsidiary target dummy      A dummy variable equal to one if the target is a subsidiary

Public target dummy          A dummy variable equal to one if the target is a publicly traded parent firm



                                                                         !                                                                       "%!
!
All cash deal   A dummy variable equal to one if the deal is purely financed by cash
Friendly deal   A dummy variable equal to one if the deal is friendly
Tender offer    A dummy variable equal to one if the deal is a tender offer

!

!




                                                           !                           "&!
!
!




Appendix 2: Labor regulation variables by country

For labor regulation variables with time-series variation, we report the annual average value during our sample period.

Country                    Unemployment coverage          Employment law                 EPL
Argentina                         0.052                       0.344                         .
Australia                         0.536                       0.352                      1.326
Austria                           0.903                       0.501                      2.594
Belgium                           0.852                       0.513                      1.803
Brazil                            0.706                       0.568                      1.433
Bulgaria                          0.247                       0.519                         .
Canada                            0.524                       0.262                      0.921
Chile                             0.209                       0.473                      2.627
China                             0.427                       0.432                      3.258
Colombia                          0.000                       0.344                         .
Czech Republic                    0.398                       0.520                      3.239
Denmark                           0.844                       0.573                      2.149
Estonia                           0.332                          .                       2.276
Finland                           0.640                       0.737                      2.321
France                            0.743                       0.744                      2.382
Germany                           0.466                       0.702                      2.731
Greece                            0.373                       0.519                      2.773
Hong Kong                         0.110                       0.170                         .
Hungary                           0.321                       0.377                      2.004
Indonesia                         0.000                       0.681                      4.075
Ireland-Rep                       0.439                       0.343                      1.391
Israel                            0.389                       0.289                      2.036
Italy                             0.492                       0.650                      2.762
Japan                             0.306                       0.164                      1.626
Jordan                            0.000                       0.698                         .
Kenya                             0.000                       0.369                         .
Malaysia                          0.000                       0.189                         .




                                                                        "'!
!
!




Mexico           0.000   0.594         2.194
Morocco          0.000   0.262            .
Netherlands      0.668   0.726         2.897
New Zealand      0.949   0.161         1.402
Norway           0.614   0.685         2.333
Pakistan         0.000   0.343            .
Peru             0.000   0.463            .
Philippines      0.000   0.476            .
Poland           0.284   0.640         2.230
Portugal         0.596   0.809         4.519
Russian Fed      0.776   0.828         3.063
Singapore        0.000   0.312            .
South Africa     0.154   0.320         2.159
South Korea      0.311   0.446         2.612
Spain            0.541   0.745         2.621
Sri Lanka        0.000   0.468            .
Sweden           0.796   0.740         2.683
Switzerland      2.303   0.452         1.595
Thailand         0.000   0.410            .
Turkey           0.023   0.403         2.363
United Kingdom   0.452   0.282         1.123
United States    0.362   0.218         0.257
Venezuela        0.000   0.651            .




                                 #(!
!
!




Appendix 3: Sample distribution in deal-level analysis
Country                                                                                          Target
Acquirer                 AR   AS   AU    BL    BR    BU   CA    CC   CE   CH    CO        DN    EA    FN   FR    GR   HK    HU   ID   IR    IS    IT    JO   JP   KE   MA
Argentina        AR                                                              2
Austria          AS                 1           1    1          2                                          2                           2           2
Australia        AU      4                3     9         40    1    9    11    1          1          3    7     1     6         7     1     1     3         1         5
Belgium          BL                 1           3         2                                3               23    1     1               1           5         1
Brazil           BR      9          3     1               4          1          3
Bulgaria         BU
Canada           CA      11   1    59     8    23               1    10   10    11         4          7    18    1     2               6     5     4              1
Czech Republic   CC
Chile            CE      1          2     1    12          1                    1
China            CH                 7                      4                               1                1         23         1                 1         4         1
Colombia         CO                                        2
Denmark          DN                 1                      5    1          2                          2     4          2                           2
Estonia          EA                                                                                         1
Finland          FN           2     3    1      1    1    4     1          2               7    2           6          3    1                     4
France           FR      2    1     5    13    18         21         3     5               6          4          1     2    2                2    20         1
Greece           GR                      1           2    1                                                                                       3          1
Hong Kong        HK                 9           5         6               56                                2                    2           1    3          2         1
Hungary          HU                                             1
Indonesia        ID                 2                                      4                                           1
Ireland-Rep      IR           1     8     1     3          5               2               4          1    3                                 3     1
Israel           IS                 1                      5    1                          1               4     1                                 5         2
Italy            IT      1    2     2     4     4          3    1    3     6               1               25                          3
Jordan           JO
Japan            JP      1    3    16     9     9          6         1     5               1          3    11          3         3           1     4                   5
Kenya            KE
Malaysia         MA                 5                      1               6               1                           2         3                 1
Morocco          MR
Mexico           MX      2         2           14         1          1          2                                                      1                               1
Norway           NO           2    2     1      4         4                               25         13    6                                       1
Netherlands      NT           5    7     17     2    1    13    1    1     3              4          3     16    1          3          1           9         1
New Zealand      NZ           1    26                     3                                                                                        1
Peru             PE      1                                           2          1
Philippines      PH                 3                                      1                                           2                                     1         4
Pakistan         PK
Poland           PL           1                            1    2                                                           1                      2
Portugal         PO                             9
Russian Fed      RU                                  1     5                                          2                                            1
South Africa     SA           1    21     1     2          5    1                          1          1     3                                      1              1    1
Singapore        SG                15     1                1              14               1          1     1         20         6           1                         16
South Korea      SK                2                       3    1         21                                1         4          2                 1         6
Sri Lanka        SL
Spain            SP      7    1     2     2    18               1    8          2         1          1     10               2                     16    1
Sweden           SW      5    4     6     6     1    1    10    4          4              21    2    30    25          1    6    1     3     1    6                    1
Switzerland      SZ      2    4     8     4     3         14    1    1          1                    4     16          1               1     2    7                    2
Thailand         TH                 1                                      1                               1           2         1
Turkey           TK                                                                                                         1               1
United Kingdom   UK      10   11   139   45    16         104   13   5    14    4         41         15    198   3    15    3    9    97    4     66         6    2    9
United States    US      31   14   160   35    41    1    565   7    6    54    6         41         20    202   2    21    6    1    39    89    59         26        3
Venezuela        VE
Germany          WG           7     5     5     2    1     3    3          2               7          2    15               3          1     4     5                   1
                 Total   87   61   524   159   200   9    842   43   51   223   34        172   4    112   601   11   111   28   36   156   115   233   1    52   4    50




                                                                                    #)!
!
!




Appendix, continued.
Country                                                                                     Target
Acquirer                 MR   MX    NO    NT    NZ    PE   PH   PK   PL   PO   RU    SA    SG     SK   SL   SP    SW    SZ    TH   TK   UK     US     VE   WG    Total
Argentina        AR                                                                                                                             1                  3
Austria          AS                       4                                                                  2     4     2               6      7          13     49
Australia        AU                  2    6     77    4    6              1          16    11     2          5     3     4    2          81    153         18     505
Belgium          BL                  1    10          1                   2          1            1          3     1     2    1    1     15    35          9      124
Brazil           BR            3     1    2                                                                                              2     11     1           41
Bulgaria         BU                                                                                                                                                0
Canada           CA           39     8    12     6    13   1         1    1    1      5     1     1          6    13     6         3     91    704    7    22    1123
Czech Republic   CC                                                                                                                                                0
Chile            CE            1           1          1                                                                                         1                 22
China            CH                        2                         1                      4     2                           1                 14          3     70
Colombia         CO            1                      1                                                                                         5                  9
Denmark          DN                  5     7                         4         1            1                2    11     5               11     22    1     5     94
Estonia          EA                                                                                                                                                1
Finland          FN                 14    9                          1         5            2               1     29    3                14    37          28     181
France           FR      3     1    4     23     1                   4    2           3     1     3         26    7     10    5    3     71    169    1    47     490
Greece           GR                 1                                          2      2                     1                      1     3      6                 24
Hong Kong        HK                        3     2                                          3                      3     1    1          8     16           2     126
Hungary          HU                                                                                                      1               1                  1      4
Indonesia        ID                                                                         1                                                   1                  9
Ireland-Rep      IR                  1    13     1                                    1                     1      3     2              123     77         7      261
Israel           IS                       2      1                   3         1      1                     2            2              10      82         2      126
Italy            IT            1     3    7                          1    2    2      1                     13     2     6         3    25      31         17     169
Jordan           JO                                                                                                                                                0
Japan            JP            1     1     5     1                             2      6     7     4          2     4     8    2    1     34    136         10     305
Kenya            KE                                                                                                                                                0
Malaysia         MA                        2     2         2                          1    21          1                 2    3          2      3           2     60
Morocco          MR                                                                                                                                                0
Mexico           MX                                   1                                                      1                     1            17    1           45
Norway           NO                        5     1                   1    1                 2                4    45     2               25     28         10     182
Netherlands      NT                  5           2                   3         4      3     4     2          7    10     5         1     47     95         18     294
New Zealand      NZ            1           2                                                                                             3      10         1      48
Peru             PE                                                                                                                      1                         5
Philippines      PH            2                                                                                              1                 2                 16
Pakistan         PK                                                                                                                                                0
Poland           PL                                                            1                             1           1         1            1           2     14
Portugal         PO                                                                                          6                                  2           2     19
Russian Fed      RU                        1                                                                                       1     2      6                 19
South Africa     SA                        3     2                                          1                      1     1               22     16          1     86
Singapore        SG            1     1     2     2                                    1           1          1           3    8    1     11     19          3     131
South Korea      SK                              1         1         1                1                                       1    1     2      17          4     70
Sri Lanka        SL                                                                                                                                                0
Spain            SP            5    1     2           4    1         2    8                                        1                     14     24    1    11     146
Sweden           SW            1    30    18     1                   4    3    7      5     2     2         11           5    1          61     81         31     401
Switzerland      SZ                 1     7      1    1                        1      1           2         3      5                     32     89         13     227
Thailand         TH                                                                         2                                            2      1                 11
Turkey           TK                                                            1     1                                                          1                  5
United Kingdom   UK      1    9     40    162   7     1    3    1    10   10   17    42    15    6          63    57    39    1    11          1233        206   2763
United States    US      1    38    41    113   22    3    3    1    7    2    9     10    23    23         33    78    71    3         752           4    259   2925
Venezuela        VE                                                                                                                                                0
Germany          WG                  5     18                        3    1                      2           9     8    12         3     57     98                282
                 Total   5    104   165   441   130   30   17   2    46   33   54    101   101   51    1    203   285   193   30   32   1528   3251   16   747   11485
!



                                                                               #*!
!
!




Figure 1: Cross-Border acquisitions as a percentage of total acquisitions


                                                    !"#$$%&#"'(")'(*+)"*,#)
     (,#!


    (,"#!


     (,"!


    (,+#!


     (,+!


    (,*#!


     (,*!


    (,)#!


     (,)!


    (,(#!


       (!
        )'')! )''*! )''+! )''"! )''#! )''$! )''%! )''&! )'''! *(((! *(()! *((*! *((+! *(("! *((#! *(($! *((%! *((&! *(('! *()(! *())! *()*!




                                                                         #+!
!
!




Figure 2: Total value of cross-border and domestic mergers (in Billions of U.S. Dollars) by year

    *#((!




    *(((!




    )#((!


                                                                                                                             -./0012/.34.!3456!

                                                                                                                             7/8409:!3456!
    )(((!




     #((!




       (!
            )'')!)''*!)''+!)''"!)''#!)''$!)''%!)''&!)'''!*(((!*(()!*((*!*((+!*(("!*((#!*(($!*((%!*((&!*(('!*()(!*())!*()*!




                                                                           #"!
!
!




Figure 3: Total value of cross-border mergers by country (in Billions of U.S. Dollars)

This figure depicts information on cross-border acquisitions for the top eleven acquirer countries in terms of cross-border deal value over the entire
sample period (1991-2012).


                      -#.*+)/*+0()#1)2"#$$%&#"'(")*2304$4,#5$)&6)2#05."67)8998%:;8:)
    +(((!


    *#((!


    *(((!


    )#((!

                                                                                                                         -./0012/.34.!3456!
    )(((!


     #((!


       (!




                                                                         ##!
!
!




Figure 4: Top acquirer country cross-border acquisition flows

In this figure, weak labor protection laws represent countries with below the 25th percentile of the employment law distribution, and strong labor
protection laws represent countries with above the 75th percentile of the employment law distribution. This figure illustrates this information for
the top eleven acquirer countries in terms of cross-border deal value over the entire sample period (1991-2012).



                     -#<)*2304"(")2#05."6)2"#$$%&#"'(")*2304$4,#5)=#>$7)8998%:;8:)
    (,'!

    (,&!

    (,%!

    (,$!

    (,#!
                                                                                                                   ;45<!652/.!=./>4:9/?!65@0!
    (,"!                                                                                                           A>./?B!652/.!=./>4:9/?!65@0!

    (,+!

    (,*!

    (,)!

      (!




                                                                         #$!
!
!




Figure 5a: Acquirer CARs around the acquisition announcement

This figure show the average acquirer cumulative abnormal returns (%) from day -2 to day +2 around the acquisition announcement (zero is the
acquisition announcement date). A>T represents observations with relatively higher employment law for acquirer country, while A<T represents
observations with relatively higher employment law for target country.

                                                 ),$!


                                                 ),"!


                                                 ),*!


                                                   )!


                                                 (,&!                                                           CDE!

                                                                                                                CFE!

                                                 (,$!


                                                 (,"!


                                                 (,*!


                                                   (!
    1*,#!    1*!      1),#!     1)!      1(,#!          (!   (,#!      )!       ),#!      *!       *,#!




                                                                     #%!
!
!




Figure 5b: Acquirer CAR residuals (CAR-R) around the acquisition announcement

This figure shows the average residuals of acquirer cumulative abnormal returns (%) from day -2 to day +2 around the acquisition announcement
(zero is the acquisition announcement date). The residuals (CAR-R) are calculated from regression model (2) in Table 3, but exclude the labor
regulation variables. A>T represents observations with relatively higher employment law for acquirer country, while A<T represents observations
with relatively higher employment law for target country.

                                                  (,*#!


                                                    (,*!


                                                  (,)#!


                                                    (,)!


                                                  (,(#!
                                                                                                                  CDE!

                                                                                                                  CFE!
                                                      (!
    1*,#!    1*!      1),#!      1)!      1(,#!            (!   (,#!     )!       ),#!       *!       *,#!

                                                  1(,(#!


                                                   1(,)!


                                                  1(,)#!


                                                   1(,*!




                                                                       #&!
!
