NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA'S MACROECONOMY
Chun Chang
Kaiji Chen
Daniel F. Waggoner
Tao Zha
Working Paper 21244
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21244
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
Special thanks go to Marty Eichenbaum, Jonathan Parker, and Chris Sims for critical comments. We
thank Toni Braun, Paco Buera, Gregory Chow, Larry Christiano, Xiang Deng, John Fernald, Lars
Hansen, Rachel Ngai, Pat Higgins, Loukas Karabarbounis, Sergio Rebelo, Richard Rogerson, Pedro
Silos, Aleh Tsyvinski, Harald Uhlig, Mark Watson, Kei-Mu Yi, Vivian Yue, Mei Zhu, Xiaodong Zhu,
and seminar participants at People's Bank of China, Princeton University, University of Chicago, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2014 European Economic Association & Econometric Society Summer
Program, Beijing University, 2014 Conference on "Macroeconomic Policies and Business Cycles"
hosed by Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, 2015 Bank of Canada and University of Toronto
Conference on the Chinese Economy, George Washington University, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, and Hong Kong Monetary Authority for helpful discussions. We also thank Shiyi
Chen, Gary Jefferson, Kang Shi, and Jun Zhang for sharing their TFP calculations with us. Last but
not least, we are deeply grateful to Pat Higgins, Hongwei Wu, Tong Xu, Jing Yu, and Karen Zhong
for extensive research support. This research is also supported in part by the National Science Foundation
Grant SES 1127665 and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Project Numbers 71473168,
71172127, and 71473169. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve System or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Chun Chang, Kaiji Chen, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trends and Cycles in China's Macroeconomy
Chun Chang, Kaiji Chen, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 21244
June 2015
JEL No. E2,F4,G1,H81
ABSTRACT
We make four contributions in this paper. First, we provide a core of macroeconomic time series usable
for systematic research on China. Second, we document, through various empirical methods, the robust
findings about striking patterns of trend and cycle. Third, we build a theoretical model that accounts
for these facts. Fourth, the model's mechanism and assumptions are corroborated by institutional details,
disaggregated data, and banking time series, all of which are distinctive of Chinese characteristics.
We argue that preferential credit policy for promoting heavy industries accounts for the unusual cyclical
patterns as well as the post-1990s economic transition featured by the persistently rising investment
rate, the declining labor income share, and a growing foreign surplus. The departure of our theoretical
model from standard ones offers a constructive framework for studying China's modern macroeconomy.
Chun Chang
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
cchang@saif.sjtu.edu.cn
Kaiji Chen
Department of Economics
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322
chen.kaiji@gmail.com

Daniel F. Waggoner
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1000 Peachtree Street N.E.
Atlanta, Georgia 30309-4470
dwaggoner@frbatlanta.org
Tao Zha
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
and also NBER
tzha@emory.edu

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

1

I. Introduction
Growth has been the hallmark for China. In recent years, however, China’s GDP growth
has slowed down considerably while countercyclical government policy has taken center stage.
Never has this change been more true than after the 2008 financial crisis, when the government injected 4 trillion RMBs into investment to combat the sharp fall of output growth.
Issues related to both trend and cycle are now on the minds of policymakers and economists;1
yet there is a serious lack of empirical research on (1) the basic facts about trends and cycles
of China’s macroeconomy and (2) a theoretical framework that is capable of explaining these
facts. This paper serves to fill this important vacuum by tackling both of these issues. The
broad goal is to promote, among a wide research community, empirical studies on China’s
macroeconomy and its government policies.
Over the past two years we have undertaken a task of providing a core of annual and
quarterly macroeconomic time series to be as consistent with the definitions of U.S. time
series as possible, while at the same time maintaining Chinese data characteristics for understanding China’s macroeconomy. We develop an econometric methodology to document
China’s trend and cyclical patterns. These patterns are carefully cross-verified by studying
different frequencies of the data, employing other empirical methods, and delving into disaggregated time series relevant to our paper. We build a theoretical framework to account
for the unique patterns of trend and cycle by integrating the disaggregated time series and
institutional details with our theoretical model. All three ingredients—data, empirical facts,
and theory—constitute a central theme of this paper; none of ingredients can be understood
apart from the whole.
Since March 1996 the government has been actively promoting what is called “heavy
industries,” which are largely composed of big capital-intensive industries such as telecommunication, energy, and metal products.2 The other industries, called “light industries,” do
not receive the same preferential treatment. Our robust empirical findings about China’s
macroeconomy since the late 1990s consist of two parts. The first concerns trend patterns
and the second pertains to cyclical patterns. The key trend facts are:
(T1) A simultaneous rise of the investment-to-output ratio (from 26% in 1997 to 36% in
2010) and a fall of the consumption-to-output ratio (from 45% in 1997 to 35% in
2010), as confirmed by Figure 1.
(T2) A decline of the labor share of income from 53% in 1997 to 47% in 2010.
(T3) An increase in the ratio of long-term loans (for financing fixed investment) to shortterm loans (for financing working capital) from 0.4 in 1997 to 2.5 in 2010.
(T4) A rise in the ratio of capital in heavy industries to that in light industries from 2.4
in 1997 to 4 in 2010.
(T5) An increase in the ratio of total revenues in heavy industries to those in light industries
from 1 in 1997 to 2.5 in 2010.
The key cyclical patterns are:
1

See various official reports from the research group in China’s National Bureau of Statistics (http:
//www.stats.gov.cn/tjzs/tjsj/tjcb/zggqgl/200506/t20050620_37473.html).
2
Not every capital-intensive industry belongs in the heavy classification. For example, food and beverage
industries are capital intensive, but are not strategically important to the government. In this paper we study
two aggregate sectors and abstract from the heterogeneity of capital intensity within each sector. Despite
the heterogeneity within each sector, the heavy sector is, on average, much more capital intensive than the
light sector.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

2

(C1) Weak or negative comovement between aggregate investment and consumption, ranging from −0.6 to 0.2 for the sample from the late 1990s on.
(C2) Weak or negative comovement between aggregate investment and labor income, ranging from −0.3 to 0.3 for the sample from the late 1990s on.
(C3) A negative comovement between long-term loans and short-term loans, around −0.2
for the quarterly sample and −0.4 for the annual sample from the late 1990s on.
To explain both trend and cyclical patterns listed above, we build a theoretical model on
Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011, SSZ henceforth) but depart from the traditional emphasis on state-owned enterprises (SOEs) versus and privately-owned enterprises (POEs).
SSZ construct an economy with heterogeneous firms that differ in both productivity and
access to the credit market to explain the observed coexistence of sustained returns to capital and growing foreign surpluses in China in most of the 2000s. Their model replicates
disinvestment of SOEs in the labor-intensive sector as POEs accumulate capital in the same
sector. In this two-sector model, they characterize two transition stages. In the first stage,
both SOEs and POEs coexist in the labor-intensive sector, while capital-intensive goods is
produced exclusively by SOEs.3 In the second stage, SOEs disappear from the labor-intensive
sector and POEs become the sole producers in that sector. SSZ present a persuasive story
about resource reallocations between SOEs and POEs within the labor-intensive sector and
the source of TFP growth since the later 1990s.
Although discussions around SOEs versus POEs have dominated the literature on China,
the SOE-POE classification does not help explain the rising investment rate, the decline
of labor income share, and the weak or negative cyclical comovement between investment
and consumption or between investment and labor income. Since the late 1990s, moreover,
capital deepening has become the major source of GDP growth in China. To address these
China’s macroeconomic issues in one coherent and tractable framework, we take a different
perspective by shifting an emphasis to resource reallocation between the heavy and light
sectors. This shift of emphasis is grounded in China’s institutional arrangements that took
place in the late 1990s, when the Eighth National People’s Congress passed a historic longterm plan to adjust the industrial structure for the next 15 years in favor of strengthening
heavy industries. The plan was subsequently backed up by long-term bank loans given
priority to the heavy sector. As discussed in Sections V.2 and VIII.2.4, heavy industries
have been deemed to be of strategic importance to China since 1996. Our novel approach
is to build a two-sector model with a special emphasis on resource and credit reallocations
between the heavy versus light sectors and by introducing two new institutional ingredients
into our model: a collateral constraint on producers in the heavy sector and a lending friction
in the banking sector. We show that with these new ingredients, our model can replicate
trend patterns (T1)-(T5) and cyclical patterns (C1)-(C3).
Frictionless neoclassical models rest on certain assumptions that are at odds with the
Chinese facts. Models represented by Chang and Hornstein (2015) and Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2014) require a fall of the relative price of investment to explain the rise of the
investment rate in South Korea or the global decline of labor share across a large number of
3To

keep our paper transparent and focused, we abstract from their first transition stage, in which SOEs’
employment share keeps declining in the labor-intensive sector. As shown by Chen and Wen (2014), most of
the increase in the share of private employment occurred between 1998 and 2004 (from 15% to 50%), while
the share increased by only 10% between 2004 and 2011. Nonetheless, our results would hold in a generalized
economy that incorporates the first stage of transition.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

3

countries when the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is greater than one.
Evidence in China for such a simultaneous fall of the relative price and the labor income
share is at best weak. Frictionless two-sector models of capital deepening à la Acemoglu
and Guerrieri (2008) assume that (labor-augmented) total factor productivity (TFP) in
the capital-intensive sector grows faster than TFP in the labor-intensive sector when the
elasticity of substitution between two sectors is less than one, or TFP in the capital-intensive
sector grows slower than TFP in the labor-intensive sector when the elasticity of substitution
between two sectors is greater than one. With this assumption, the investment rate declines
over time. For the investment rate to rise and the labor share of income to decline, it must
be that the elasticity of substitution between two sectors is greater than one and TFP in the
capital-intensive sector grows faster than TFP in the labor-intensive sector. As discussed in
Section V.2, Chinese evidence is unsupportive of faster TFP growth in the heavy sector. The
critical feature of our model is that it does not rely on any TFP assumption in explaining
the trend patterns of China. What we do rely on is a host of key institutional details that
are critical for understanding China’s macroeconomy. This paper weaves these institutional
details together to formulate our theoretical framework.
Our counterfactual economy shows that the key to generating the trend patterns is the
presence of collateral constraint in the heavy sector. With the collateral constraint, the
borrowing capacity of heavy firms grows with their net worth. Accordingly, the demand for
capital from the heavy sector accelerates during the transition, which leads to an increase in
the value share of the heavy sector in aggregate output. This structural change contributes
to both an increasing aggregate investment rate and a declining labor income share along
the transition path. In the absence of this financial friction as in SSZ, by contrast, the
economy tends to predict a declining (aggregate) investment rate during the transition. This
result occurs because, under the aggregate production function with the constant elasticity of
substitution (CES), the demand for capital from producers in the heavy sector is proportional
to output produced by the light sector. As output growth in the light sector slows down over
time due to the diminishing returns to capital, the heavy sector would experience a declining
investment rate. Moreover, the investment rate in the light sector tends to decline during
the transition due to either the resource reallocation from SOEs to POEs (in the first stage
of transition, which we abstract from our model) or decreasing returns to capital when this
kind of reallocation is completed.4
The cyclical patterns uncovered in this paper, an issue silent in SSZ, constitute an integral
part of our model mechanism. The key to accounting for these important cyclical patterns is
the presence of bank lending frictions in our model, which interacts with the aforementioned
collateral constraint to deliver a negative externality on the light sector from credit injections
into the heavy sector. In response to the government’s credit injection, the expansion of
credit demand by the heavy sector tends to crowd out the light sector’s demand for workingcapital loans by pushing up the loan rate for working capital. In an economy absent such
lending frictions, a credit injection into the heavy sector tends to push up the wage income
and therefore household consumption due to the imperfect substitutability between output
produced from the heavy sector and output produced by the light sector, a result that is
4SSZ

overcome such deficiency in their quantitative model by feeding in an exogenous sequence of interest
rate subsidies, which pushes up wages and capital-labor ratios for both types of firms. This modification,
nonetheless, predicts that the growth rates of aggregate investment and labor income tend to comove positively, which is inconsistent with fact (C2).

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

4

again at odds with what we observe in China (fact (C2)).5 Specifically, it generates the
following counterfactual predictions:
• A strong, positive comovement between investment and consumption.
• A strong, positive comovement between investment and labor income.
• A strong, positive comovement between investment loans and working-capital loans.
Standard business cycle models have a number of shocks that are potentially capable
of generating a negative comovement between aggregate investment and household consumption through the negative effect on consumption of rising interest rates in response to
demand for investment. Primary examples are preference shocks, investment-specific technology shocks, and credit shocks. In those models, however, an increase of investment raises
household income, contradictory to fact (C2). What is most important: most of these standard models are silent about the negative relationships between short-term and long-term
loans (fact (C3)) and are not designed to address many of the trend facts (T1)-(T5). We
view our model’s capability of reproducing the cyclical patterns of China’s macroeconomy a
further support of our mechanism for the aforementioned trend facts.
More generally, our theory contributes to the emerging literature on the role of financialmarket imperfections in economic development (Buera and Shin, 2013; Moll, 2014). It is a
long-standing puzzle from the neoclassical perspective that the investment rate in emerging economies increases over time, since the standard neoclassical model predicts that the
investment rate falls along the transition and quickly converges to the steady state due
to decreasing returns to capital. The typical explanation in this literature is that in an
under-developed financial market, productive entrepreneurs, thanks to binding collateral
constraints and thus high returns to capital, have a higher saving rate, while the unproductive but rich entrepreneurs are financially unconstrained and have a low saving rate.
Aggregate investment rate increases during the transition, when productive entrepreneurs
account for a larger share of wealth and income in the aggregate economy over time through
resource reallocations.
Our model provides a different explanation for an increase in aggregate investment for
China. In our model, a persistent increase in aggregate investment is mainly caused by an
increasing share of revenues generated by heavy industries in aggregate output as those firms
become larger with their expanded borrowing capacity. Such an explanation is consistent
with the heavy industrialization experienced in China (facts (T4) and (T5)). We view our
model mechanism as a useful complement to the larger literature.6
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews how we construct the
annual and quarterly data relevant to this paper. Section III develops an econometric method
to uncover the key facts of trend and cycle. Section IV delivers a robustness analysis of these
facts using different empirical approaches. Section V provides China’s institutional details
relevant to this paper. In light of these facts we build a theoretical framework in Section VI
and characterize the equilibrium in Section VII. In Section VIII we discuss the quantitative
5Similar

positive comovements between aggregate investment, labor income, and consumption would
happen if there is a negative shock to the interest rate subsidy facing by either heavy or light producers, as
in SSZ.
6Our mechanism might potentially explain why the observed fast increase in the ratio of corporate debt
to GDP tends to beget a financial crisis, as many East Asian countries experienced in 1997-1998, because
unproductive large firms accumulate debts at the cost of loans allocated to productive firms. A pace of rising
debts in large firms is a looming issue for China at the present time (see, for example, the article “Digging
into China’s debts” published in the 2 February 2015 issue of Financial Times).

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

5

results from our model, corroborate the model’s key assumptions and mechanism with further
empirical evidence, and conduct a number of counterfactual exercises to highlight the model’s
mechanism. We offer some concluding remarks in Section IX.
II. Construction of macroeconomic time series
In this section we discuss how we construct a standard set of annual and quarterly macroeconomic time series usable for this study as well as for future studies on China’s macroeconomy.
II.1. Brief literature review and data sources. There are earlier works on the Chinese
economy, some taking an econometric approach and others employing historical perspectives
or narrative approaches (Chow, 2011; Lin, 2013; Fernald, Spiegel, and Swanson, 2013). He,
Chong, and Shi (2009) apply standard business cycle models to the linearly detrended 19782006 annual data for conducting business accounting exercises and conclude that productivity
best explains the behavior of China’s macroeconomic variables. Chakraborty and Otsu
(2012) apply a similar model to the linearly detrended 1990-2009 annual data and conclude
that investment wedges are increasingly important for China’s business cycles in the late
2000s. But the questions of what explains the dynamics of investment wedges and what are
the key cyclical patterns for China’s economy are left unanswered. Shi (2009) finds that
capital deepening is the major driving force of high investment rates after 2000, consistent
with our own evidence presented in Section V.3.
Most of extensive empirical studies on China, however, take a microeconomic perspective
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Brandt and Zhu, 2010; Yu and Zhu, 2013), mainly because there
are a variety of survey data that either are publicly available or can be purchased. Annual
Surveys of Rural and Urban Households conducted by China’s National Bureau of Statistics
(NBS) provide detailed information about income and expenditures of thousands of households from at least 1981 through the present time (Fang, Wailes, and Cramer, 1998). The
survey data on manufacturing firms for studying firms’ TFPs come from Annual Surveys
of Industrial Enterprises from 1998 to 2007 conducted by the NBS, which is a census of all
nonstate firms with more than 5 million RMB in revenue as well as all state-owned firms
(Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Lu, Forthcoming). The longitudinal data from China’s Health and
Nutrition Surveys provide the distribution of labor incomes over 4,400 households (26,000
individuals) over several years starting in 1989 (Yu and Zhu, 2013). There have been recent
efforts in constructing more micro data about China. For example, China’s Household Finance Survey, conducted by Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, is a survey
on 8,438 households (29,324 individuals) in 2011 and 28,141 households (more than 99,000 individuals) in 2013, with a special focus on households’ balance sheets and their demographic
and labor-market characteristics (Gan, 2014).
Macroeconomic time series are based on two databases: the CEIC (China Economic Information Center, now belonging to Euromoney Institutional Investor Company) database—one
of the most comprehensive macroeconomic data sources for China—and the WIND database (the data information system created by the Shanghai-based company called WIND
Co. Ltd., the Chinese version of Bloomberg). The major sources of these two databases
are the NBS and the People’s Bank of China (PBC). For the NBS data, in particular, we
consult China Industrial Economy Statistical Yearbooks (including 20 volumes) and China
Labor Statistical Yearbooks (including 21 volumes).

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

6

II.2. Construction. This paper is not about the quality of publicly-available data sources
in China. The pros and cons associated with such quality have been extensively discussed
in, for example, Holz (2013), Fernald, Malkin, and Spiegel (2013), and Nakamura, Steinsson,
and Liu (2014). Notwithstanding possible measurement errors of GDP as well as other
macroeconomic variables, one should not abandon the series of GDP in favor of other less
comprehensive series, no matter how “accurate” one would claim those alternatives are. After
all, the series of GDP is what researchers and policy analysts would pay most attention to
when they need to gauge China’s aggregate activity.
The most urgent data problem, in our view, is the absence of a standard set of annual and
quarterly macroeconomic time series comparable to those commonly used in the macroeconomic literature on Western economies. Our goal is to provide as accurate as possible
the series of GDP and other key variables, make them publicly available, and use such a
dataset as a starting point for promoting both improvement and transparency of China’s
core macroeconomic series usable for macroeconomic analysis.
Construction of the annual and quarterly time series poses an extremely challenging task
because many key macroeconomic series are either unavailable or difficult to fetch. We utilize
both annual and quarterly macroeconomic data that are available and interpolate or estimate
those that are publicly unavailable.7 Our construction method emphasizes the consistency
across data frequencies and serves as a foundation for improvements in future research.8
The difficulty of constructing a standard set of time series lies in several dimensions. The
NBS—probably the most authoritative source of macroeconomic data—reports only percent
changes of certain key macroeconomic variables such as real GDP. Many variables, such as
investment and consumption, do not even have quarterly data that are publicly available .
The Yearbooks published by the NBS have only annual data by the expenditure approach
(with annual revisions for the most recent data and benchmark revisions every five years for
historical data—benchmark revisions are based on censuses conducted by the NBS). Even
for the annual data, the breakdown of the nominal GDP by expenditure is incomplete. The
Yearbooks publish the GDP subcomponents such as household consumption, government
consumption, inventory changes, gross fixed capital formation (total fixed investment), and
net exports. But other categories, such as investment in the state-owned sector and investment in the nonstate-owned sector, are unavailable. These categories are estimated using
the detailed breakdown of fixed-asset investment across different data frequencies.
Using the valued-added approach, the NBS publishes some quarterly or monthly series
whose definitions are different from the same series by expenditure. For the value-added
approach, moreover, the subcomponents of GDP do not add up to the total value of GDP.
Many series on quarterly frequency are not available for the early 1990s. For that period,
we extrapolate these series. Few macroeconomic time series are seasonally adjusted by the
NBS or the PBC. We seasonally adjust all quarterly time series.
The most challenging part of our task is to keep as much consistency of our constructed
data as possible by cross-checking different approaches, different data sources, and different
data frequencies. One revealing example is construction of the quarterly real GDP series.
7One

could in principle interpolate quarterly data using a large state-space-form model for a mixture of
frequencies of the data. (A similar argument could be made about seasonal adjustments.) Since computation
for such an interpolation is both costly and model-dependent, we opt for the approach proposed by Leeper,
Sims, and Zha (1996) and Bernanke, Gertler, and Watson (1997).
8For the detailed description of all the problems we have discovered and of how best to correct them and
then construct the time series used in this paper, see Higgins and Zha (2015).

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

7

Based on the value-added approach, the NBS publishes year-over-year changes of real GDP
in two forms: a year-to-date (YTD) change and a quarter-to-date (QTD) change. Let t
be the first quarter of the base year. The YTD changes for the four quarters within the
yt+3 +yt+2 +yt+1 +Yt
yt+1 +Yt
yt+2 +yt+1 +Yt
yt
base year are yt−4
(Q1), yt−3
(Q2), yt−2
(Q3), and yt−1
(Q4). The
+yt−4
+yt−3 +yt−4
+yt−2 +yt−3 +yt−4
yt+1
yt+2
yt
t+3
QTD changes for the same four quarters are yt−4 (Q1), yt−3 (Q2), yt−2 (Q3), and yyt−1
(Q4).
The published data on QTD changes are available from 1999Q4 on, while the data on YTD
changes begin on 1991Q4. Using the time series of both YTD and QTD changes we are able
to construct the level series of quarterly real GDP. There are discrepancies between the real
GDP series based on the QTD-change data and the same series based on the YTD-change
data. We infer from our numerous communications with the NBS that the discrepancies
are likely due to human errors when calculating QTD and YTD changes. The real GDP
series is so constructed that the difference between our implied QTD and YTD changes
and NSB’s reported QTD and YTD changes is minimized. The quarterly real GDP series
is also constructed by the CEIC, the Haver Analytics, and the Federal Reserve Board. In
comparison to these sources, the method proposed by Higgins and Zha (2015) keeps to the
minimal the deviation of the annual real GDP series aggregated by the constructed quarterly
real GDP series from the same annual series published by the NBS.
Another example is the monthly series of retail sales of consumer goods, which has been
commonly used in the literature as a substitute for household consumption. Constructing the
annual and quarterly series from this monthly series would be a mistake because the monthly
series covers only large retail establishments with annual sales above 5 million RMB or with
more than 60 employees at the end of the year.9 The annual series published by the NBS,
however, includes smaller retail establishments and thus has a broader and better coverage
than the monthly series. A sensible approach is to use the annual series (CEIC ticker
CHFB) to interpolate the quarterly series with the monthly series (CEIC ticker CHBA) as
an interpolater.
Many series such as M2 and bank loans are published in two forms: year-to-date change
and level itself. In our communication with the People’s Bank of China, we have learned
that when the two forms do not match, it is the year-to-date change that is supposed to be
more accurate, especially in early history. We thus adjust the affected series accordingly.
Cross-checking various data sources to ensure accuracy is part of our data construction
process. For example, the monthly bank loan (outstanding) series from the CEIC exhibits
wild month-to-month fluctuations (more than 10%) in certain years (e.g., the first 3 months
in 1999). These unusually large fluctuations may be due to reporting errors as they are
absent in the same series from the WIND Database (arguably more reliable for financial
data). Detecting unreasonable outliers in the data is another important dimension of our
construction. One prominent example is the extremely low value of fixed-asset investment
in 1994Q4. If this reported low value were accurate, we would expect the growth rate of
gross fixed capital formation in 1995 to be unusually strong as the 1995Q4 value would be
unusually strong relative to the 1994Q4 value. But this is not the case. Growth of gross
fixed capital formation in 1995 is more in line with growth of fixed-asset investment in capital
construction and innovation than does growth of total fixed-asset investment. Accordingly
we adjust the extreme value of total fixed-asset investment in 1994Q4. The quarterly series
of fixed-asset investment is used as one of the interpolators for interpolating the quarterly
series of gross fixed-asset capital formation (Higgins and Zha, 2015).
9See

China’s Statistical Yearbook 2001 published by the NBS.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

8

II.3. Core time series. We report several key variables that are relevant to this paper.
Table 1 reports a long history of GDP by expenditure, household consumption, gross capital
formation (gross investment including changes of inventories), government consumption, and
net exports. Since 1980, the consumption rate (the ratio of household consumption to GDP)
has been trending down and the investment rate (the ratio of gross capital formation to GDP)
has been trending up, while the share of government consumption in GDP has been relatively
stable. China has undergone many dramatic phases. Table 2 displays major economic
reforms from December 1978 onward. Economic reforms towards the market economy were
not introduced until December 1978; the period prior to 1979 belongs to Mao’s premarket
command economy and is not a subject of this paper. The phase between 1980 and the late
1990s is marked by a gradual transition to the implementation of privatization of state-owned
firms. Due to the lack of detailed time series prior to 1995, the focus of this paper is on the
period since the late 1990s.
As indicated in Table 1, net exports as percent of GDP has become important since the late
1990s. Detailed breakdowns of GDP, as well as other relevant time series, become available
from 1995 on, as reported in Table 3 and 4. From these tables one can see that the rapid
increase of fixed investment (gross fixed capital formation) is driven by fixed investment of
privately owned firms, while fixed investment of state-owned firms as a share of GDP has
trended down steadily. Net exports as a share of GDP reached its peak in 2007 before it
gradually descended. Household investment as a share of GDP reached its peak in 2005
and has since hovered around that level. Changes of inventories as a share of GDP have
fluctuated around a low value since 1997.
Figure 2 displays the annual growth rate of real GDP, the annual change of the GDP
deflator (inflation), and consumption, gross fixed capital formation (total fixed investment),
retail sales of consumer goods, and fixed-asset investment as percent of GDP. The two
measures of real GDP, by expenditure and by value added, have similar growth rates over
the time span since 1980. After the economic reforms were introduced in December of 1978,
China’s growth has been remarkable despite its considerable fluctuations accompanied by
the large rise and fall of inflation in the early 1990s. Rapid growth is supported by the
steady decline of household consumption and the steady rise of gross fixed capital formation
as percent of GDP (the middle row of Figure 2). Consumption as a share of GDP is now
below 40% while total fixed investment is at 45% of GDP, prompting the question of how
sustainable China’s high growth will be in the future. The commonly used measure of
consumption, retail sales of consumer goods, shows the same low share of GDP (around
40% by 2012), although this measure includes consumption goods purchased by government
and possibly durable goods purchased by small business owners. The other measure of
total investment, fixed-asset investment, takes up nearly 80% of GDP by 2012 (the bottom
row of Figure 2). This measure exaggerates investment because it includes the value of
used equipment as well as the value of land that has increased drastically since 2000.10
Nonetheless, fixed-asset investment is available monthly and its subcomponent “investment
in capital construction and innovation” plays a key role in interpolation of quarterly gross
fixed capital formation.

10See

Xu (2010) for more details. The author was deputy director of the NBS when that article was
published.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

9

Figure 3 displays (a) year-over-year changes of the quarterly series: real GDP, the GDP
deflator, M2, and total bank loans outstanding and (b) new long-term and short-term quarterly loans to non-financial firms as percent of GDP by expenditure. The first row of this
figure corresponds to the annual data displayed in the first row of Figure 2. The quarterly
series clearly shows that the largest increase of inflation occurred in the early 1990s. Fueled by rapid growth in M2 and bank leading, GDP deflator inflation reached over 20% in
1993Q4-1994Q3 and CPI inflation reached over 20% in 1994Q1-1995Q1. The PBC began
to adopt very tight credit policy in 1995. In 1996, inflation was under control with GDP
deflator down to 5.45% and CPI down to 6.88% by 1996Q4 while GDP growth fell from
17.80% in 1993Q2 to 9.22% in 1996Q4. For fear of drastically slowing down the economy
caused by rising counter-party risks (“Sanjiao Zhai” in Chinese), the PBC cut interest rates
twice in May and August of 1996. While new long-term loans were held steady, short-term
loans shot up in 1996 and in the first quarter of 1997 to achieve a soft landing (“Ruan
Zhaolu” in Chinese). This increase proved to be short-lived while the decentralization of the
banking system was underway. In subsequent years, whenever medium and long term loans
increased sharply, short-term loans tended to decline. Another sharp spike of short-term
loans (most of which was in the form of bill financing) took place in 2009Q1 right after the
2008 financial crisis. This sharp rise, however, lasted for only one quarter and was followed
by sharp reversals for the rest of the year. By contrast, a large increase in medium and
long term loans lasted for two years after 2008 as part of the government’s two-year fiscal
stimulus plan. Clearly, long-term and short-term loans tend not to move together.
III. Econometric evidence
In this section we uncover the key facts about trends and cycles. Cyclical facts are as
important as trend facts because they help discipline the model with stochastic shocks and
serve as an identification mechanism to distinguish between theoretical models. To be sure,
separating the cyclical behavior from the trend behavior is inherently an daunting task,
especially when the time series are relatively short. We do not view it as an option to
abandon this enterprise. Rather, we take a two-pronged approach to safeguard our findings.
First, we follow King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson (1991) and develop a Bayesian reducedrank time-series method to separate trend and cycle components. The trend component is
consistent with the trend definition in our theoretical model. We avail ourselves of quarterly
data that range from 1997Q1 to 2013Q4,11 a sample length comparable to many businesscycle empirical studies using the U.S. data only after the early 1990s to concentrate on the
recent Great Moderation period discussed in Stock and Watson (2003).
Second, we use other empirical methods outlined in Section IV to build robustness of the
findings uncovered in this section. We believe that the method employed in this section
is methodologically superior to those used in Section IV because we treat all the relevant
variables in one system. Nonetheless, other empirical methods reassure the reader that our
robust findings do not hinge on one particular econometric method.
Figures 2 and 3 in Section II together present a broad perspective of trends and cycles
for the Chinese economy. These charts exhibit changes in both volatility and trend. These
11China’s

Statistical Yearbooks have not published the subcomponents of GDP by expenditure for 2014.
Some quarterly series in 2013 are extrapolated, and the quality of extrapolation is high. See Higgins and
Zha (2015) for details.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

10

changes could be potentially caused by a number of economic reforms undergone by the Chinese government. We use the major reform dates displayed in Table 2 to serve as candidate
switching points for either volatility or trend changes. To take account of these date points,
we use Sims, Waggoner, and Zha (2008)’s regime-switching vector autoregression (VAR)
methodology that allows discrete (deterministic) switches in both volatility and trend.
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996, 1999, 2005) argue forcibly that the VAR evidence is the key to disciplining a credible theoretical model. To this end we estimate a large
set of models with various combinations of switching dates reported in Table 2 and perform
a thorough model comparison. We find strong evidence for discrete switches in volatility but
not for any discrete switches in trend. But the steady decline of consumption and the steady
rise of investment shown in Figure 2 indicate that our VAR model must take account of a
possible continuous drift in trend. The model presented below is designed for this purpose.
III.1. Econometric framework. Let Yt be an n × 1 vector of (level) variables, p the lag
length, and T the sample size. The multivariate dynamic model has the following primitive
form:
p
X
A 0 y t = at +
A` yt−` + Dst εt ,
(1)
`=1

where st , taking a discrete value, is a composite index for regime switches in volatility, Dst is
an n × n diagonal matrix, and εt is an n × 1 vector of independent shocks with the standard
normal distribution. By “composite” we mean that the regime-switching index may encode
distinct Markov processes for different parameters (Sims and Zha, 2006; Sims, Waggoner, and
Zha, 2008) or deterministic discrete jumps according to different dates displayed in Table 2.
The previous literature on Markov-switching VARs, such as Sims, Waggoner, and Zha
(2008), focuses on business cycles around the trend that is constant across time. Chinese
macroeconomic data have a distinctively different characteristic: cyclical variations coexist
with trend drifts as shown in Figure 2. The time varying intercept vector at , monotone and
bounded in t for each element, captures a continuous trend drift. In contrast to the HP
filter that deals with each variable in isolation, our methodology is designed to decompose
the data into cycles and trends in one multivariate framework. Specifically, unit roots and
cointegration are imposed on system (1). These restrictions are made explicit in the errorcorrection representation as follows
F0 ∆yt = ct + Ryt−1 +

p−1
X

F` ∆yt−` + Dst εt ,

(2)

`=1

where R is an n × n matrix of reduced rank such that rank(R) = r with r < n, implying that
there are n−r unit roots and at most r cointegration vectors (i.e., the number of cointegration
relationships and the number of stationary relationships sum to r). Long-run relationships
are imposed in, for example, Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) who measure a long-run risk for
the valuation of cash flows exposed to fluctuations in macroeconomic growth. The Bayesian
framework developed here helps find the posterior peak by simulating Monte Carlo Markov
Chain (MCMC) draws of model parameters.
The relation between (1) and (2) is
A0 = F0 , A1 = R + F1 + F0 , A` = F` − F`−1 (` = 2, . . . , p − 1), Ap = −Fp−1 , ct = at .
We consider the following three functional forms of ct,j , the j th component of ct , in the
descending order of importance.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

11

• We specify the 4-parameter process as
ct,j = cj + (dj − cj )(αj (t − τj ) + 1)e−αj (t−τj )
where αj > 0 for j = 1, . . . , n. cj is the limiting value of ct,j as t increases and dj
is the value of ct,j when t = τj . Furthermore, if dj < cj , then dj is the minimum
value of ct,j and if dj > cj , then dj is the maximum value of ct,j . The parameter αj
controls how quickly ct,j converges to its limiting value. Our setup is flexible enough
for researchers to entertain further restrictions of the form αj = α, cj = c, dj = d, or
τj = τ for all or some of j’s.
• ct = cst , where the discrete process st is either Markovian or deterministic.
• The following specification is an alternative that is not used for this paper:
h
i0
c
c
ct = 1+β11 αt1 , . . . , 1+βnn αtn ,
n×1

where 0 ≤ αj < 1 for all i = 1, . . . , n. One could consider the restriction αj = α for
all i = 1, . . . , n or the restriction βj = β for all i = 1, . . . , n or both.
The reduced-form representation of (1) is
yt = bst +

p
X

B` yt−` + Mst εt ,

(3)

`=1

A−1
0 as t ,

A−1
0 A` ,

where bst =
B` =
switching covariance matrix.

0
and Mst = A−1
0 Dst . Let Σst = Mst Mst be the regime-

III.2. Design of the prior. Since the representation (2) is expressed in log difference and
of reduced rank, it embodies the prior of Sims and Zha (1998) (with the implication that
the Sims and Zha prior become degenerate along the dimension of reduced rank). Therefore
we should begin with the prior directly on F` (` = 0, . . . , p − 1), cj , dj , τj , αj , and Dst . The
only difficult part is to have a prior that maintains the reduced rank r for R.
Prior on F` (` = 0, . . . , p − 1), cj , dj , and τj . The prior is Gaussian on each of those elements centered at zero. For F` (` = 1, . . . , p − 1), there is a lag decay factor such that the
prior becomes tighter as the lag lengthens.
Prior on αj and Dst . The prior on αj is of Gamma. The prior on each of the diagonal
elements of Dst is of inverse Gamma.
Prior on R. Because R is a reduced-rank matrix, the usual decomposition is R = αβ 0 ,
where both α and β are n × r matrices of rank r. But a more effective decomposition is the
singular value decomposition:
R = UDV0 ,
where both U and V are n × r matrices with orthonormal columns and D is an r × r diagonal
matrix. Let the prior on both U and on V be the uniform distribution and the prior on the
diagonal elements of D be Gaussian.
The set of all n × r matrices with orthonormal columns is the Stiefel manifold, which
is an (nr − r(r+1)
)-manifold in Rnr . Instead of working directly with the elements of the
2
Stiefel manifold, we work with arbitrary n × r matrices Ũ and Ṽ and map Ũ and Ṽ to U
and V using the QR decomposition. In particular, we map Ũ to U and Ṽ to V via the QR
decompositions Ũ = URU and Ṽ = VRV with the positive diagonals of RU and RV . If the
prior on each column of Ũ and Ṽ is any spherical distribution centered at the origin, then
the induced prior on U and V is uniform as desired. Having the free parameters Ũ, Ṽ, and

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

12

D defined over Euclidean space, as opposed to a complicated submanifold, makes numerical
optimization tractable. While this parameterization is not unique in the sense that different
values of Ũ, Ṽ, and D can produce the same R, it is inconsequential because we do not give
Ũ, Ṽ, and D any economic interpretation.
We propose a prior on each column of Ũ and Ṽ to be
Γ( n2 )
n

π22

n+1
2

ρ2

)
Γ( n+1
2

ρe− 2 ,

where ρ is the norm of a column of Ũ or Ṽ. This prior is spherical and centered at the origin,
and thus induces the uniform prior distributions for U and V. Moreover it is straightforward
to sample independently from this distribution.
Our prior has some similarity to the prior specified by Villani (2005). Working directly
with the reduced-form parameters, Villani (2005) uses the F0−1 R = αβ 0 decomposition with
normalization such that the upper r × r block of β is the identity matrix. The prior on β
is chosen so that the prior on the Grassmannian manifold is uniform. The Grassmannian
manifold is the space of all k-dimensional linear subspaces in Rn and the columns of β can
be interpreted as the basis for an element in the Grassmannian manifold. This is analogous
to our use of the uniform distribution on the Stiefel manifold. Villani (2005) does not work
directly with α but instead uses
α̃ = α(β 0 β)1/2 .
It follows that the prior on the ith column of α̃, conditional on Σst , is normally distributed
with mean zero and variance matrix vΣst , where v is a positive hyperparameter.
Since we work with the primitive error-correction form for the purpose of taking into
account time-varying shock variances, our prior is on R directly, not on F0−1 R. All the
reduced-form parameters are derived, through the relations between (2) and (3), as
B1 = F0−1 (R + F1 + F0 ) , B` = F0−1 (F` − F`−1 ) (` = 2, . . . , p − 1), Bp = −F0−1 Fp−1 ,
bst = F0−1 cst , Mst = F0−1 Dst .
III.3. Decomposing trends and cycles. We first estimate system (2) and then convert it
to system (3). We express system (3) in companion form:

   

 

yt
bs t
B1 . . . Bp−1 Bp
yt−1
Mst
 yt−1   0   In . . . 0n nn  yt−2   0 

   

 

(4)
 ..  =  ..  +  ..
  ..  +  ..  εt ,
 .  .  .
 .   . 
yt−p+1

0

0n . . .
|

In
{z
B

0n

yt−p

0

}

where the companion matrix B is of np×np dimension, In is the identity matrix of dimension
n, and 0n is the n × n matrix of zeros. There are m2 = n − r unit roots and let m1 = np − m2 .
We follow the approach of King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson (1991) by maintaining their
assumption that the innovations to permanent shocks are independent of those to transitory
shocks. This assumption enables one to obtain a unique block of permanent shocks as well
as a unique block of transitory shocks.12
12Shocks

within each block are not uniquely determined.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

13

To obtain these two blocks of shocks, we first perform a real Schur decomposition of B
such that
#
"
i T11 T12 
h

0
0
W1
W2
W
W
,
B = np×m
1
2
0
T
np×m2
22
1
m2 ×m2


where W1 W2 is an orthogonal matrix and the diagonal elements of T22 are equal to one.
Our first task is to find the largest column space in which transitory shocks lie. That is,
we need to find an np × `1 matrix, V1,st , such that the column space of


Mst
 0 


(5)
 ..  V1,st
 . 
0
is contained in the column space of W1 , and V1,st is of full column rank and has the maximal
number of columns. Hence, the transitory shocks lie in the column space represented by
(5). This column space
to the intersection of the column space of W1 and
0
 0 must be equal
the column space of Mst , 0, . . . , 0 . In other words, there exists an m1 × `1 matrix of real
values, A, such that


Mst
 0 


 ..  V1,st = W1 A.
 . 
0
Since W1 ⊥ W2 , we have


Mst
 0 

0
W2  ..  V1,st = 0.
 . 
0
It follows that
 

Mst
  0 

 
V1,st = Null W20  .. 
  . 
0
and `1 ≥ n − m1 .
Let
h
i
Q
Q
1,s
2,s
t
t
V1,st = Qst Rst =
Rst
n×`1

n×`2

be the QR decomposition of V1,st . Since `1 ≥ n − m1 , it must be that `2 = n − `1 ≤ m2 . The
impact matrix is


Mst Q1,st Q2,st
with the first `1 columns corresponding to contemporaneous responses to the transitory
shocks and the second `2 columns corresponding to those to the permanent shocks.
If we have a different identification represented by M̃st , we can repeat the same procedure
to obtain the impact matrix as


M̃st = Q̃1,st Q̃2,st
with M̃st Q̃i,st = Mst Qi,st Pi,st for i = 1, 2, where [P1,st P2,st ] is an orthogonal matrix.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

14

III.4. Results. The sample begins with 1997Q1 because this is the time when China had
begun to swift its strategic priority to development of heavy industries as marked in Table 2
(see Section V.2 for a detailed discussion).
We estimate a number of 6-variable time-varying quarterly BVAR models with 5 lags and
the sample 1997Q1-2013Q4. Out of these variables, four variables are log values of real
household consumption, real total business investment, real GDP, and real labor income (all
are deflated by the implicit GDP deflator); two variables are the ratio of new medium&longterm bank loans to GDP and the ratio of new short-term bank loans and bill financing
to GDP. All the variables are seasonally-adjusted. The 5 lags are used to eliminate any
residual of possible seasonality. For our benchmark BVAR, the rank of the matrix R is
set to 3, implying one possible cointegration relationship and two stationary variables. We
find 2 stochastic regimes for the shock variances. Finding the posterior mode proves to
be a challenging task. The estimation procedure follows the DSMH method proposed by
Waggoner, Wu, and Zha (2015). First, we use the DSMH method to obtain the sufficient
sample of BVAR coefficients. From these posterior draws, we randomly select 100 starting
points independently and use the standard optimization routine to find local peaks. From
the 100 local peaks, we select the hight peak as our posterior mode.
We use the model structure and the estimated parameter values to back out a smoothed
sequence of shocks, εt . Out of the six shocks at each time t, three of them are permanent
and the other three are stationary.13 Conditional on the values of the six variables for the
initial 5 periods, the trend component of each variable is computed recursively by making
the predictions from the model by feeding into the model the smoothed permanent shocks
at each time t. The stationary component, by construction, is the difference between the
data and the trend component.
Across different BVARs, we obtain robust results about cyclical patterns. For the benchmark BVAR, the estimated correlation between stationary components of investment and
consumption (the cyclical part) is −0.05, the estimated correlation between investment and
labor income is −0.23, and the estimated correlation between short-term loans and longterm loans is −0.51. The results are robust across various BVARs. For example, with the
BVAR with all coefficients (including shock variances) being set to be constant across time,
the estimated correlation is 0.18 between investment and consumption and −0.44 between
investment and labor income; when the BVAR with time-varying intercept terms and regimeswitching volatility, the estimated correlation is −0.50 between investment and consumption
and 0.14 between investment and labor income. If we set rank(R) = 2 (i.e., no cointegration is allowed) and allow for regime-switching volatility, the estimated correlation is 0.01
between investment and consumption and −0.33 between investment and labor income.
The government’s stimulation of investment after the 2008 financial crisis shows up as a
rapid run-up of the investment rate in 2009 in the trend movement; the stimulation has a
long-last impact on sustaining the high investment rate even after the government ceased
long-term credit expansions in 2011 (Figure 1). The high-volatility regime, characterized by
the smoothed posterior probability as displayed in the bottom row of Figure 4, reflects the
wild fluctuation of banks loans shown in Figure 3. After separating these short-lived high
volatilities from the general trend, the trend pattern is equally striking with the consumptionto-GDP ratio steadily declining and the investment-to-GDP ratio steadily rising. Both the
13While

the posterior mode is well estimated with our method, we still have not managed to obtain a
convergence of MCMC posterior draws to provide an informative posterior distribution.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

15

trend and cycle patterns uncovered here are robust findings not only from different BVAR
models but also from other empirical studies presented in the next section.
IV. Robust empirical evidence
In this section we verify robustness of the key facts uncovered in Section III. Given
how stark these findings are, it is essential to verify their robustness by other means. We
pursue this task in two ways. First, we cross-verify the previous findings using the annual
data. Second, we apply the HP filter to the relevant variables to verify the cyclical patterns
previously obtained.
The trend patterns, reported in Figure 1, are confirmed by the raw annual data displayed
in Figure 5. Since the late 1990s, household consumption as a share of GDP has steadily
declined from 45% in 1997 to 35% in 2010 (the top left chart), while aggregate investment
(total business investment) has risen from 26% in 2000 to 36% in 2010 (the top right chart).14
This striking trend pattern is robust when we use the narrow definition of output as the sum
of household consumption and business investment (the two charts at the bottom). More
telling is the declining pattern of both household disposable personal income and labor
income as a share of GDP since 1997.15
With the annual data we are able to study the transition with the longer period that
covers the early years after the introduction of economic reforms in December 1978. The
left column of Figure 6 reports the time series of the moving 10-year-window correlations of
annual growth rates between household consumption (C) and gross fixed capital formation
(GFCF). There is a clear structural break after the early 1990s when the correlations have
declined to be extremely low or even negative. Such negative correlations after the mid 1990s
are more pronounced for the HP-filtered series, reported in the right column of Figure 6.
Note that for annual data we follow the analytical formula of Ravn and Uhlig (2002) by
setting the smoothing parameter value of the HP filter to 6.25 so that this value is most
compatible to the smoothing parameter value (1600) used for quarterly data.
The cyclical pattern uncovered in Section III supports a similar divergence between consumption on the one hand and investment and income on the other. This pattern is further
confirmed by various 10-year moving-window correlations of the HP-filtered annual data
as reported in Figure 7. First, the correlation between business investment and household
consumption is more negative than not across time with the 10-year moving window (the
first row of Figure 7). Second, the correlation of various household incomes with aggregate
investment has been either very low or negative (the second row of Figure 7). The correlations among various HP-filtered quarterly time series present a similar pattern in which
investment has either low or negative correlation with consumption as well as with labor
income (Table 5).
Household disposable income is the sum of household before-tax income and net transfers. In China, taxes and transfers play a minor role in explaining the correlation between
investment and disposable income because the correlation between investment and household before-tax income shows a similar pattern (the second row of Figure 7). For Western
14Total

business investment is gross fixed capital formation bar household investment.
series of “labor income” is obtained from the Flows of Funds. Alternatively one could construct
labor share of income by summing up “compensation of labor” across provinces and dividing by sum of
“GDP by income” across provinces, which has also declined since the late 1990s. There are, however, serious
data problems associated with this alternative measure because of large discrepancies between the national
value and the sum of provincial values. For discussions of other data problems, consult Bai and Qian (2009).
15The

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

16

economies, household disposable income is different from household labor income because
of interest payments and capital gains (household disposable income is the sum of labor
income, interest payments, realized capital gains, and net transfers). In China, however,
labor income is the main driving force of household disposable income. This fact explains
the similar pattern of the correlation of investment with labor income and with disposable
income (the second row of Figure 7).
The low or negative correlation between investment and labor income, alongside the negative correlation between investment and consumption, poses a challenging task for macroeconomic modeling. Standard macroeconomic models for explaining the negative correlation
of business investment and household consumption rely on intertemporal substitution of
household consumption. Except for an aggregate TFP shock, which moves investment and
consumption in the same direction, other shocks (such as preference, marginal efficiency of
investment, and financial constraint) may be able to generate a negative comovement of
investment and consumption, but they also generate a positive comovement between investment and labor income. For the Chinese economy, the government’s policy for stimulating
investment is typically through credit expansions, as shown in Figure 3. In the one-sector
model à la Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), for example, a credit expansion triggers demand for
investment and increases the interest rate. As a result, consumption in the current period
declines. An increase in investment, however, tends to increase household disposable income as well as savings. Thus one should expect not just positive but also strong correlation
between investment and household income. This is inconsistent with the fact presented in
Figure 7. The discussion in Section VIII.3 at the end of this paper provides examples of how
standard models cannot account for the key Chinese facts.
V. China in transition
Table 2 lists a number of major economic reforms. Out of these reforms we focus on the
two most important dimensions of the transition that are relevant to both our empirical
findings and our subsequent macroeconomic theory. One dimension, state-owned versus
privately-owned firms, has been extensively studied in the literature on China. The other
dimension, the heavy versus light sectors, is a new and enlightening angle that we argue is
most helpful to an understanding of trends and cycles in China’s aggregate economy.
V.1. SOEs vs. POEs. The Chinese economy has undergone two kinds of reforms in SOEs
simultaneously, the so-called “grasp the large and let go of the small.”. One transition is
privatization that allows many SOEs previously engaged in unproductive labor-intensive
industries to be privatized. This reform is the focus of the SSZ work. The other reform
is a gradual concentration of SOEs in large industries, such as petroleum, commodities,
electricity, water, and gas. We use disaggregated data on two-digit industries to quantify
this reform. Table 6 lists the 39 two-digit industries. For each industry we obtain the value
added, gross output, fixed investment, the capital stock, employment, and the share of SOEs
from the NBS data source. We then compute the capital-labor ratio for each industry to
measure the capital intensity. We also compute the weight of each industry by value added
or by gross output if the value added is unavailable. Table 7 reports the weight and the rank
by capital intensity for each of the all 39 industries for 1999, 2006, and 2011.16 Those years
give us an informative picture of how the SOE reforms took place from 1999 to 2011; and
16Since

the sixth industry “Mining of Other Ores” receives almost zero weight in value added or gross
output, there are effectively 38 active industries.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

17

Tables 6 and 7 are used in conjunction with Figures 8, 9, and 10 to add understanding of the
outcome of SOE reforms. In all these three figures, the left column of each figure displays
the SOE share for each industry and the bars are sorted from the most capital-intensive
industry (the highest capital-labor ratio) on the top to the least capital-intensive industry
(the lowest capital-labor ratio) at the bottom. The right column of each figure plots the
SOE share against the capital intensity for each industry.
The rank of industries by capital intensity changes over time (Table 7), but this change is
not only gradual but also minimal. Indeed, the rank correlations between 1999, 2006, and
2011 are all above 0.93. The SOE share, however, has undergone a significant change. In
1999 many SOEs engaged in labor-intensive industries; in 2006 fewer SOEs engaged in those
industries; and in 2011 even fewer SOEs engaged. Take “Manufacture of General Purpose
Machinery” (the industry identifier 29 in Table 6) as an example.17 In 1999 the SOE share
was over 60% (the bar chart in Figure 8); in 2006 the SOE share dropped to 25% (the bar
chart in Figure 9); and in 2011 the SOE share dropped even further to less than 20% (the bar
chart in Figure 10). This trend is confirmed by the aggregate data displayed in Figure 11.
The figure shows that the SOE share of total business investment has declined while the
POE share has increased.
This pattern of change in SOE reforms is consistent with the fact that the SOE sector
has become more productive over time by shedding unproductive small firms through privatization. As documented by Hsieh and Song (2015), the gap between the average TFP in
privatized firms (i.e., state-owned in 1998 and privately owned in 2007) and the average TFP
in surviving privately owned firms (i.e., privately owned in 1998 and in 2007) had narrowed
from 1998 to 2007. For the same period, the TFP gap between surviving SOEs (i.e., stateowned in 1998 and in 2007) or newly entered SOEs and surviving privately owned firms had
also narrowed. Of course, the definition of what constitutes a SOE is crucial. Hsieh and
Song (2015) provide a careful analysis and argue that simply using the firm’s legal registration as state owned is inaccurate. They propose to “define a firm as state-owned when the
share of registered capital held directly by the state exceeds or equals 50 percent or when
the state is reported as the controlling shareholder.” Even within the SOE sector, there is
a degree to which a firm is controlled by the state, depending on the actual share of capital
owned by the sate. Nonetheless, Hsieh and Song (2015) find that the SOE share of total
revenue, calculated according to their definition, is close to the official aggregate data in
the China’s Statistical Yearbooks from 1998 to 2007 published by the NBS.18 Different SOE
definitions notwithstanding, a robust finding is that privatization appears to be a critical
factor in driving TFP growth of the SOE sector. As the SOE sector continues to reform19,
this reallocation from SOEs to POEs through privatization will persist. Despite Hsieh and
17Our

evidence indicates that this industry is labor intensive. In Table 11, we classify 17 broad sectors
according to their respective labor income shares. According to that classification, the sector “Machinery
Equipment” belongs to the labor-intensive sector.
18The SOE definition we use for Figure 11 is consistent with the NBS’s official definition except a fraction
of limited liability companies (LLCs) excluding “state sole proprietors” should have been classified as SOE
according to the China’s Statistical Yearbooks’s definition of “State Owned & Holding” (Higgins and Zha,
2015). Note that LLCs excluding “state sole proprietors” in the series of fixed-asset investment are not further
partitioned. For the disaggregate data on the two-digit industries, we use the NBS’s official definition of
SOE.
19For informative reading, see the recent article “State-owned enterprises: fixing China Inc” in the 30
August 2014 issue of the Economist.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

18

Song (2015)’s finding that the average TFP of surviving SOEs had grown faster than the
average TFP of surviving POEs, such reallocation gain is largely responsible for the continuing decline both in the SOE share of investment (Figure 11) and in the state-owned share
of industrial revenues as reported in the China’s Statistical Yearbooks (Figure 12).
V.2. Heavy vs. light sectors. Although discussions around the role of SOEs have dominated the literature on China’s economy, the SOE-POE classification does not naturally lead
up to an explanation of the steady rise of investment as a share of total output (Fact T1).
This point is elaborated further in the context of our theoretical model in Section VI.
We place instead an emphasis on studying two distinct sectors: the heavy and light sectors.
This shift of focus marks a major departure of our approach from the standard approach
in the literature on China and affords a fruitful and tractable way of analyzing the Chinese
aggregate economy; and it helps avoid the seemingly contradicting fact that the SOE investment share has declined over time but at the same time the SOE TFP has grown faster than
the POE counterpart.
The gradual concentration of large firms or industries in the heavy sector has taken place
since the late 1990s. In March 1996, the Eighth National People’s Congress passed the National Economic and Social Development and Ninth Five-Year Program: Vision and Goals
for 2010, prepared by the State Council (see the bold, italic line in Table 2). This program
was the first medium and long term plan made after China switched to the market economy;
it set up the policy goal to adjust the industrial structure for the next 15 years. Specifically, it
urged continuation of strengthening the infrastructure (transportation, telecommunication—
information transmission) and basic industries (electricity, coal, petroleum process, natural
gas, smelting and pressing of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, chemical industry), boosting
pillar industries (electrical machinery, petroleum process, automobile, real estate), and invigorating and actively developing the tertiary industry. Most of these industries belong to
the heavy sector as illustrated in Section VIII.2.3. Indeed, the revenue ratio of the heavy
sector to the light sector began to increase in 1996.
Our own analysis of disaggregate data reinforces this finding. On the right column of each
figure from Figure 8 to 10, we mark the top-10 value-weighted industries with dark circles
and fit the quadratic curve through these dark circles. In 1999 four of those industries
were capital intensive (i.e., the capital-labor ratio is above 20, Figure 8); by 2011 not only
more of the top-10 industries became capital intensive but also the ratio of capital to labor
increased for these large industries (Figure 10). Large industries became more and more
capital intensive during this transition.
Indeed, the reallocation of resources between heavy and light sectors has a profound effect
on the upward trend of the overall investment rate. The NBS provides the time series of
gross output, value added, and investment for the heavy and light sectors within the broad
secondary industry bar the construction sector (we compute investment as the first difference
of the gross value of fixed assets). The reallocation (between-sector) effect, relative to the
sector-specific (within-sector) effect, on the overall investment rate is calculated as
īl Ptl Ytl + īk Ptk Ytk ilt P l Y l + ikt P k Y k
−
,
Ptl Ytl + Ptk Ytk
P lY l + P kY k
where Ptl Ytl is value added or gross output for the light sector, Ptk Ytk for the heavy sector, ilt is
the investment rate for the light sector, and ikt for the heavy industry. The bar line over each
of the variables indicates the sample mean. The series for value added ends in 2007 and there

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

19

is no published data from the NBS for later years. The relative reallocation effect between
1997 and 2007 is an increase of 16.8 percentage points. For the series of gross output, the
relative reallocation effect between 1997 and 2011 is an increase of 11.1 percentage points.20
These findings provide solid evidence about the importance of a between-sector contribution
to the rise of the investment rate discussed in Sections III.4 and IV and displayed in Figures 1
and 5. In Section VIII.2.4 we discuss further the evolution of heavy vs. light sectors in
connection with how each sector is financed.
Firms in the heavy sector are a mix of SOEs and POEs (especially large POEs). According
to the 2012 report “Survey of Chinese Top 500 Private Enterprises” published by China’s
National Federation of Economic Ministry, there has been a trend for more large private
firms (whose sales are all above 500 million RMB) to engage in heavy industries, partly
because these activities are supported by the state. For instance, in 2007 there were only
36 large firms in the ferrous metal and processing industries; by 2011 there were 65 large
firms; in 2007 there only 6 large firms in the industries of petroleum processing, coking, and
nuclear fuel processing; by 2011 the number more than doubled. Indeed, out of 345 largest
private firms in 2010, 64 were in the ferrous metal and processing industries (constituting
the single largest fraction of all these large firms) while 54 were in the wholesale and retail
trade industries.
As China’s economic reforms deepen, the government no longer adheres to the practice
of favoring SOEs and bias against POEs. As long as firms help boost growth of the local
economy and create tax revenues, the local government would support them. Medium and
long term bank loans treat large firms symmetrically no matter whether they are SOEs or
POEs; labor-intensive firms, most of which tending to be small, have a difficult time to obtain
loans, especially in the last ten years. One of the main reasons for heavy-industry firms to
gain easy access to bank loans is the firms’ ability to use their fixed assets for collateralizing
the loans. This feature is built in our theoretical model.
Evidence shows that the labor-intensive sector is more productive than the capital-intensive
sector. Using the dataset of manufacturing firms by bridging the Annual Surveys of Industrial Enterprises and the Database for Chinese Customs from 2000 to 2006, Ju, Lin, Liu, and
Shi (2015) calculate the TFP growth rates for the import and export sectors, using both the
Olley and Pakes (1996) method and the standard OLS method. In China, the export sector
is much more labor intensive than the import sector. Ju, Lin, Liu, and Shi (2015) find that
TFP growth in the export sector was higher than that in the import sector for the period
from 2000 and 2006. More direct evidence comes from the careful study by Chen, Jefferson,
and Zhang (2011) and Huang, Ju, and Yue (2015). Chen, Jefferson, and Zhang (2011) use
the disaggregate data of 2-digit industries to document that the TFP in the light sector grew
faster than that in the heavy sector.21 Using the Chinese Annual Industrial Survey between
20For

this calculation we adjust the average investment rate within the secondary sector bar the construction industry to match the average investment rate for the whole economy for the sample from 1997 to 2011.
The investment rate for the whole economy is measured as the ratio of total business investment to GDP
by expenditure. The NBS also provides the input-output tables that contain the series of output and the
survey data that contain the series of labor compensation for each of 17 sectors covering the whole economy,
but the investment series is not measured in accordance with our purpose. For each of the 17 sectors, the
value of gross fixed capital formation is calculated according to how much of the goods produced by industry
A is used for the production in industry B. If the output of the food industry is not used for the production
of other industries, for example, investment in that industry receives the zero entry.
21According to their estimates, the result holds for labor-augmented TFP growth rates as well. Such a
result does not necessarily contradict the findings of Hsieh and Song (2015) because privatized firms have

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

20

1999 and 2007, Huang, Ju, and Yue (2015) show that technology improved significantly in
favor of more labor-intensive industries. To the extent that estimated TFP growth rates
across different sectors are debatable, there is well-established evidence that the TFP level
in the light sector is higher than that in the heavy sector. Nonetheless our benchmark model
does not rely on any TFP assumption.
Despite the fact that the light sector is more productive than the heavy sector, the government has since 1997 abided by the Strategic Plan passed by the Eighth National People’s
Congress. Because a significant part of the heavy sector is comprised of large firms that
possess an strategic importance to the state, the government assigns lending priorities to
this sector. It is this unique institutional arrangement that forms a building block for development of our theoretical model.
V.3. Aggregate economy. Figure 6 shows the sharp break in the correlation between
investment and consumption fluctuations since the late 1990s. This stark picture is not an
accident. It is a consequence of both banking reforms in 1995 and a new government policy
in promoting heavy industries started in 1996. Such preferential credit policy toward heavy
industries also generated the sharp trend change in the consumption-output and investmentoutput ratios (Figure 5).
How important is the rise of the investment-output ratio to GDP growth? Table 8 reports
the contribution of capital deepening and TFP growth to the GDP growth rate for various
periods, where GDP is measured by value added. Capital deepening accounts for a majority of GDP growth, especially since 1998.22 Clearly, this investment-driven growth has its
negative consequences on consumption and labor income, which has caused concerns of the
Chinese government.
China’s capital deepening has its own unique characteristics when compared to other
East Asian newly industrializing countries (NICs) studied by Young (1995) and Fernald and
Neiman (2011). Figure 13 displays the consumption-output ratio, the investment-output
ratio, and the labor share of income for the four NICs: Korea, Japan, Singapore, and
Taiwan. The overall correlation between the labor income share and the investment rate is
positive for Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan and negative for Japan. For the early years when
the investment-output ratio rose, the correlation is almost zero for Japan and positive for
Korea and Taiwan. The CEIC does not have the labor share data for Singapore in those
early years, but Young (1995) reports that the labor share series were essentially flat. China
is different: the labor share of income declined when the investment-output ratio rose as
shown in Figure 5.
Another unique feature of China is the divergence between the rising investment rate and
the diminishing ability to export capital-intensive goods as China moved toward a stage of
heavy industrialization. Romalis (2004) finds that as other East Asian NICs (e.g. Korea,
Singapore, Taiwan) accumulated physical capital, their export structure also moved toward
capital-intensive goods (the so-called “quasi-Rybczynski” effect in the international trade
literature). Ventura (1997) shows how a small open economy can sustain rapid growth
without a diminishing marginal product of capital by exporting capital-intensive goods.
The disaggregate evidence of China, however, suggests the pattern opposite to other East
proven to be very productive and there has been a trend for the largest private firms to engage in heavy
industries prioritized by the National People’s Congress.
22We compute the contribution from 1998 and 2007 to compare to a similar finding by Brandt and Zhu
(2010). The difference in exact numbers is probably due to different vintage data.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

21

Asian NICs. Between 1999 and 2007, according to Huang, Ju, and Yue (2015), laborintensive firms increased their export shares and capital-intensive firms reduced their export
share; and at the same time the capital intensity of export firms was reduced. All these
reallocations occurred despite the fact that aggregate investment rate increased steadily
during that period. Such a divergent pattern is at odds with the existing theory that explains
a persistent increase in the investment rate among East Asian NICs based on the country’s
ability to export capital-intensive goods (e.g. Ventura (1997)). But the pattern, as we have
argued, is rooted in the macro policy of China via the special credit channel under which
firms in the heavy sector, instead of those in the light sector (constituting the bulk of the
export sector), enjoy preferential access to bank credits.
VI. The theoretical framework
In this section we build a theoretical model that is tractable for understanding its mechanism but rich enough for capturing the salient facts presented in the preceding sections.
VI.1. Environment. The economy is populated by two-period lived agents with overlapping generations (OLGs).23 Agents work when young and consume their savings when old.
Agents have heterogeneous skills. In each cohort, half of the population consists of workers without entrepreneurial skills and the other half is composed of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurial skills are inherited from parents. Without loss of generality we do not allow
switching between social classes.
VI.2. Technology. There are two production sectors of intermediate goods and hence two
types of firms. The key feature of our model is that these two production sectors differ in
capital intensity and especially their access to bank loans. The first sector is composed of
firms that are endowed with capital-intensive technology. We call these firms “K-firms,”
which stands for capital-intensive. Remember that the heavy sector is more capital intensive
that the light sector.
The second sector is a newly emerging private sector composed of productive firms. We
call these firms “L-firms” that are labor-intensive. The firms are managed and operated
by entrepreneurs. Specifically, L-firms are owned by old entrepreneurs, who hire their own
children as managers, are residual claimants on profits, and consume all the profits.
Technologies for both types of firms have constant returns to scale:
α
Ytk = Ktk , Ytl = Ktl (χLt )1−α ,
where Ytj and Ktj denote per capita output and the capital stock for the type-j firm, j ∈
{k, l}. The superscript k stands for “capital-intensive” and l for “labor-intensive.” Lt denotes
the labor demand by labor-intensive firms. The parameter χ > 1 captures the assumption
that L-firms are more productive than K-firms, as supported by the analysis in Section V.2.
The results implied by our benchmark model, however, do not reply on this assumption.
This assumption is used only for the purpose of measuring the effects of misallocation of
resources between the two sectors.
The production of final goods is a CES aggregator of the above two intermediate goods:
σ
h
i σ−1
 σ−1
 σ−1
k
l
σ
σ
Yt = ϕ Yt
+ Yt
.
23While

one can extend it to the economy with multiple-period-lived agents, one may lose both tractability
and intuition.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

22

The perfect competition in the final goods market implies the following first-order condition
σ

Ytk
Ptl
= ϕ k
,
(6)
Ytl
Pt
where Ptk is the price of the intermediate goods Ytk , and Ptl is the price of the intermediate
goods Ytl . Normalizing the final-goods price to one and using the zero-profit condition for
final goods, we have
1
h
1−σ
1−σ i 1−σ
+ Ptl
ϕσ Ptk
= 1.
(7)
VI.3. K-firms’ problem. Each K-firm lives for one period only, an assumption that can
be relaxed. At the beginning of each period, new born K-firms receive net worth Nt from
the government. K-firms can borrow from the representative financial intermediary at a
fixed interest rate (R) to finance investment in capital. K-firms, however, could default on
loan payments and receive a fraction of output, (1 − θt )Ptk Ytk . The time-varying parameter
θt reflects the changing loan quota targeted by the government. A higher value of θt implies an increase of the targeted loan quota whose payment is implicitly guaranteed by the
government. The incentive-compatibility constraint for the K-firm is

Ptk Ktk − R Ktk − Nt ≥ (1 − θt ) Ptk Ktk .
(8)
The problem of the K-firm is

Πkt ≡ maxPtk Ktk − R Ktk − Nt + (1 − δ) Ktk
Ktk

subject to (8). Denote the investment loan to the K-firm by Btk = Ktk − Nt . At the end of
the period, the K-firm turns in its gross profit (which includes (1 − δ)Ktk ) to the government
and dies.24
It is straightforward to show that for the financial constraint to bind, the following inequality must hold
θt Ptk < R < Ptk .
The first inequality is necessary; otherwise, the incentive-compatibility constraint for the Kfirm never binds in equilibrium, even when Nt = 0. The second inequality holds because it is
always profitable for K-firms to expand the production until the financial constraint binds.
If the financial constraint is not binding, (8) implies that the demand for capital satisfies
the condition Ktk ≤ Nt / (1 − θt ) with R = Ptk . If, on the other hand, Ktk > Nt / (1 − θt ), the
financial constraint must bind. With the binding constraint, we obtain from (8)
Ktk =

R
Nt .
R − θt Ptk

(9)

Accordingly, the amount borrowed by the K-firm is
Btk =
24Alternatively

θt Ptk
Nt .
R − θt Ptk

(10)

one can assume that K-firms may exist forever but with a certain surviving rate to prevent
the accumulated net worth Nt from growing so large that the collateral constraint (8) is no longer binding.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

23

VI.4. L-firms’ problem. Before production takes place, L-firms must finance their working
capital from intratemporal (short-term) bank loans. For simplicity, we assume that L-firms
can borrow working-capital loans freely from the bank. L-firms, however, have no access
to intertemporal (long-term) bank loans to fund its fixed investment and must self-finance
it through their own savings. We leave to Section VIII.2.4 the discussion of how these
assumptions are consistent with China’s disaggregated banking data.
Following SSZ, we assume that the old entrepreneur pays the young entrepreneur a manα
agement fee as a fixed fraction of output produced, mt = ψPtl Ktl (χLt )1−α , where ψ < 1.25
Therefore the old entrepreneur’s problem becomes
α
Πlt ≡ maxPtl (1 − ψ) Ktl (χLt )1−α − Rtl wt Lt + (1 − δ) Ktl ,
(11)
Lt

where Rtl is the loan rate on the working capital wt Lt . Note that old entrepreneurs do not
choose Ktl because, as shown below, it is determined when they are young.
The first-order condition gives
α
(1 − ψ) (1 − α) Ptl Ktl /Lt (χ)1−α = Rtl wt .
(12)
The gross return to the L-firm’s capital is
ρlt ≡ Πlt /Ktl = (1 − ψ) αPtl Ktl /Lt

α−1

(χ)1−α + 1 − δ.

(13)

The young entrepreneur’s problem is to decide on consumption and a portfolio allocation
between bank deposits and physical capital investment. Since the rate of return to capital
investment is ρlt+1 and ρl > R in steady state, the young entrepreneur always prefers investing
in capital to depositing in the bank. Specifically, the young entrepreneur’s consumptionsaving problem is
1− γ1
 1
l
E 1− γ
m t − sE
ρ
s
t
max
+ βEt t+1 t 1
.
1
1
−
1− γ
sE
t
γ
First-order conditions determine the optimal saving of young entrepreneurs:

1−γ 
−γ
l
sE
=
m
/
1
+
β
E
ρ
.
t
t
t
t+1
l
Since sE
t = Kt+1 , the law of motion for the L-firm’s capital becomes
l
Kt+1
=

ψ
1+

β −γ E

l
t ρt+1

l
l
1−γ Pt Kt

α

(χLt )1−α .

(14)

VI.5. Workers’ problem. Workers deposit their savings into the representative bank and
earn the fixed interest rate R. Workers cannot lend directly to K-firms or L-firms. This
assumption is consistent with the fact that the banking sector in China plays a key role in
intermediating business loans.
25SSZ

provide a microfoundation for the young entrepreneur’s management fee as a fixed fraction of
output as follows. There exists an agency problem between the manager and the owner of the business. The
manager can divert a positive share of the firm’s output for her own use. Such opportunistic behavior can
be deterred only by paying managers a compensation that is at least as large as the funds they could steal,
which is a share of output. An alternative setup is for parents to leave voluntary bequests to their children,
who in turn would invest in the family firm.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

24

The worker’s consumption-saving problem is
1− γ1
1− γ1
cw
(cw
2t+1
1t )
max
1 +β
w
cw
1 − γ1
1t ,c2t+1 1 − γ
subject to
w
cw
= wt ,
1t + st
w
cw
2t+1 = st R,
w
w
where wt is the market wage rate; cw
1t , c2t+1 , and st denote consumption when young, consumption when old, and the worker’s savings.

VI.6. The bank’s problem. Each period the bank receives deposits Dt from young workers and uses these deposits for intertemporal (long-term) loans to K-firms’ investment and
intratemporal (short-term) loans to L-firms’s working capital. The bank’s interest rate for
investment loans is simply R, but the loan rate for working capital is Rtl . The bank is subject
to a convex cost of loan processing, C (Bt ), which increases in the total amount of loans,
denoted as Bt ≡ Btl + Btk . Specifically, C (Bt ) = Btη for η > 1. Remaining deposits, invested
in foreign bonds, earn the interest rate R.
The convex cost of loan processing is discussed in Cúrdia and Woodford (2010). For
China, this assumption is more pertinent because various legislative or implicit restrictions
on bank loans to small but productive firms become more severe as the loan-to-deposit
ratio approaches to the official limit, making loans to productive firms exceedingly expensive
(Zhou and Ren, 2010).26 Since bank loans to enterprises with large asset values are always
given priority in China, we assume that that the bank always meets K-firms’ demand for
investment loans prior to lending to L-firms. The bank’s problem is therefore
Πbt = Max Rtl Btl + RBtk + R(Dt − Btk ) − RDt − C (Bt ) − Btl .
Btl

l
In equilibrium, Dt = sw
t Lt and Bt = wt Lt . The first-order condition

Rtl = 1 + C 0 (Bt )

(15)

reveals that the loan rate for working capital increases with the total amount of loans.
VI.7. The government’s problem. The government lasts forever. At the end of each
period, the government decides on how much of its revenues to be advanced to new-born
K-firms as net worth in the beginning of the next period. For simplicity we assume that
Nt+1 advanced to new-born K-firms is a fraction of K-firms’ capital stock at the end of the
current period, i.e.,
Nt+1 = ξKtk ,
(16)
where 0 ≤ ξ ≤ 1. A combination of (9) and (16) gives the law of motion for the K-firm’s net
worth
Rξ
Nt+1 =
Nt .
(17)
R − θt Ptk
The government’s budget constraint is
G
Bt+1
+ Nt+1 = Πkt + Πbt + RBtG ,
26Reports

from various Chinese financial papers confirm these institutional arrangements.

(18)

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

25

where BtG is the beginning-of-period government assets invested in foreign bonds, with the
fixed interest rate R.
VI.8. Equilibrium conditions. The equilibrium conditions are listed as follows.

1
(1 − ψ) (1 − α) Ptl χ α l
1 = Lt =
Kt /χ,
Rtl wt
Πlt = ρlt Ktl ,
ρlt = (1 − ψ) αPtl Ktl

α−1

χ1−α + 1 − δ,

Rtl = 1 + C 0 (Bt ) ,

Πkt = Ptk Ktk − R Ktk − Nt + (1 − δ) Ktk ,

= Rtl − 1 Btl − C (Bt ) ,
ΠB
t
α
mt = ψPtl Ktl (χLt )1−α ,

1−γ 
−γ
l
sE
=
m
/
1
+
β
E
ρ
,
t
t t+1
t
E
E
l E
cE
1t = mt − st , c2t = ρt st−1 ,

Btk = Ktk − Nt ,
Btl = wt Lt ,
Nt+1 = ξKtk ,
σ
i σ−1
h
 σ−1
 σ−1
k
l
σ
σ
Yt = ϕ Yt
+ Yt
,
Ytk = Ktk ,
α
Ktl (χLt )1−α ,
h

 i 1
σ
k 1−σ
l 1−σ 1−σ
,
1 = ϕ Pt
+ Pt

Ytl =

R
Nt ,
R − θt Ptk
= Πkt + Πbt + RBtG − Nt+1 ,
 1
Ptk Ytl σ
=
,
ϕ Ytk

= wt / 1 + β −γ R1−γ ,

Ktk =
G
Bt+1

Ptl
sw
t

w
w
w
cw
1t = wt − st , c2t = st R,
k
Btw = sw
t − Bt .

Combining the budget constraints of households, entrepreneurs, and the government, we
obtain the following resource constraints

Ct + It + Stf = GNPt = Yt − C (Bt ) + (R − 1) Btw + BtG ,
(19)
where Stf stands for a current account or foreign surplus and
w
E
E
C t = cw
1t + c2t + c1t + c2t ,

It = Kt+1 − (1 − δ) Kt ,
Kt = Ktk + Ktl ,

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

26


w
G
Stf = Bt+1
+ Bt+1
− Btw + BtG .
VII. Characterizing the equilibrium
In this section we characterize the equilibrium. We first discuss the parameter restrictions
for the capital-intensive sector’s collateral constraint to bind at steady state. We then
discuss the model’s implication on a foreign surplus. We end the section by analyzing the
determinants of the investment rate and the share of labor income during the transition.
VII.1. Steady state. In steady state, all aggregate variables are constant. We consider the
case that the borrowing constraint for the K-firm is binding at steady state. Note that
R
(1 − ξ) ,
θ
P k θ < R.

Pk =

For the collateral constraint to bind, i.e R < P k , it must be
1 − ξ > θ.

(20)

Intuitively, the smaller θ is, the stronger the firm’s default incentive is, and thus the more
binding the collateral constraint is. Similarly, the smaller ξ is, the slower the net worth
accumulates, and the more binding the collateral constraint becomes. Condition (20) implies
that the collateral constraint always binds along the transition path. It is, therefor, always
profitable for K-firms to borrow up to the maximum to expand their production.
VII.2. A growing foreign surplus. Tables 3 and 4 show that net exports since 1997 has
become large in comparison to earlier periods. A large current account surplus, part of the
emphasis in SSZ, is a byproduct of our model but with a different mechanism. To see this
result, we begin with workers’ purchases of foreign bonds denoted as
k
Btw = sw
t − (Kt − Nt ),

where Ktk − Nt is workers’ savings used for domestic capital investment. The net foreign
surplus as a fraction of GDP is
w
G
Bt+1
+ Bt+1
− (Btw + BtG )
.
Yt − C (Bt )
w
Two forces drive up the net foreign surplus: households’ savings in foreign bonds (Bt+1
−Btw )
G
and the government’s savings in foreign reserves (Bt+1
− BtG ). In China, the difference
between savings and investment (GFCF) as percent of GDP by expenditure reached its
peak at 9.48% in 2007 and declined to 0.69% in 2012. Although household savings is still the
main component of national savings, its growth is much slower than that of the government’s
savings between 2000 and 2012. According to our calculation based on the NBS annual data,
government savings as percent of GDP increased by seven percentage points between 2000
and 2012, contributing to 63.90% of an increase of 11 percentage points in the national saving
rate during this period (from 37.47% to 48.43%). In our model, the worker’s saving rate is
constant and all entrepreneurial savings is used to finance investment in the labor-intensive
sector. As a result, most of the increase in the national saving rate and thus the net foreign
surplus are driven by an increase in government savings, consistent with the aforementioned
fact for China.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

27

VII.3. Key transition paths. We are interested in the dynamic paths of (a) the investment
rate, measured as the ratio of aggregate investment to aggregate output, and (b) the share
of labor income, measured as the ratio of wage income to aggregate output. For tractability
j
we set θt = θ and assume the complete capital depreciation (i.e. δ = 1) such that Itj = Kt+1
27
for j ∈ {k, l} . In our two-sector model, the investment rate can be decomposed as
Itk Ptk Ytk
Itl Ptl Ytl
It
= k k
+ l l
.
Yt
Pt Yt Yt
Pt Yt Yt

(21)

In our model, dynamic paths of the investment rate depend on two channels: the reallocation
(between-sector) effect and the sector-specific (within-sector) effect. If the investment rate in
the capital-intensive sector is higher than the investment rate in the labor-intensive sector,
reallocation of resources from the labor-intensive sector to the capital-intensive sector tends
to increase the investment rate (the reallocation effect). Given the ratio of revenue in the
capital-intensive sector to that in the labor-intensive sector, a change in the investment
rate in the capital-intensive sector tends to move the aggregate investment rate in the same
direction (the sector-specific effect).28
The other key object is the share of labor income in total output:
wt Lt
(1 − ψ) (1 − α)
.
=
Yt
1 + Ptk Ytk / Ptl Ytl

(22)

Equation (22) indicates that an increase in the ratio of revenue in the capital-intensive sector
to that in the labor-intensive sector reduces the share of labor income.29
In summary, an increase in the ratio of revenue in the capital-intensive sector to that in
the labor-intensive sector tends to raise the investment rate and reduce the share of labor
income simultaneously, as we observe in the data discussed in Sections V.2 and VIII.2. Such
a trend pattern, as argued below, is driven by the increasing borrowing capacity of the
capital-intensive sector.
We now establish the following proportion about the ratio of revenue in the capitalintensive sector to that in the labor-intensive sector during the transition.
Proposition 1. Given that σ > 1, during the transition the ratio of revenue in the capitalintensive sector to that in the labor-intensive sector increases monotonically towards the
steady state.
Proof. The growth rate of the ratio of revenues in the two sectors can be expressed as


Ptk Ytk
Yk
1
∆ log l l = 1 −
∆ log t l .
(23)
σ
Pt Y t
Yt
27For

illustrative purposes we use Yt in the denominator in this section. The correct measurement of GDP
in our benchmark model, however, is Yt − C (Bt ), which we adopt in our numerical analysis below. Because
Bt increases over time, our results hold when the denominator is replaced by Yt − C (Bt ).
28Because of the complete capital depreciation, the investment rate in the labor-intensive sector is constant
when the risk-aversion parameter γ is set to one. Relaxing the assumption of full depreciation would predict
a declining investment rate in the labor intensive sector due to diminishing marginal returns to capital.
29Such a prediction holds in a general setup in which the capital-intensive sector also uses labor as an input,
as long as the share of labor income in the capital-intensive sector is less than that in the labor-intensive
sector.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Along the transition path, the output ratio of the two sector is
 
  1 σ
k 1−σ 1−σ
σ
Ytk  ϕ 1 − ϕ Pt

=
 .
Ytl
Ptk

28

(24)

Therefore, the ratio of output in the capital intensive sector to that in the labor intensive
sector moves in opposite direction to the relative price of capital-intensive goods. As net
worth of the capital-intensive sector increases, the collateral constraint becomes less binding,
which reduces the price of capital-intensive goods towards the first-best level R. Therefore,
l
the ratio Ytk /Y
 t increases monotonically during the transition path. Given σ > 1, the ratio
k k
l l
Pt Yt / Pt Yt increases along the transition path.

The intuition for the above proposition is as follows. Accumulation of net worth in the
capital-intensive sector expands the borrowing capacity and henceforth causes output in the
capital-intensive sector to grow faster than output in the labor-intensive sector. With the
elasticity of substitution greater than one, the ratio of revenue in the capital-intensive sector
to that in the labor-intensive sector increases along the transition.
Equation (23) is reminiscent of the finding of Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008). In a frictionless two-sector model with different capital intensities, their paper explores the impact of
capital deepening on the capital income share, and the efficient resource reallocation between
the two sectors. The focus of their paper, however, is on the U.S. economy, characterized
by a roughly constant labor income share and the increasing share of the labor-intensive
sector’s value in the long run as capital deepens. As a result, the elasticity of substitution
of less than one is needed to reconcile these facts. The observation on China’s two sectors
(elaborated in Sections V.2 and VIII.2.3) clearly indicates that the ratios of both revenues
and capital stocks in the capital-intensive and labor-intensive sectors increase while the share
of labor income declines with capital deepening, suggesting that the elasticity of substitution
of greater than one is consistent with the transition pattern of China’s macroeconomy.
More important is our finding that the dynamics of the aggregate investment rate along
the transition path depend on the source of capital deepening. In our benchmark model, the
source of capital deepening is endogenous and the extent to which capital deepens increases
with the borrowing capacity of the capital-intensive sector. Consequently, resources are reallocated from the labor-intensive sector to the capital-intensive sector. If the labor-intensive
sector is more productive than the capital-intensive sector, the reallocation is inefficient.
Such a mechanism, as we show in Section VIII, is crucial to explaining not only the trend
patterns but also the cyclical patterns of China. Without the borrowing constraint, our
economy would imply a declining aggregate investment rate and an increasing consumption
output ratio along the transition path, due to diminishing returns to capital in the laborintensive sector; and the economy would imply a positive comovement between investment
and labor income under various shocks as well as a positive comovement between long-term
and short-term loans.
VIII. Quantitative results and the mechanism
In this section we report quantitative results for both the transition paths, holding θ constant, and the impulse responses following an expansionary shock to θ. We then discuss the

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

29

mechanism in our model in the context of disaggregated data and further empirical findings. We conclude this section with counterfactual exercises to illustrate how the mechanism
works.
VIII.1. Trend and cyclical patterns. We set both the initial capital stock in the laborintensive sector and the initial net worth of the capital-intensive sector to values smaller than
the corresponding steady-state values. Moreover, the initial net worth of capital-intensive
firms is such that the capital-intensive sector’s collateral constraint binds in the initial period.
The specific configuration of parameter values is set in Table 9.
Figure 14 shows the simulated results. Along the transition path, we see that the consumptionoutput ratio experiences a secular decline, while the investment-output ratio increases steadily
after an initial fall.30 An increase in the investment rate is puzzling from the perspective
of neoclassical models. As Equation (21) suggests, the main channel for an increase in the
investment rate is the increase in the value of the capital-intensive sector relative to that of
the labor-intensive sector. In our model economy, the investment rate in the capital-intensive
sector is higher than its counterpart in the labor-intensive sector because of capital-intensive
firms’ ability to leverage against their net worth. When capital-intensive goods producers’
net worth increases, resources are reallocated towards the capital-intensive sector, measured
by an increasing share of revenues of capital-intensive firms in total output. As a result,
the aggregate investment rate tends to increase toward the steady state. The middle row of
Figure 14 shows that the ratio of investment loans to working-capital loans increases steadily
while the share of labor income declines, as we observe in the data. The last row of the figure
shows that the ratios of revenue and capital stock in the capital-intensive sector to those in
the labor-intensive sector increase steadily. These results are corroborated by the evidence
from the disaggregated data presented in Section VIII.2.4.
We now explore the impulse responses to an increase in the credit quota, that is, an
unexpected increase in θt . Figure 15 presents a set of impulses responses that are consistent
with the empirical findings discussed in previous and later sections. One can see that loans
to the capital-intensive sector (long-term loans) increase sharply on impact and the response
is persistent. The increase of long-term loans crowds out working-capital loans due to the
banking friction (the bottom row of Figure 15). As a result, aggregate investment increases,
while aggregate consumption decreases moderately (the first row of Figure 15). This outcome
leads to a hump-shaped increase in aggregate output. The decline of the wage rate and thus
labor income is caused by the crowding effect on the labor-intensive sector (the second row
of Figure 15).
VIII.2. Key mechanism and data corroboration. Along the transition path, as capitalintensive firms’ net worth increases, their borrowing capacity increases as well. With the
elasticity of substitution between the two sectors greater than one, the share of the capitalintensive sector’s revenue in total output increases along the transition path. Given that the
capital-intensive sector’s investment rate is higher than that of the labor-intensive sector,
such a resource reallocation leads to a higher aggregate investment rate. Meanwhile, the
share of labor income declines and the ratio of the capital stock in the capital-intensive
sector to that in the labor-intensive sector rises.
30The

aggregate investment rate falls initially because the investment rate in the capital-intensive sector
falls initially with the initial leverage ratio smaller than the leverage in later periods.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

30

Over the business cycle, if the government decides to increase the loan quota à la an
increase of θt , long-term credits to capital-intensive firms would expand. Equations (10) and
(15) then imply that an increase in the capital-intensive firm’s borrowing capacity exerts a
positive externality on the cost of working-capital loans for labor-intensive firms. According
to (12), an increase in Rtl reduces labor demand, thereby crowding out working-capital
loans and reducing wage income (the crowding-out effect). Thus, our theoretical model is
able to generate a negative correlation between investment and labor income, a negative
comovement of investment and consumption, and most importantly a negative comovement
of long-term and short-term loans. For similar reasons, such comovement patterns hold
during the economic transition (even without credit shocks) because capital-intensive firms’
net worth continues to rise.
VIII.2.1. Estimating the elasticity of substitution. The fall of the labor income share generated by our model economy depends crucially on the magnitude of the elasticity of substitution in the aggregate production function to be greater than 1. The value greater than one
accords with (a) the observed ratio of revenue in the capital-intensive sector to that in the
labor-intensive sector and (b) the observed comovement between the ratio of revenues in the
heavy and light sectors and the corresponding quantity ratio. Of course, one can directly
estimate this important parameter by deriving from (6) the following relationship between
the value ratio and the quantity ratio in the two sectors:
log

Ptk Ytk
σ−1
Ytk
=
log
ϕ
+
.
log
σ
Ptl Ytl
Ytl

(25)

The annual data for the value and quantity ratios in the heavy and light sectors are available
from 1996 to 2011. Following Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008), we first HP-filter both variables
in (25) with the smooth parameter being 6.25 and then regress the lefthand variable on the
righthand variable. The regression estimate of (σ − 1)/σ is 0.78 with the t-statistic 5.32,
implying that the estimate of σ is 4.53 and significantly greater than 1. To examine the
P kY k
extent to which this estimate is affected by the HP filter, we also regress ∆ log Ptl Ytl on
∆ log

Ytk
Ytl

t

t

by taking advantage of the relationship
∆ log

Ytk
Ptk Ytk
σ−1
=
∆
log
.
σ
Ptl Ytl
Ytl

(26)

The regression estimate of (σ − 1)/σ is 0.74 with the t-statistic 5.65. This implies that the
estimate of σ is 3.86 and it is significantly greater than 1.
There are two criticisms for this simple regression exercise. One is that the number of
data points is only 16. To address this criticism, we employ the monthly data for Ptk , Ptl ,
Ytk , and Ytl that are available from 2003:1 to 2012:5 (a total of 113 data points) when Ytk and
Ytl are measured by gross output and from 1996:10 to 2012:12 (a total of 195 data points)
when these variables are measured by sales. Running simple regressions on the HP-filtered
seasonally-adjusted series (with the smooth parameter being 129600) according to equation
(25) yields the estimate of σ being 1.38 for gross output and 1.92 for sales.
The second criticism, which is more serious, is that both variables in (25) or (26) are
endogenously determined. Thus, simple-regression results may be biased. To take account
of these criticisms and further establish the robustness of the result σ > 1, we model such a

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

31

simultaneous relationship explicitly with the following two-variable restricted VAR:
A0 yt = a +

p
X

A` yt−` + εt ,

`=1

where A0 is an unrestricted 2 × 2 matrix allowing for full endogeneity, a is a 2 × 1 vector of
intercept terms, εt is a 2 × 1 vector of independent standard-normal random shocks, and




h
i0
a0,11 a0,12
a`,11 a`,12
P kY k
Yk
A0 =
, A` =
, yt = log Ptl Ytl log Ytl .
(27)
t t
t
a0,21 a0,22
0
0
It follows from (25) and (27) that σ = a0,21 /(a0,21 + a0,22 ). By Theorems 1 and 3 of RubioRamı́rez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010), the simultaneous system (27) is globally identified
almost everywhere. We estimate this model with p = 13.31 Likelihood-based estimation
of system (27) is analogous to utilizing a large number of lagged variables as instrumental
variables (Sims, 2000).
The monthly data for gross output gives us 100 data points (excluding all the lagged
variables)—a respectable degrees of freedom for estimation. We use the MCMC method
of Zha (1999) and Sims and Zha (1999) to obtain maximum-likelihood estimation of the
VAR parameters as well as the 68% and 95% posterior probability intervals of the estimated
parameter σ, as reported in Table 10. Estimation results are robust to whether we first
seasonally-adjust the four monthly data Ptk , Ptl , Ytk , and Ytl or we do not adjust theses series
seasonally. Because the estimation applies to the value and quantity ratios, the seasonality is
largely eliminated. The estimate of σ is 2.32 for seasonally-adjusted monthly data and 2.15
for original monthly data. The probability intervals are very tight around these estimates.
None of the million MCMC simulations we have generated gives the value of σ that comes
even close to being less than or equal to 1.32
The robustness of our advanced estimation method is further tested by applying the
method to the alternative relationship
log

Ptk Ytk
Ptk
=
σ
log
ϕ
+
(1
−
σ)
log
.
Ptl Ytl
Ptl

Thus, the system represented by (27) becomes




h
i0
a0,11 a0,12
a`,11 a`,12
P kY k
Pk
A0 =
, A` =
, yt = log Ptl Ytl log Ptl .
t t
t
a0,21 a0,22
0
0

(28)

(29)

One can show that the estimation result for σ is invariant to whether system (27) or (29)
is used. The invariance is confirmed by our MCMC simulations. This robust result is
critical because the invariance property breaks down when one estimates this alternative
relationship via simple regressions or swaps the lefthand variable and the righthand variable
in the regression. We recommend that the estimated results reported in Table 10 be used.
31The

quantity Ytk or Ytl is measured by gross output. The lag length 13, instead of 12, is used to take
account of any residual seasonality. Estimation results are robust to a choice of lag length.
32As a robust check we also apply our estimation method to the monthly data in which the quantity and
revenue are measured by sales in each of the heavy and light industries. Again, all of the posterior draws
deliver the robust result that σ > 1.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

32

VIII.2.2. Relative prices of investment. In a recent paper, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)
argue for the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor to be greater than 1 to
explain the decline of labor income share. Their model requires that the relative price of
investment declines simultaneously. Our model economy for China does not rest on the
decline of the relative price of investment to explain the decline of labor income share.
Specifically, the relative price is assumed to be flat so that it does not play a dominant role
in explaining either trend or cyclical facts.33 This feature marks a major departure of our
model from the standard model so as to account explicitly for Chinese unique characteristics
in which we establish, below, a robust finding that there is weak or little relationship between
the labor income share and the relative price of investment in China.
Figure 16 displays various measures of relative prices of investment goods to consumption
goods following Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014). In the top chart of the figure, we use two
investment price series and two consumption price seres. The investment price series are the
price indices for fixed-asset investment (FAI) and gross fixed-asset capital formation (GFCF);
the consumption price series are CPI and the price index for the retail sales of consumer
goods. As one can see from these various measures, the relative price of investment since
1997 has either increased or stayed flat. This pattern is robust to other measures of the
relative price of investment. In the bottom chart of Figure 16, we report the two other data
sources used by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014): the PWT measure (Penn World Tables)
and the WDI measure (World Bank’s World Development Indices). Both measures use the
price of GFCF. The PWT price index of consumption is the purchasing-power-parity (PPP)
price of consumption that is suitably adjusted by the exchange rate. The PWT price index
of investment is adjusted by the PPP in the same way. The WDI price index of consumption
is the price of retail sales of consumer goods. As evident in this chart, the relative price of
investment has been increasing or flat since 1997.34
VIII.2.3. Between-sector contribution to the labor share decline. The assumption of two sectors in our model accords with the fact that the between-sector contribution to the aggregate
labor-share decline is empirically significant for the Chinese economy. The disaggregated data
we use are the surveys from 1995 to 2010 of the 17 disaggregated sectors (sub-sectors), published by the NBS in years ending with 0, 2, 5, and 7. This dataset contains four variables:
labor income (remuneration of employees), net production tax, profits (operational surplus),
and depreciation of fixed assets. The value added of each disaggregated sector is calculated
as the sum of these four variables.35 Table 11 ranks the 17 detailed sectors according to the
33In

fact, our results hold both along the transition path and in dynamic responses to a positive credit
shock, even if we expand our benchmark model to an economy either with decreasing relative prices of
investment to reflect technological advances in the production of investment goods or with endogenously
increasing relative prices of investment goods due to a fixed input (e.g., land) in the production, .
34Hsieh and Klenow (2007) find that for poor countries, the relative price of investment measured by the
domestic price tends to be larger than that measured by the PPP price. Our finding, however, is not subject
to such a measurement issue, since our interest is the time series pattern of the relative price of investment
for a given country, i.e. China.
35The sum of values added over the 17 sectors is very close to GDP by value added from 2002 on, although
there are some discrepancies between these two measures prior to 2002. Discrepancies also exist between
the sum of labor compensations over the 17 sectors and the labor income reported by the NBS’s Flow of
Funds (FOF). The labor income series reported in the Flow of Funds contains two components: (a) wage
and (b) social insurance payment by company. The discrepancies may be driven mainly by social insurance
payments. Despite all these discrepancies, the decline of China’s labor income share since the late 1990s is
a robust fact, as further confirmed by Bai and Qian (2009) and Qian and Zhu (2012) who have made data

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

33

average labor share between 1995 and 2010. Although the ranking within each broad sector
differs between China and the U.S., a comparison of our Table 11 and Acemoglu and Guerrieri (2008)’s Table 1 shows the broad consistency of separating the capital-intensive sector
from the labor-intensive sector across the two countries.36 We then group the 17 sectors into
two aggregate sectors: the heavy sector and the light sector according to the strategic plan of
the Eighth National People’s Congress to develop infrastructure, real estate, basic industries
(metal products, autos, and high-tech machinery), and other heavy industries (petroleum
and telecommunication).
Figure 17 plots the labor shares in the heavy and light sectors, along with the labor share
at the aggregate level. The aggregate labor share from the survey data and input-output
tables shows a pattern similar to the trend pattern displayed in the middle row of Figure 5
in which the Flow of Funds aggregate data are utilized; its decline over time is attributed to
a combination of within-sector and between-sector effects. The within-sector effect concerns
the decline of the labor share in each of the heavy and light sectors and the between-sector
effect reflects the difference between the two sectors. To calculate these two effects, note
that
P kY k
1 + βt Ptl Ytl
wt Lt
wt Lkt + wt Llt
l
t t
LSt ≡
= αt
= k k
,
kY k
l
l
P
Yt
Pt Y t + Pt Y t
1 + Ptl Ytl
t

where

αtl

=

wt Llt
,
Ptl Ytl

αtk

=

wt Lkt
,
Ptk Ytl

and βt =

αkt
αlt

t

< 1. The between-sector effect is measured by

Bteffect = ᾱl

1 + β̄
1+

Ptk Ytk
Ptl Ytl

Ptk Ytk
Ptl Ytl

,
k

where ᾱi is the average of αti over t for i = l, k and β̄ = ᾱᾱl , while the within-sector effect
is measured by Wteffect = LSt − Bteffect . A change in the labor share, denoted by ∆LS ≡
LSt=t1 − LSt=t0 where t0 is the beginning year and t1 is the end year in consideration, is
decomposed into
∆LS = ∆B effect + ∆W effect ,
(30)
effect
effect
effect
effect
effect
effect
= Wt=t1 − Wt=t0 . It is straightforward to
where ∆B
= Bt=t1 − Bt=t0 and ∆W
prove that (30) is equivalent to the decomposition formula proposed by Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2014) such that
X
X
∆B effect =
ᾱi ∆ω i , ∆W effect =
∆αi ω̄ i ,
(31)
i=k,l

i=k,l

Pti Yti
Ptk Ytk +Ptl Ytl

where ωti =
and ω̄ i is the average of ωti over t.
A necessary condition for the between-sector effect on the declining labor share is for
the ratio of value added in the heavy sector to value added in the light sector to rise over
time. Figure 18 plots this ratio, which shows a strong upward trend since 1990. As shown in
Figure 17, the labor share αti for both i = k (the heavy sector) and i = l (the light sector) did
adjustments to take account of changes in statistical coverage of labor compensation over time. To make
definition distinctive, therefore, we use the term “labor income” when the data is from the Flow of Funds
and “labor compensation” when it is from the survey data for the 17 disaggregated sectors.
36To make grouping of different industries more compatible between China and the U.S., one may proceed
further by matching sic codes for similar four-digit industries. The results reported in Table 11, however,
serve our purpose of separating the two general sectors.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

34

not change much between 1995 and 2010, while the overall (aggregate) labor share declined
from 0.5 in 1995 to 0.47 in 2010. This presents a very informative case—it illustrates that
even when the labor share changes little in the heavy sector and even rises in the light sector,
the aggregate labor share may still decline entirely due to the between-sector effect. If we
use 1997 instead as an initial year, the labor share did experience a decline over time for each
of the two sectors and the question is whether the between-sector effect is still empirically
significant.37 Table 12 reports that with 1997 as an initial year for comparison, the betweensector effect continues to be significant in explaining the decline of the overall labor income
share.38 The table documents the results with and without the agricultural sector for 1995
as an initial year, 1997 as an initial year, 2007 as an ending year, and 2010 as an ending
year. The reason for excluding agriculture is to eliminate the potential bias introduced by
the extremely high value of labor share in that sector. Our findings are very robust. For
a majority of cases, the between-sector effect contributes at least 40% of the decline to the
aggregate labor share. In the cases when the initial year is 1995 and the ending year is 2010,
the between-sector effect is the only effect that contributes the labor share decline because
the within-sector effect has a wrong sign (i.e., causing the labor share to increase rather than
decrease). These robust results reinforce the overriding importance of modeling the heavy
and light sectors as two separate sectors for the Chinese economy.
VIII.2.4. Short-term vs. long-term loans. Figure 19 summarizes the key loan structure in
China. Heavy industries, given the priority by the “Five-Year Program” of the Eighth
National People’s Congress, have enjoyed easy access to bank loans for medium and long
term investment. One main reason for rapid increases of bank loans towards heavy industries
is the persistent monopoly held by large banks (most of them are state-owned) in the credit
market. According to Yu and Ju (1999), the share of the four largest national banks (“the
Big Four”) in total bank loans was 70.0% in 1997. This monopolistic power has been hardly
changed ever since. According to our calculation using the monthly data from 2010:1 to
2014:12 published by the PBC, the share of large national banks in total bank loans was on
average 67.4% (with a share of 51.2% for the Big Four). This monopoly is more severe for
medium and long term loans, with an average share of 75.7% between 2010 and 2014 (55.2%
for the Big Four).
When assessing the loan applications, these large national banks favor loans to large firms
and are biased against small firms. This practice is not only because of the asymmetric
information problem for small firms when banks assess loan applications, but also because
large firms gain implicit government guarantees from local governments (Jiang, Luo, and
Huang, 2006). In Figure 19 we call this type of banking “green banking.” As a result,
banks favor lending to large firms in heavy industries targeted by the state (e.g. steel and
petroleum). Compared to small firms, large firms produce more sales, provide more tax
37To

keep our model both transparent and focused, we abstract from entering labor in the production
function of the heavy sector. For the same reason, we abstract from factors that might potentially explain
the changes in the labor income share within the sector. We could, for example, allow for the heterogeneity
of technologies and endogenous technology adoption within each sector as in Ngai (2004). Adding these
components would not change our qualitative results but may blunt our emphasis on the between-sector
contribution to changes in the labor income share.
38The year 1997 marks the regime switch intended in March 1996 by the “Five-Year Program” of the
Eighth National Peoples Congress to give priority to the heavy industry. All our results about the importance
of the between-sector effect hold if we also choose 2000 as an initial year for comparison.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

35

revenues, and help boost the GDP of the local economy, an important criterion for the
promotion of local government officials.
Most small firms are concentrated in labor-intensive industries (Lin and Li, 2001). Given
the monopoly of large banks in the credit market, their preferential loan advances to large
firms in the heavy sector, often in the form of “medium & long term loans,” take priority over
other loans to small firms in the light industry, often in the form of “short-term loans and
bill financing.” A reading of various China Monetary Policy Reports prepared by Monetary
Policy Analysis Group of the Peoples Bank of China (the CMP reports hereafter) reveals
that the government often increases medium & long term loans at the sacrifice of short-term
loans. The purpose of short-term loans is to finance working capital. In fact, the CMP
reports sometimes interexchange the terms “short-term loans” and “working capital loans.”
Costs of short-term loans are much higher than those of long-term loans and we call this
type of banking “yellow banking” in Figure 19.
Figure 20 presents evidence that is consistent with the CMP reports and with the divergence between green baking and yellow banking . Two series are plotted in the figure: one
is the short-term loan series as percent of GDP and the other is the medium&long-term
loan series as percent of GDP. Given the fact that the total loan volume is targeted by the
government, whenever there is a rise in new long-term loans, there is a tendency for new
short-term loans to fall. The overall correlation of new long-term and short-term loans is
negative (about −0.4), consistent with our model’s prediction in response to a credit expansion.39 These annual data accord with the quarterly data displayed in the bottom row
of Figure 3 and the discussion in Section III.4. This negative correlation is most conspicuous right after the 2008 financial crisis, when the government injected massive credits into
medium&long-term investment projects with a spike of new long-term loans to blunt the impact on China of the severe global recession, while new short-term loans were left unchanged.
When this prodigious government credit expansion ceased in 2010, new short-term loans began to rise. Indeed, the loan structure in our theoretical model is designed to approximate
these unique characteristics of short-term versus long-term loans.
These new loan series have one potential shortcoming: it does not have the data on new
loans made to households. An alternative hypothesis is that when the government makes
loans to firms, loans to households get crowded out, which leads to the negative comovement
between consumption and investment. To entertain this hypothesis, we obtain a breakdown of the quarterly time series of loans outstanding into loans to non-financial enterprises
(NFE) and to households. These disaggregated series are available from 2007Q1 to 2014Q3.
Figure 21 plots year-over-year growth rates of these quarterly series. The left column of
the figure displays the growth rates of short-term and long-term loans to NFEs. This plot
confirms the negative-correlation pattern displayed in Figure 20, with the correlation being
−0.744. The right column of Figure 21 reports the growth rates of short-term and long-term
loans to household consumption, alongside the growth rates of long-term loans to NFEs.
As one can see clearly, an increase of long-term loans to non-financial firms does not crowd
39Brandt

and Zhu (2007) discuss how bank loans to the SOEs and POEs changed over time (it appears
that these breakdown series for loans no longer exist after 2003). The high volume of short-term loans before
1997 reflected the government’s loose credit policy for funding small firms (including unproductive SOE
firms) in the form of working capital. After the 1995 banking reform, such easy credit policy has ceased. We
see from Figure 20 a sharp fall of new short-term loans in 1997 and 1998. Since 1997 new short-term loans
to small firms, including privatized small firms, have been restrictive and received lower priority than new
medium&long-term loans to large firms.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

36

out long-term loans to household consumption nor does it crowd out short-term loans to
household consumption. To the contrary, all three series comove together with the correlation being 0.725 between short-term and long-term household consumption loans and 0.769
between long-term loans to NFEs and those to household consumption.
The negative correlation between short-term and long-term loans in China is in sharp
contrast to the positive one for the U.S. economy. Table 13 reports the correlation between
short-term and long-term loans in terms of both the year-over-year growth rate of outstanding
loans and the ratio of new loans to GDP by expenditure. All these loans are for non-financial
institutions. The quarterly U.S. series of short-term and long-term loans outstanding extend
back all the way to the first quarter of 1960, while the corresponding Chinese series go back to
only the first month of 1994 according to the WIND dataset.40 We consider three subsamples
relevant to our study: the whole sample period for the U.S. but unavailable (N/A) in early
periods for China (1961:1-2014:3), the sample period for most of our empirical analysis
(1997:1-2014:3 or 1997:1–2014:4), and the sample period in which a host of monthly data are
available for China (2000:1-2013:4 or 2000:1-2014:3). For the U.S., the correlation is highly
positive and stable (around 0.60) across all the three subsamples; for China, the correlation
is significantly negative for both growth of outstanding loans and the ratio of new loans to
GDP (above −0.26) for the two subsamples. These negative correlations for the Chinese
economy reflects the government’s policy priority that supports heavy industries at the cost
of crowding out short-term loans to labor-intensive industries.
The link between the government’s investment in the heavy sector and its priority in
injecting long-term bank loans into this sector is an unusual institutional arrangement central to our storyline. It is this link that constitutes the key architecture of our theoretic
framework. From our calculation based on the 2010:1-2014:4 quarterly series of loan classifications reported by the PBC, 89% of medium&long-term loans is allocated on average
to heavy industries and this number has been stable over the years. Figure 22 presents
further facts along this dimension but over the longer span of periods. The top chart shows
that the ratio of gross output in heavy sector over gross output in light sector based on the
NBS’s own classification of heavy vs light sectors within the broad secondary industry bar
the construction sector. This ratio fluctuated around one until the mid 1990s and since then
has steadily increased to the factor of 2.5 in recent years, consistent with the upward trend
displayed in Figure 18 based on all the 17 sectors covering the entire economy. The next
chart reports the ratio of the capital stock in the heavy sector over that in the light sector
within the broad secondary industry bar the construction sector. This chart shows a pattern
similar to the top chart. The increasing importance of heavy industries is supported by the
rising long-term loans relative to short-term loans until 2010, both in the form of new loans
and by the outstanding measure (the third and bottom charts). The upward trend has been

40There

is no good comprehensive source of aggregate loan originations (new loans) for the U.S. One
source we are aware of is the Survey of Terms of Business Lending (STBL) from the Federal Reserve
Board, which collects data on commercial and industrial loan originations. It is not a comprehensive count
(about 350 banks are surveyed each quarter), and to our knowledge the largest banks are surveyed with certainty and smaller banks are randomly sampled. Consult http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/
reportforms/reportdetail.aspx?sOoYJ+5BzDaSCesXTb1UmHCoyU8rIHWr for details. The aim
of the STBL survey is to collect data on terms of new business loans (e.g. lending rates), although the
survey collects data on the amount of loan originations (or new loans) as well. Unfortunately there is no
breakdown of short-term vs. long-term loan originations.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

37

reversed since 2010 because the government ceased to inject long-term credits in 2010.41 The
results from our theoretical model are consistent with the facts presented by Figure 22.
VIII.3. Understanding the mechanism further. We explore in this section three counterfactual economies to understand the role of the two key ingredients in our model: the
collateral constraint on capital-intensive firms and the financial friction in the banking sector. To isolate the role of each ingredient, we drop one friction at a time. We first drop the
banking-sector friction. We then drop both banking-sector friction and collateral constraint
on capital-intensive firms so that this counterfactual economy mimics the SSZ two-sector
economy. Last, we allow firms in the labor-intensive sector to borrow to finance their investment so that this counterfactual economy becomes a standard frictionless small-open
economy.
VIII.3.1. Economy without lending frictions. We remove the convex lending cost from our
benchmark model. This isolates the role of the financial friction on capital-intensive firms.
We find that the transition path of this counterfactual economy is qualitatively similar to
our benchmark economy. But the cyclical patterns following a credit expansion differs.
A credit expansion, through on capital-intensive firms, leads to an increase in demand
for output produced by the labor-intensive sector. Without the banking-sector friction, the
labor demand by labor-intensive firms would increase, which would push up the wage rate
as well as the demand for working capital loans (Figure 23). Consequently, working-capital
loans increase with investment loans, inconsistent with the data discussed in Section VIII.2.4.
More important is the result that both aggregate consumption (both entrepreneur’s and
worker’s) and aggregate investment increase (Figure 23), which again is inconsistent with
the empirical facts. This exercise suggests that the banking-sector friction holds the key to
explanation of the cyclical patterns we observe in China.
VIII.3.2. Economy without lending and collateral frictions. We now remove the collateral
constraint faced by capital-intensive firms as well. With these two types of frictions removed,
our economy is reduced to the SSZ two-sector economy. We explore transition paths of this
counterfactual economy to quantify the role of the collateral constraint.
Let the starting point be the low initial capital stock below the steady state for laborintensive firms. Similar to a neoclassical model, the investment-output ratio declines over
time while the consumption-output ratio increases. This is opposite of the transition pattern
of the economy with collateral constraints. The intuition is simple. Without the collateral
constraint on capital-intensive firms, the economy behaves essentially as a neoclassical economy. As the economy grows, output growth in the labor-intensive sector slows down due to
the diminishing marginal return to capital. The fall of output growth in the labor-intensive
sector in turn reduces the investment rate in the capital-intensive sector because of the imperfect substitutability of outputs between the two sectors. To see this point, consider the
case of complete capital depreciation and the risk-aversion parameter γ = 1. Because there
41As

shown in the third chart, the patterns for new NFE loans and total new loans track each other very
closely, suggesting that total new loans can be used to approximate NFE loans when subcategories of the
NFE data are unavailable. For these loan data, it is often inquired by the reader as to why a large fall
of new short-term loans in 1997 shown in Figure 20 is not visible in the third chart of Figure 22. This is
because the large fluctuations in 1996 and 1997 observed in Figure 20 are small in scale when compared to
those in 2008 and 2009. Indeed, the ratio of new medium&long-term loans to new short-term loans in 1996
is 4.53/14.14 = 0.32 and that the same ratio in 1997 increases to only 3.58/9.18 = 0.39.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

38

there is no collateral constraint on capital-intensive firms, we have Ptk = R and consequently
Ptl is constant according to (7). The investment rate in the capital-intensive sector becomes
k
k
k
l
k
Yt+1
Kt+1
Pt+1
Kt+1
1 Yt+1
=
=
.
k
k
R Ytl
Yt+1
Ptk Ytk
Pt+1
Ptk Ytk

Even though the investment rate in the labor-intensive sector remains constant, because the
share of revenues in the two sectors in total output is constant, a decline of the investment
rate in the capital-intensive sector leads to a simultaneous decline in the aggregate investment
rate and a rise in the consumption-output ratio (the first row of Figure 24).42
The middle row of Figure 24 displays the pattern of loan structure changes during this
transition. When investment for labor-intensive firms falls, it leads to a fall in investment
for capital-intensive firms as well. As a result, the demand for investment loans (relative
to working-capital loans) declines over time. Due to the constant ratio of revenue in the
capital-intensive sector to that in the labor-intensive sector and the constant fraction of
wage incomes in output produced by labor-intensive firms, the share of labor income is
constant throughout the transition (the middle and last rows of Figure 24).
To summarize, the collateral constraint faced by capital-intensive firms is the key to generating the following trend patterns observed in the Chinese economy: (1) an increasing
investment rate, (2) a decreasing consumption-output ratio, (3) a decreasing labor income
share, (4) an increasing ratio of the capital-intensive sector’s revenue to the labor-intensive
sector’s revenue, and (5) an increasing ratio of long-term loans to short-term loans. Without such a friction (in addition to the absence of the bank-lending friction), the economy
would become essentially neoclassical, which predicts (1) a declining investment rate, (2)
an increasing consumption-output ratio, (3) a constant labor income share, (4) a constant
ratio of the capital-intensive sector’s revenue to the labor-intensive sector’s revenue, and (5)
a secular decline of long-term loans relative to short-term loans. All these counterfactual
trend patterns are at odds with the Chinese data.
VIII.3.3. Frictionless economy. In addition to remove both lending and collateral constraints
from the benchmark model, we allow the labor-intensive sector to have free access to the
financial market. This is essentially a standard frictionless small-open economy with an
exogenous interest rate. Assume, without loss of generality, that the old entrepreneur owns
the L-firm that is able to borrow from the bank at the fixed interest rate R for capital input.
Note that the interest rate for short-term loans to finance wage bills is Rl = 1. Similar to our
benchmark model, the young entrepreneur is the manager of the L-firms, and the managerial
compensation is a fraction ψ of the L-firm’s total output. At the end of the period, the young
entrepreneur decides on how much to consume and how much to save or deposit in the bank
at the fixed interest rate R.
Solving this frictionless economy is straightforward. Because the labor-intensive sector can
borrow freely to finance its production with the constant interest rate R, this economy is at
the steady state in all periods. In particular, both the consumption rate and the investment
rate are constant across time, which implies that the ratio of long-term loans to short-term
loans is constant. Similar to the economy without lending and collateral frictions, the labor
income share and the ratio of the capital-intensive sector’s revenue to the labor-intensive
sector’s revenue is constant. Thus, all the financial frictions introduced in our benchmark
42With

incomplete capital depreciation or the risk-aversion parameter γ > 1, the investment rate in the
labor-intensive sector would decline due to diminishing marginal returns to capital.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

39

model as a way to encapsulate China’s unique financing arrangements play an indispensable
role in accounting for the key facts laid out in this paper.
IX. Conclusion
We have provided a core set of annual and quarterly time series to promote transparency
and consistency of the data usable for studying China’s macroeconomy. We have styled the
key facts that are robust to disparate empirical analyses. These facts represent the core
aspects of trend and cycle in the Chinese economy. Macroeconomic models for China should
aim to account for all these facts. We have developed a theoretical framework capable of
explaining the stylized facts documented in this paper. This framework does not rest on
declining prices of investment or a particular assumption about the TFPs between the heavy
and light sectors.
There are a host of important dimensions we have not considered, in which one might
consider to extend our model for future studies. One important extension is to collect the
relevant micro banking data to see how a particular loan is made to a firm, including the
information on the type of loan, the type of firm, and the terms of new loans. This extension
also allows us to study the aggregate impact of current financial reforms. Another extension
is to refine and enrich the model for day-to-day policy analysis, an analysis much needed by
the People’s Bank of China.
Perhaps the most relevant extension is to explore policy implications and banking reforms.
The Eighteenth National People’s Congress in 2012, when discussing various policy goals,
explicitly expressed concerns about low consumption growth and low labor share of income
in China.43 Our theoretical framework sheds light on a potential cause of the twin first-order
problems facing China’s macroeconomy today: (a) low consumption and income growth and
(b) overcapacity of heavy industries with rising debt risks. How to resolve these problems
might have profound policy implications. Our paper suggests that both problems have
stemmed from preferential credit policy for promoting the heavy industrialization since the
late 1990s. Going forward, effective policy would aim at reducing the preferential credit
access given to large firms and especially those in the heavy sector. Indeed, financial reforms
geared for eliminating such a distortion would go a long way toward making both short-term
and long-term loans function efficiently and putting the economy on a more balanced path.
We hope that this paper will stimulate further research on China’s macroeconomy.

43See

the third point at http://news.xinhuanet.com/18cpcnc/2012-11/17/c_113711665_5.
htm and http://news.xinhuanet.com/18cpcnc/2012-11/17/c_113711665_8.htm.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Table 1. Annual GDP series and its subcomponents
Year

GDP

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

459.3
500.9
559.0
621.6
736.3
907.7
1050.8
1227.7
1538.9
1731.1
1934.8
2257.7
2756.5
3693.8
5021.7
6321.7
7416.4
8165.9
8653.2
9112.5
9874.9
10902.8
12047.6
13661.3
16095.7
18742.3
22271.3
26659.9
31597.5
34877.5
40281.6
47261.9
52939.9
58667.3

C

I
Govt
Billion RMB
233.1
160.0
67.7
262.8
163.0
73.4
290.3
178.4
81.2
323.1
203.9
89.5
374.2
251.5
110.4
468.7
345.8
129.9
530.2
394.2
152.0
612.6
446.2
167.8
786.8
570.0
197.1
881.3
633.3
235.2
945.1
674.7
264.0
1073.1
786.8
336.1
1300.0 1008.6 420.3
1641.2 1571.8 548.8
2184.4 2034.1 739.8
2837.0 2547.0 837.9
3395.6 2878.5 996.4
3692.2 2996.8 1121.9
3922.9 3131.4 1235.9
4192.0 3295.2 1371.7
4585.5 3484.3 1566.1
4943.6 3976.9 1749.8
5305.7 4556.5 1876.0
5765.0 5596.3 2003.6
6521.8 6916.8 2233.4
7295.9 7785.7 2639.9
8257.5 9295.4 3052.8
9633.2 11094.3 3590.0
11167.0 13832.5 4175.2
12358.5 16446.3 4569.0
14075.9 19360.4 5335.6
16895.7 22834.4 6315.5
19058.5 25277.3 7140.9
21218.8 28035.6 7997.8

Nex
-1.5
1.7
9.1
5.1
0.1
-36.7
-25.5
1.1
-15.1
-18.6
51.0
61.8
27.6
-68.0
63.4
99.9
145.9
355.0
362.9
253.7
239.0
232.5
309.4
296.5
423.6
1020.9
1665.5
2342.3
2422.7
1503.7
1509.8
1216.3
1463.2
1415.1

C

I
Percent
50.8 34.8
52.5 32.5
51.9 31.9
52.0 32.8
50.8 34.2
51.6 38.1
50.5 37.5
49.9 36.3
51.1 37.0
50.9 36.6
48.8 34.9
47.5 34.8
47.2 36.6
44.4 42.6
43.5 40.5
44.9 40.3
45.8 38.8
45.2 36.7
45.3 36.2
46.0 36.2
46.4 35.3
45.3 36.5
44.0 37.8
42.2 41.0
40.5 43.0
38.9 41.5
37.1 41.7
36.1 41.6
35.3 43.8
35.4 47.2
34.9 48.1
35.7 48.3
36.0 47.7
36.2 47.8

Govt Nex
of GDP
14.7 -0.3
14.6 0.3
14.5 1.6
14.4 0.8
15.0 0.0
14.3 -4.0
14.5 -2.4
13.7 0.1
12.8 -1.0
13.6 -1.1
13.6 2.6
14.9 2.7
15.2 1.0
14.9 -1.8
14.7 1.3
13.3 1.6
13.4 2.0
13.7 4.3
14.3 4.2
15.1 2.8
15.9 2.4
16.0 2.1
15.6 2.6
14.7 2.2
13.9 2.6
14.1 5.4
13.7 7.5
13.5 8.8
13.2 7.7
13.1 4.3
13.2 3.7
13.4 2.6
13.5 2.8
13.6 2.4

Note: “C” stands for household consumption, “I” for gross capital formation (aggregate
investment), “Govt” government consumption, and “Nex” net exports.

40

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Table 2. Chronology of structural switches
Dates
December 1978
Early 1990s
Beginning of 1992
January 1994
1994
1995-1996
1995
March 1996
July 1997
November 1997
November 2001
July 2005
September 2008
2009-2010

Major structural changes
Introduction of economic reforms
Price controls and rationing
Advanced the reforms by Deng Xiaoping
Ended the two-tiered foreign exchange system
Major tax reforms and devaluation of RMB
Phased out price controls and rationing
Enacted People’s Bank of China law and other banking laws
with decentralization of the banking system
Strategic plan to develop infrastructure
and other heavy industries
Asian financial crises started in Thailand
Began privatization
Joined the WTO and trade liberalization
Ended an explicit peg to the USD
U.S. and world wide financial crisis
Fiscal stimulus of 4 trillion RMB investment

41

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

42

Table 3. Annual GDP series and further breakdowns (billion RMB)
Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

GDP
6321.7
7416.4
8165.9
8653.2
9112.5
9874.9
10902.8
12047.6
13661.3
16095.7
18742.3
22271.3
26659.9
31597.5
34877.5
40281.6
47261.9
52939.9
58667.3

C
2837.0
3395.6
3692.2
3922.9
4192.0
4585.5
4943.6
5305.7
5765.0
6521.8
7295.9
8257.5
9633.2
11167.0
12358.5
14075.9
16895.7
19058.5
21218.8

SOE
926.8
1016.6
1090.9
1215.7
1263.5
1289.2
1324.2
1409.3
1525.6
1654.4
1695.7
2055.1
2327.6
2928.3
3892.9
4388.6
4323.5
4708.6
4991.9

POE
810.7
963.4
1032.8
1086.8
1156.5
1345.9
1549.7
1927.4
2504.5
3155.2
3577.1
4728.6
5839.3
7388.3
8571.1
10156.8
11855.9
13460.3
15111.7

HH I Govt C
351.0
837.9
424.8
996.4
472.8 1121.9
554.4 1235.9
632.7 1371.7
749.3 1566.1
901.5 1749.8
1026.4 1876.0
1318.9 2003.6
1702.1 2233.4
2150.5 2639.9
2011.7 3052.8
2228.0 3590.0
2491.8 4175.2
3204.0 4569.0
3816.1 5335.6
5388.7 6315.5
6006.8 7140.9
6803.3 7997.8

Nex
99.9
145.9
355.0
362.9
253.7
239.0
232.5
309.4
296.5
423.6
1020.9
1665.5
2342.3
2422.7
1503.7
1509.8
1216.3
1463.2
1415.1

Invty
458.5
473.7
400.3
274.5
242.4
99.8
201.5
193.3
247.2
405.1
362.4
500.0
699.5
1024.1
778.3
998.9
1266.2
1101.6
1128.1

Note: “C” stands for household consumption, “SOE” for the SOE portion of gross fixed
capital formation, “POE” the POE portion of gross fixed capital formation, “HH I”
household investment, “Govt C” government consumption, “Nex” net exports, and “Invty”
changes of inventories.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

43

Table 4. Detailed GDP subcomponents as percent of GDP
Year
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

C
44.9
45.8
45.2
45.3
46.0
46.4
45.3
44.0
42.2
40.5
38.9
37.1
36.1
35.3
35.4
34.9
35.7
36.0
36.2

SOE POE HH I Govt C Nex Invty
14.7 12.8 5.6
13.3
1.6
7.3
13.7 13.0 5.7
13.4
2.0
6.4
13.4 12.6 5.8
13.7
4.3
4.9
14.0 12.6 6.4
14.3
4.2
3.2
13.9 12.7 6.9
15.1
2.8
2.7
13.1 13.6 7.6
15.9
2.4
1.0
12.1 14.2 8.3
16.0
2.1
1.8
11.7 16.0 8.5
15.6
2.6
1.6
11.2 18.3 9.7
14.7
2.2
1.8
10.3 19.6 10.6
13.9
2.6
2.5
9.0 19.1 11.5
14.1
5.4
1.9
9.2 21.2 9.0
13.7
7.5
2.2
8.7 21.9 8.4
13.5
8.8
2.6
9.3 23.4 7.9
13.2
7.7
3.2
11.2 24.6 9.2
13.1
4.3
2.2
10.9 25.2 9.5
13.2
3.7
2.5
9.1 25.1 11.4
13.4
2.6
2.7
8.9 25.4 11.3
13.5
2.8
2.1
8.5 25.8 11.6
13.6
2.4
1.9

Note: “C” stands for household consumption, “SOE” for the SOE portion of gross fixed
capital formation, “POE” the POE portion of gross fixed capital formation, “HH I”
household investment, “Govt C” government consumption, “Nex” net exports, and “Invty”
changes of inventories.

Table 5. Correlations between HP-filtered log quarterly series
Panel A: Real variables
deflated by own price index
(C, I) (I, LaborIncome)
Correlation −0.140
0.165
p-value
0.256
0.179
Panel B: Real variables
deflated by GDP price deflator
(C, I) (I, LaborIncome)
Correlation −0.035
0.165
p-value
0.775
0.178
Note: Labor income (LaborIncome) is deflated by the GDP deflator. The sample runs from
1996Q1 to 2012Q4. “C” stands for household consumption and “I” for total business
investment.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Table 6. Industry identifiers
Identifier
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

Industry
Mining and Washing of Coal
Extraction of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Mining and Processing of Ferrous Metal Ores
Mining and Processing of Non-Ferrous Metal Ores
Mining and Processing of Nonmetal Ores
Mining of Other Ores
Processing of Food from Agricultural Products
Food
Wine, Beverage & Refined Tea
Tobacco
Textile
Textile Product, Garment, Shoes & Hat
Leather, Fur, Feather & Its Product
Wood Processing, Wood, Bamboo, Rattan, Palm & Grass Product
Manufacture of Furniture
Manufacture of Paper and Paper Products
Printing, Reproduction of Recording Media
Cultural, Education & Sport
Processing of Petroleum, Coking, Processing of Nuclear Fuel
Chemical Material & Product
Manufacture of Medicines (Pharmaceutical)
Manufacture of Chemical Fibers
Manufacture of Rubber
Manufacture of Plastics
Manufacture of Non-metallic Mineral Products
Smelting and Pressing of Ferrous Metals
Smelting and Pressing of Non-ferrous Metals
Manufacture of Metal Products
Manufacture of General Purpose Machinery
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery
Manufacture of Transport Equipment
Manufacture of Electrical Machinery and Equipment
Computer, Communication & Other Electronic Equipment
Instrument, Meter, Culture & Office Machinery
Manufacture of Artwork and Other Manufacturing
Recycling and Disposal of Waste
Electricity, Heat Production & Supply
Gas Production & Supply
Water Production & Supply

44

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

45

Table 7. Weights and capital-intensity ranks for various industries
1999
2006
2011
Industry Weight (%) by
Capital
Weight (%) by
Capital
Weight (%) by
Capital
identifier
value added
intensity rank
value added
intensity rank gross output intensity rank
1
2.66
23
3.93
22
3.42
16
2
6.77
2
6.57
2
1.52
2
3
0.25
30
0.64
23
0.93
12
4
0.59
24
0.74
24
0.59
15
5
0.55
22
0.41
28
0.45
27
6
N/A
N/A
0.00
16
0.00
8
7
3.59
19
3.83
21
5.22
22
8
1.62
18
1.61
18
1.66
23
9
2.76
11
1.58
12
1.40
17
10
4.20
4
2.61
6
0.80
7
11
5.26
29
4.35
30
3.86
33
12
2.38
35
2.01
38
1.60
37
13
1.33
36
1.28
39
1.05
39
14
0.62
28
0.75
32
1.06
31
15
0.36
33
0.55
35
0.60
35
16
1.67
12
1.52
11
1.43
13
17
0.93
16
0.61
17
0.45
26
18
0.66
34
0.51
37
0.38
38
19
2.78
3
2.54
4
4.36
4
20
5.73
10
5.92
10
7.20
10
21
2.42
13
1.98
13
1.76
21
22
1.19
7
0.66
8
0.79
11
23
0.95
20
0.78
20
0.86
20
24
1.82
21
1.83
26
1.84
30
25
4.73
17
4.01
15
4.75
14
26
5.09
8
7.69
7
7.58
6
27
1.90
9
3.51
9
4.25
9
28
2.54
31
2.44
33
2.76
28
29
3.50
27
4.17
29
4.85
25
30
2.43
25
2.52
27
3.09
24
31
5.62
15
5.41
14
7.49
18
32
4.72
26
5.07
31
6.09
29
33
6.35
14
7.77
19
7.55
32
34
0.85
32
1.06
34
0.90
34
35
N/A
N/A
0.77
36
0.85
36
36
N/A
N/A
0.10
25
0.31
19
37
10.18
1
7.58
1
5.60
1
38
0.17
5
0.21
3
0.37
5
39
0.68
6
0.34
5
0.13
3

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

46

Table 8. Growth accounting of China’s economy
Growth rate (in percent)
1978-1998 1998-2011 1998-2007
GDP per worker
6.78
9.48
9.42
capital per worker
3.56
7.00
6.13
TFP
3.23
2.48
3.29
Contribution by capital deepening
52.4%
73.9%
65.1%
Note: The computation uses the value of the capital share set at 0.5 as in SSZ and Brandt
and Zhu (2010).
Table 9. Parameter values
Parameter
α
β
ξ
θ
ψ
δ
χ
σ
R
ϕ
η
γ

Definition
Capital Income Share in L-Sector
Utility Discount Factor
Speed of Net Worth Accumulation for K-sector
Leverage Ratio for K-Sector
Fraction of L-sector Revenue to Young Entrepreneurs
Capital Depreciate Rate
Relative TFP of L-sector
Elasticity of Substitution Between K and L Sectors
Interest Rate for K-sector Investment Loan
Share of K-sector output in Final Output Production
Curvature Parameter in Banking Cost of Borrowing
Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution

Value
0.40
(0.96)30
0.56
0.30
0.20
1
4.98
2
1.04
0.85
20
1

Table 10. Estimate and probability intervals of σ using system (27) or (29)
Seasonally adjusted monthly data
Point estimate 68% interval
95% interval
2.32
(2.11, 2.54)
(1.94, 2.79)
Original (not seasonally adjusted) monthly data
Point estimate 68% interval
95% interval
2.15
(1.96, 2.35)
(1.80, 2.57)
Note: The simulated results are based on one million MCMC posterior probability draws.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

47

Table 11. Labor shares across 17 sectors
Labor share
0.199
0.238
0.243
0.266
0.316
0.330
0.335
0.336
0.365
0.370
0.375
0.399
0.414
0.448
0.580
0.738
0.886

Detailed sector
Broad sector
Real Estate, Leasing and Commercial Service
H
Electricity, Heating and Water Production and Supply
H
Coking, Coal Gas and Petroleum Processing
H
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
L
Wholesale, Retail, Accommodation and Catering
H
Banking and Insurance
H
Chemical
H
Other manufacturing
L
Mining
H
Transportation, Information Transmission, Computer Services & Software
H
Metal Product
L
Machinery Equipment
L
Construction Material and Non Metallic Mineral Product
L
Textile, Garment and Leather
L
Construction
L
Other Services
L
Farming, Forestry, Animal Husbandry, Fishery
L

Note: “H” stands for the heavy sector and “L” the light sector. The labor share in each
disaggregated sector is calculated as labor compensation from the survey data, divided by
value added from the NBS input-output tables. The labor-share number reported is the
average value between 1995 and 2010.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

48

Table 12. Between-sector and within-sector decompositions of changes in the
labor share
All 17 sectors, ∆LS relative to the 1995 labor share
Year ∆LS Between Within Between (%) Within (%)
2007 -0.085 -0.052
-0.032
61.84 (−)
38.15 (−)
2010 -0.025 -0.052
0.027
65.81 (−)
34.19 (+)
All 17 sectors, ∆LS relative to the 1997 labor share
Year ∆LS Between Within Between (%) Within (%)
2007 -0.147 -0.057
-0.089
39.00 (−)
61.00 (−)
2010 -0.088 -0.057
-0.030
65.59 (−)
34.40 (−)
Excluding agriculture, ∆LS relative to the 1995 labor share
Year ∆LS Between Within Between (%) Within (%)
2007 -0.043 -0.019
-0.024
43.30 (−)
56.69 (−)
2010 0.028
-0.019
0.047
29.01 (−)
70.99 (+)
Excluding agriculture, ∆LS relative to the 1997 labor share
Year ∆LS Between Within Between (%) Within (%)
2007 -0.119 -0.026
-0.093
21.76 (−)
78.23 (−)
2010 -0.048 -0.027
-0.021
55.84 (−)
44.16 (−)
Note: “∆LS” stands for change of the labor share relative to the value in the initial year
(1995 or 1997). The “−” sign in parentheses indicates contribution to a decline in labor
share and the “+” sign indicates contribution to an increase in labor share. “Excluding
agriculture” means all 16 sectors excluding the sector of farming, forestry, animal
husbandry, and fishery.

Table 13. Correlation between short-term and long-term loans (quarterly data)
Start of
Loan growth (yoy) Loan growth (yoy) New loans as % of GDP
the sample
U.S.
China
China
1961:10.63 (2014:3)
N/A
N/A
1997:10.60 (2014:3)
-0.26 (2014:4)
-0.27 (2013:4)
2000:10.59 (2014:3)
-0.40 (2014:4)
-0.27 (2013:4)
Note: “Loan growth (yoy)” means the year-over-year growth rate of loans outstanding.
“New loans as % of GDP” means the ratio of new loans to GDP. For the Chinese data, the
term “long-term loans” means medium&long-term loans. The date in parentheses indicates
the end period of the sample. These end-of-sample dates are different for different series,
depending on when the latest data of each series is released to the public.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY
Trend patterns

48

49
38

46

36

44

34

42

32

40

30

38

28

36

26

34
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

I/Y (percent)

C/Y (percent)

C/Y
I/Y

24
2014

Figure 1. Trend patterns of household consumption and business investment,
estimated from the 6-variable regime-switching BVAR model.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY
20

12
10
8
6

Consumption (% of GDP)

exp
va

4
1990

2000

GDP deflator (%)

14

55

45
40
35
1990

2000

0
1990

2000

2010

45

2000

2010

2000

2010

exp
va

40
35
30
25
1990

100
exp
va

45
40
35

1990

2000

2010

FAI (% of GDP)

RSCG (% of GDP)

5

20
1980

2010

50

30
1980

10

50
exp
va

50

30
1980

15

-5
1980

2010

GFCF (% of GDP)

Real GDP growth (%)

16

2
1980

50

80

exp
va

60
40
20
0
1980

1990

Figure 2. Time-series history of trends and cycles in China’s macroeconomy: annual data. “Consumption” is household consumption, “GFCF” stands
for gross fixed capital formation, “RSCG” stands for retail sales of consumer
goods, and “FAI” stands for fixed-asset investment. The legend “exp” means
that GDP is measured by expenditure and “va” means that GDP is measured
by value added.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

18

25

16

20
GDP deflator

GDP

14
12
10
8

1995

2000

2005

Total bank loans

M2

35
30
25
20
15
1995

2000

2005

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

40
30
20
10
0

2010

30
ST loans and bill financing

20
15
MLT loans

5

50

40

10
5
0
-5
-10

10

-5

2010

45

10

15

0

6
4

51

1995

2000

2005

2010

25
20
15
10
5
0
-5

Figure 3. The top first two rows: year-over-year growth rates (%) of key
quarterly time series; the bottom row: quarterly variables as percent of GDP.
Total bank loans are delated by the implicit GDP deflator. “MLT loans”
stands for medium and long term bank loans to non-financial firms and “ST
loans and bill financing” stands for short term bank loans and bill financing
to non-financial firms.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

52

Probability of high-volatility regime

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 4. Estimated smoothed posterior probabilities of the high-volatility regime.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Consumption as % of GDP

48

Investment as % of GDP

38

46

53

36

44

34

42
32
40
30

38

28

36
34
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Disposable income as % of value added

70

26
1995

55

2000

2005

2010

2015

Labor income as % of value added

68
66
64

50

62
60
58
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Consumption as % of output

64

45
1990

52

62

50

60

48

58

46

56

44

54

42

52

40

50

38

48
1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

36
1995

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Investment as % of output

2000

2005

2010

Figure 5. Annual data: trend patterns for household consumption, investment, GDP, household disposable personal income, and household labor income. “Investment” is total business investment, calculated as gross fixed
capital formation excluding household investment. “Output” is the sum of
household consumption and business investment.

2015

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

C and GFCF

1

54

C and GFCF

1
0.8

0.8

0.6
0.6

Correlation

Correlation

0.4
0.4
0.2

0.2
0
-0.2

0
-0.4
-0.2
-0.4
1980

-0.6

1985

1990

1995

2000

-0.8
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Figure 6. Time series of correlations with the 10-year moving window. The
left-column graphs represent the correlation of annual growth rates. The rightcolumn graphs represent the correlation of HP-filtered log annual values.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

55

Investment and consumption

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Investment and incomes

0.4

Disposable
Labor
Before tax

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 7. Correlations between HP-filtered log annual series with the moving
window of 10 years. “Consumption” is real household consumption (deflated
by the CPI), “Incomes” are various measures of household personal incomes
(deflated by the GDP deflator), “Investment” is real total business investment
(deflated by the investment price index), “Disposable” stands for household
disposable personal income, “Labor” stands for household labor income, and
“Before tax” stands for household before-tax labor income.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

56

100

90

80

SOE share (%)

Industry identifier

110
37
2
19
10
38
39
22
26
27
20
9
16
21
33
31
17
25
8
7
23
24
5
1
4
30
32
29
14
11
3
28
34
15
18
12
13

70

60

50

40

30

20
Large value added
Small value added

0

20

40

60

SOE share (%)

80

100

10

0

20

40

60

Capital-labor ratio

Figure 8. The 1999 characteristics of various industries in China. The industries identified by the numerical numbers on the vertical axis of the left-hand
graph are listed in Table 6. The dark circles in the right-hand graph indicate
the top-10 industries by added value to output; the curve line is a fitted quadratic regression of the SEO share on the capital-labor ratio for these top-10
industries.

80

57

100

37
2
38
19
39
10
26
22
27
20
16
9
21
31
25
6
17
8
33
23
7
1
3
4
36
24
30
5
29
11
32
14
28
34
15
35
18
12
13

90

80

70

SOE share (%)

Industry identifier

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

60

50

40

30

20

10
Large value added
Small value added

0

20

40

60

SOE share (%)

80

100

0

0

20

40

60

80

Capital-labor ratio

Figure 9. The 2006 characteristics of various industries in China. The industries identified by the numerical numbers on the vertical axis of the left-hand
graph are listed in Table 6. The dark circles in the right-hand graph indicate
the top-10 industries by added value to output; the curve line is a fitted quadratic regression of the SEO share on the capital-labor ratio for these top-10
industries.

100

58

100

37
2
39
19
38
26
10
6
27
20
22
3
16
25
4
1
9
31
36
23
21
7
8
30
29
17
5
28
32
24
14
33
11
34
15
35
12
18
13

90

80

70

SOE share (%)

Industry identifier

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

60

50

40

30

20

10
Large gross output
Small gross output

0

20

40

60

SOE share (%)

80

100

0

0

50

100

150

Capital-labor ratio

Figure 10. The 2011 characteristics of various industries in China. The
industries identified by the numerical numbers on the vertical axis of the lefthand graph are listed in Table 6. The dark circles in the right-hand graph
indicate the top-10 industries by gross output; the curve line is a fitted quadratic regression of the SEO share on the capital-labor ratio for these top-10
industries.

200

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

59

80
SOE
POE

Share as % of total business investment

70

60

50

40

30

20
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 11. The share of SOE investment and POE investment as percent of
total business investment, where total business investment equals the sum of
SOE investment and POE investment.
0.55

SOE's share of total industrial sales

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25
1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 12. The ratio of sales revenue in the SOEs to the total sales revenue
in all industrial firms.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Korea

100

60
I/Y
C/Y
LS

90
80

50
Percent

Percent

45

60
50
40

40

I/Y
C/Y
LS

35
30

30
20

25

10

20
15

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Singapore

100

80
I/Y
C/Y
LS

90
80

70

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Taiwan
I/Y
C/Y
LS

60

70
60

Percent

Percent

Japan

55

70

0

60

50
40
30

50
40
30

20
20

10
0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

10

1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

Figure 13. C: private personal consumption; I: gross fixed domestic investment (gross fixed capital formation); LS: labor income share; Y: GDP. Source:
CEIC. Overall correlation between LS and I/Y: 0.718 (Korea), -0.174 (Japan),
0.353 (Singapore), 0.740 (Taiwan).

65

36

60

34
32

55

I/Y (%)

C/Y (%)

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

50
45

30
28
26

40

24

35

22

Time

Labor income share (%)

1.2
1
B k/B l

Time

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

35
30
25
20
15
10

Time

0.9

13

0.8

12
Capital ratio

Revenue ratio

Time

0.7
0.6
0.5

11
10
9
8

0.4

7

0.3

6

Time

Time

Figure 14. The trend patterns for the benchmark theoretical model. “C”
stands for aggregate consumption, “I” for aggregate investment, “Y” for aggregate output, “B k ” for long-term loans, “B l ” for short-term loans, “Revenue
ratio” means the ratio of the capital-intensive sector’s revenue to that of the
labor-intensive sector, and “Capital ratio” means the ratio of capital stock in
the capital-intensive sector to that in the labor-intensive sector.

61

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

0.8

0.05

Investment

Consumption

0
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15

0.6
0.4
0.2

-0.2
-0.25

0

Time

Time

0.4

0
Labor income

Output

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

Time

Time
0
Short-term loans

Long-term loans

1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

Time

Time

Figure 15. Impulse responses to an expansionary credit shock in the benchmark theoretical model.

62

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

63

1.3
FAI/CPI
GFCF/CPI
FAI/RetC
GFCF/RetC

1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
0.9

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

1.35
PWT
WDI

1.3
1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95

1995

2000

Figure 16. Various relative prices of investment goods to consumption goods,
normalized to 1 for 2000. “FAI” stands for the price of fixed-asset investment, “GFCF” the price of gross fixed-asset capital formation, and “RetC”
the price of retails sales of consumer goods. The data of relative prices of investment goods to consumption goods from the PWT and WDI are suggested
by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), where “PWD” stands for the Penn
World Tables and “WDI” the World Bank’s World Development Indices. For
the PWT data source, the price of investment goods is the price of GFCF and
the price of consumption goods is CPI; for the WDI data source, the price
of investment goods is the same as in the PWT data source, but the price of
consumption goods is the price of retail sales of consumer goods.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

64

0.7

0.65

Labor share over time

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.3

Aggregate
Heavy
Light

0.25
1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 17. Labor shares in the heavy and light sectors. The calculation is
based on the NBS input-output data for the 17 sectors in China.
1.5

1.4

1.3

Ratio of values added

1.2

1.1
Heavy/Light

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Figure 18. Ratio of values added in the heavy and light sectors grouped from
the 17 sectors in the NBS input-output data.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Central
government:
heavy industrialization policy

Green banking: preferential credit access by
large firms in heavy sector

Banks

Targeted quota
and other implicit
costs

Yellow banking: convex costs for short-term
loans to small firms in
light sector

Figure 19. Loan structures in China.

Local government:
implicit loan guarantee but requiring
collateral

65

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

66

16
Short term
Medium & long term

14

Percent of GDP

12

10

8

6

4

2
1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 20. New bank loans to non-financial enterprises as percent of GDP.
The correlation between the two types of loans is −0.403 for 1992-2012 and
−0.405 for 2000-2012.
60

45
NFE ST
NFE MLT

HCons ST
HCons MLT
NFE MLT

40
50
35

40

30

25
30
20

15

20

10
10
5

0
2008

2010

2012

2014

0
2008

2010

2012

2014

Figure 21. Year-over-year growth rates of short term (ST) and medium and
long term (MLT) bank loans (outstanding) to household consumption (HCons)
and non-financial enterprises (NFE) from 2008Q1 to 2014Q3. The correlation
is −0.744 between short-term and medium&long-term NFE loans, 0.725 between short-term and medium&long-term household consumption loans, and
0.769 between medium&long-term NFE and household consumption loans.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

67

Gross output: Ratio of heavy and light sectors

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2010

2012

Net value of fixed assets: Ratio of heavy and light sectors

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

New bank loans: ratio of medium&long-term and short-term loans

4

All enterprises
Non-financial enterprises

3
2
1
0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Total bank loans outstanding: ratio of medium&long-term and short-term loans

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Figure 22. Secular patterns for heavy vs light sectors and for medium and
long term bank loans vs. short term bank loans. The top two charts are based
on the NBS data and the 39 industries. The third chart (counting from the
top) is based on the Flow of Funds annual data and the bottom chart is based
on the monthly WIND data (the source of both data is the People’s Bank of
China).

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

0.8

0.2
Investment

Consumption

0.25

0.15
0.1

0.6
0.4
0.2

0.05
0

0

Time

Time
0.25

0.4
Labor income

Output

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Time

Time
0.25
Short-term loans

Long-term loans

1.5

1

0.5

0

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Time

Time

Figure 23. Impulse responses to an expansionary credit shock in an economy
without the bank-lending friction.

68

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

26.5

86
84
82
I/Y (%)

C/Y (%)

26
25.5

80
78
76

25

74
24.5

72

Time

Labor income share (%)

10
9
8
B k/B l

Time

7
6
5
4

6.9606
6.9606
6.9606
6.9606
6.9606
6.9606
6.9606
6.9606

Time

Time
24
22
Capital ratio

Revenue ratio

2.2756
2.2756
2.2756
2.2756

20
18
16

2.2756
14

Time

Time

Figure 24. The trend patterns for an economy without lending frictions and
collateral constraints. “C” stands for aggregate consumption, “I” for aggregate investment, “Y” for aggregate output, “B k ” for long-term loans, “B l ” for
short-term loans, “Revenue ratio” means the ratio of the capital-intensive sector’s revenue to that of the labor-intensive sector, and “Capital ratio” means
the ratio of capital stock in the capital-intensive sector to that in the laborintensive sector.

69

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

70

References
Acemoglu, D., and V. Guerrieri (2008): “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3), 467–498.
Bai, C., and Z. Qian (2009): “Factor Income Share in China: The Story Behind the
Statistics,” Economic Research Journal (in Chinese), 3, 27–41.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and M. W. Watson (1997): “Systematic Monetary
Policy and the Effects of Oil Price Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,
91–142.
Brandt, L., and X. Zhu (2007): “China’s Banking Sector and Economic Growth,” in
China’s Financial Transition at a Crossroads, ed. by C. W. Calomiris, chap. 2. Columbia
University Press, New York.
(2010): “Accounting for China’s Growth,” Working Paper 394, Department of
Economics, University of Toronto.
Buera, F. J., and Y. Shin (2013): “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A
Quantitative Exploration,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2), 221–272.
Chakraborty, S., and K. Otsu (2012): “Business Cycle Accounting of the BRIC
Economies,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Chang, Y., and A. Hornstein (2015): “Transition Dynamics in the Neoclassical Growth
Model: the Case of South Korea,” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, Forthcoming.
Chen, K., and Y. Wen (2014): “The Great Housing Boom of China,” Unpublished Manuscript, Emory University.
Chen, S., G. H. Jefferson, and J. Zhang (2011): “Structural Change, Productivity
Growth, and Industrial Transformation in China,” China Economic Review, 22(1), 133–
150.
Chow, G. C. (2011): China As A Leader Of The World Economy. World Scientific Publishing Company, New Jersey, USA.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1996): “The Effects of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Some Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 78(1), 16–34.
(1999): “Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and To What End?,” in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp. 65–148.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, Holland.
(2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1–45.
Cúrdia, V., and M. Woodford (2010): “Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(S1), 3–35.
Fang, C., E. Wailes, and G. Cramer (1998): “China’s Rural and Urban Household
Survey Data: Collection, Availability, and Problems,” CARD Working Paper 98-WP 202,
Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State University.
Fernald, J., I. Malkin, and M. Spiegel (2013): “On the Reliability of Chinese Output
Figures,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 8.
Fernald, J., and B. Neiman (2011): “Growth Accounting with Misallocation: Or, Doing
Less with More in Singapore,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 29–74.
Fernald, J., M. M. Spiegel, and E. Swanson (2013): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy
Effectiveness in China: Evidence from a FAVAR Model,” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

71

Gan, L. (2014): “Income Inequality and An Economy in Transition,” Presentation Slides,
Texas A&M University and Southwestern University of Finance and Economics.
Hansen, L. P., J. C. Heaton, and N. Li (2008): “Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring
Long-Run Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2), 260–302.
He, Q., T. Chong, and K. Shi (2009): “What accounts for Chinese Business Cycle?,”
China Economic Review, 20, 650–661.
Higgins, P. C., and T. Zha (2015): “China’s Macroeconomic Time Series: Method and
Implications,” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Holz, C. (2013): “The Quality of China’s GDP Statistics,” Working Paper No. 487, Stanford Center for International Development.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2007): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” The
American Economic Review, 97(3), 562–585.
(2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, CXXIV(4), 1403–1448.
Hsieh, C.-T., and Z. M. Song (2015): “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The
Transformation of the State Sector in China,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Huang, H., J. Ju, and V. Z. Yue (2015): “A Unified Model of Structural Adjustments
and International Trade: Theory and Evidence from China,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Jiang, S., J. Luo, and J. Huang (2006): “Credit Concentration and Expansion, Soft
Budget Constraints, and Systemic Credit Risks of Banks,” Journal of Financial Research
(in Chinese), 4, 40–48.
Ju, J., Y. Lin, Q. Liu, and K. Shi (2015): “A Dynamic Structural Analysis of Real
Exchange Rate: Theory and Evidences from China,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Karabarbounis, L., and B. Neiman (2014): “The Global Deciine of the Labor Share,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.
King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (1991): “Stochastic
Trends and Economic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 81(4), 819–840.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
105(2), 211–248.
Leeper, E. M., C. A. Sims, and T. Zha (1996): “What Does Monetary Policy Do?,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–78.
Lin, J. Y. (2013): Demystifying the Chinese Economy. Cambridge University Press, New
York, USA.
Lin, J. Y., and Y. Li (2001): “Promoting the Growth of Medium and Small-sized Enterprises through the Development of Medium and Small-sized Financial Institutions,”
Economic Research Journal (in Chinese), 1, 10–18.
Lu, D. (Forthcoming): “Exceptional Exporter Performance? Evidence from Chinese Manufacturing Firms,” Journal of Monetary Economics.
Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo
Capital Misallocation?,” American Economic Review, 104(10), 3186–3221.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, and M. Liu (2014): “Are Chinese Growth and Inflation
Too Smooth? Evidence from Engel Curves,” Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia University.
Ngai, L. R. (2004): “Barriers and the Transition to Modern Growth,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 51, 1353–1383.

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

72

Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–1297.
Qian, Z., and X. Zhu (2012): “Why Is Labor Income Share So Low in China?,” Unpublished Presentation Slides.
Ravn, M. O., and H. Uhlig (2002): “Notes On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for
the Frequency of Observations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2), 371–380.
Romalis, J. (2004): “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” American Economic Review, 94(1), 67–79.
Rubio-Ramı́rez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): “Structural Vector Autoregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference,” Review of Economic
Studies, 77, 665–696.
Shi, H. (2009): “Understanding Chinas Economy During 1979-2007: A Business Cycle
Accounting Approach,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Sims, C. A. (2000): “Using a likelihood perspective to sharpen econometric discourse: Three
examples,” Journal of Econometrics, 95, 443–462.
Sims, C. A., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2008): “Methods for Inference in Large
Multiple-Equation Markov-Switching Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 146(2), 255–274.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Models,”
International Economic Review, 39(4), 949–968.
(1999): “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica, 67(5), 1113–1155.
(2006): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 96, 54–81.
Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2011): “Growing Like China,” American
Economic Review, 101(1), 196–233.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2003): “Has the Business Cycles Changed? Evidence and Explanations,” in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing
Economy, pp. 9–56. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Ventura, J. (1997): “Growth and Independence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1),
57–84.
Villani, M. (2005): “Bayesian Reference Analysis of Cointegration,” Econometric Theory,
21, 326–357.
Waggoner, D. F., H. Wu, and T. Zha (2015): “Dynamic Striated Metropolis-Hastings
Sampler for High-Dimensional Models,” Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta.
Xu, X. (2010): “An Accurate Understanding of Chinas Economic Statistics,” Economic
Research Journal (in Chinese), 5, 21–31.
Young, A. (1995): “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the
East Asia Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3), 641–680.
Yu, J., and G. Zhu (2013): “How Uncertain Is Household Income in China,” Economics
Letters, 120, 74–78.
Yu, L., and Y. Ju (1999): “Monopoly and Competition: The Reform and Development of
China’s Banking Industry,” Economic Research Journal (in Chinese), 8, 48–57.
Zha, T. (1999): “Block Recursion and Structural Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of
Econometrics, 90(2), 291–316.
Zhou, M., and R. Ren (2010): “A Time Series Analysis of the Relationship between
Banking Interest Rates and Private Lending Interest Rates,” Statistics and Decision (in

TRENDS AND CYCLES IN CHINA’S MACROECONOMY

Chinese), 1, 126–129.

73

