NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE IMPACTS OF PROGRAM BENEFITS:
USING INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES WITH UNDERREPORTED AND IMPUTED DATA
Melvin Stephens, Jr.
Takashi Unayama
Working Paper 21248
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21248

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

Tom Eldridge provided excellent research assistance. We thank Gary Engelhardt as well as seminar
participants at Illlinois, Michigan, Virginia, Williams, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful
suggestions. We also thank the Statistical Bureau of the Japanese Government for allowing access
to the Family Income and Expenditure Survey data. A part of this project is financially supported by
KAKENHI (15H03357). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Melvin Stephens, Jr. and Takashi Unayama. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Impacts of Program Benefits: Using Instrumental Variables with Underreported
and Imputed Data
Melvin Stephens, Jr. and Takashi Unayama
NBER Working Paper No. 21248
June 2015
JEL No. C80,E21,H53,H55
ABSTRACT
Survey non-response has risen in recent years which has increased the share of imputed and underreported
values found on commonly used datasets. While this trend has been well-documented for earnings,
the growth in non-response to government transfers questions has received far less attention. We demonstrate
analytically that the underreporting and imputation of transfer benefits can lead to program impact
estimates that are substantially overstated when using instrumental variables methods to correct for
endogeneity and/or measurement error in benefit amounts. We document the importance of failing
to account for these issues using two empirical examples.

Melvin Stephens, Jr.
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
341 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan St.
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mstep@umich.edu
Takashi Unayama
Institute of Economic Research
Hitotsubashi University
Naka 2-1
Kunitachi, Tokyo, Japan
unayama@ier.hit-u.ac.jp

1

Introduction

Vast economic literatures estimate the impacts of government benefits (e.g., Social Security, unemployment insurance, welfare) on an array of household-level and individual-level outcomes (e.g.,
see the surveys of Krueger and Meyer 2002; and Currie 2004). Since program participation is
quite often a choice, a typical approach for estimating the causal effect of transfer benefits on an
outcome of interest is to treat the amount of benefits received as an endogenous regressor and then
implement an estimation method such as instrumental variables (IV) that exploits an exogenous
source of variation in benefits. While benefit amounts reported on household surveys are typically
thought to be measured with error, it is well-known that IV estimates are consistent if the measurement error in the endogenous regressor is classical. However, it is quite common for benefit
amounts on surveys to be underreported or for the data provider to replace missing information
with imputed values. In this paper, we demonstrate both analytically and through the use of two
empirical examples that IV estimation with underreported or imputed endogenous variables will
tend to overstate, and in some instances quite substantially, the causal effect of program benefits.
Recorded values of program benefits received on major surveys such as the Current Population
Survey (CPS), the Decennial Census, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), and the Survey
of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) suffer from measurement error that is non-classical.
First, when households acknowledge receiving a benefit but do not recall the amount, these benefits
routinely are imputed. While it is well-known that a substantial and increasing share of earnings
reports are imputed (Lillard, Smith, and Welch 1986; Hirsch and Schumacher 2004; Bollinger and
Hirsch 2006; Heckman and LaFontaine 2006), the extent of benefit imputation has received far less
attention. More generally, researchers typically fail to even acknowledge the use of imputed data.
Surveying articles published in eight journals between 2004 and 2013, inclusive, and that used the
CPS as the primary data source, we find that only 19 percent (16 out of 86 articles) mention that
the data contains imputed values.1
Figure 1 displays the share of imputed income measures among respondents with non-zero
1

The journals we surveyed are the American Economic Review (excluding the Papers and Proceedings issues),
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, the Journal of Human Resources, the Journal of Labor Economics, the
Journal of Public Economics, Labour Economics, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, and the Review of Economics
and Statistics. Even when acknowledged, some of these studies still treat the imputed values as actual data.

1

amounts in the March CPS from 1980-2013.2 The Figure shows that benefit imputations have
increased just as dramatically as earnings imputations over this period.3 The imputation rates
of positive earnings reports are only slightly larger than those of positive Supplemental Security
income reports while Social Security imputation rates exceed those of earnings.4
A second issue is that benefit levels are underreported in surveys. For example, the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CE) did not construct imputations prior to 2004 although roughly one in
six of the consumer units were flagged as “incomplete income reporters.” Interestingly, only one
valid non-zero report for a single major source of income was needed to qualify as a complete
income reporter which means this designation is likely a misnomer for a number families (Paulin
and Ferraro 1994). Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2009) find across a number of benefit categories
that total benefits received, computed by aggregating and appropriately weighting responses in a
given survey, fall short of administrative records detailing the total amount of benefits paid. This
total dollars underreporting occurs even when including imputations. Thus, benefit imputations
may fall short of actual benefits received for those individuals that acknowledge receipt but forget
amounts received or some households may fail to report the receipt of benefits (or both).
In this paper, we show that underreporting and imputation can lead instrumental variables
estimates to dramatically overstate the impacts of transfer programs. Hirsch and Schumacher
(2004) and Bollinger and Hirsch (2006) demonstrate that OLS regression coefficients typically
will be attenuated when using imputed outcomes if the imputation procedure does not explicitly
condition on the regressor of interest. For example, they note that the CPS imputations do not
account for union status when assigning earnings to those that fail to report an earnings amount.
2

Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2009) present a similar set of results although in terms of dollars imputed rather than
individuals. Prior to 1988, unemployment insurance and worker’s compensation benefits are combined with other
government benefits and cannot be separately examined. Prior to 1982, the imputation codes for AFDC/TANF in
the CPS data do not match the values listed in the codebook and thus not shown here.
3
A sharp rise in earnings imputations is also found during the 1990s in the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group which
collects earnings information from households at the end of their four month CPS rotation (Bollinger and Hirsch
2006). Determining which earnings values are imputed in the March CPS becomes less transparent beginning in
1988. A discussion of the issues involved along with the Stata and SAS code to correctly determine imputed earnings
values can be found at http://www.psc.isr.umich.edu/dis/data/kb/answer/1349.
4
These imputation rates not only account for the item non-response but also for the fact that each year roughly
10% of households do not answer (or only provided limited data for) the March CPS supplement. Whole supplement
non-response information is contained in the variable FL-665 which is available on the public-use CPS data files
although, notably, it is not currently provided with the IPUMS CPS data. While the whole supplement non-response
flag does not appear on the public-use CPS data until 1991, it does appear on the Unicon CPS files beginning in
1988. We thank Jay Stewart of the Bureau of Labor Statistics for directing us to these pre-1991 data.

2

Intuitively, the lack of correlation between imputed earnings and union status should attenuate
the estimated union wage gap. They indeed find that that union wage gaps are substantially
understated when using the full CPS sample, which includes imputed earnings values, as compared
to the sub-sample of observations with non-imputed earnings information.
To estimate the impact of transfer programs, the amount of benefits received is typically treated
as an endogenous regressor and, thus, is the outcome in the first stage equation when applying IV
methods. If the imputation method used to replace to missing benefit amounts does not condition on
the instrumental variable, the estimated first stage coefficient on the instrument generally converges
to a value smaller than the true parameter as in the case of union wage gaps. For example, if the
instrument relies on changes in benefit program rules that vary across states and over time but the
imputation procedure does not condition on state of residence, then the imputed values will not be
correlated with the instrumental variable.
Since the IV estimate can be computed as the ratio of the reduced form to the first stage
coefficients on the instrument, the aforementioned inconsistency of the first stage estimator will
yield an IV estimate that exceeds its true parameter value. We show analytically that when the
instrument is uncorrelated with the imputed values and missing observations are randomly assigned,
the IV estimator will converge to a value exceeding the true IV parameter by a factor of 1/p where
p is the fraction of households correctly reporting benefit values. Given that only two-thirds of CPS
households correctly report benefits in recent years, IV estimates generated using imputed benefits
will be biased upwards by 50 percent.
The underreporting of benefits yields a similar impact on the IV estimator. If underreporting
takes the form of not reporting benefits at all then the resulting IV estimator is the same as in the
situation when the imputations are uncorrelated with the instrumental variable. The extent of this
inconsistency falls as the degree of underreporting diminishes as we demonstrate below.
If the random assignment of non-reporting which underlies our analytical results holds, then a
straightforward empirical solution is to perform the analysis only using the non-imputed sub-sample.
If values instead are missing at random, then methods which account for selection on observable
characteristics such as inverse propensity score weighting can be applied. However, when there is
selection on unobservables, the estimates using the non-imputed sample will be inconsistent as well.
3

We briefly discuss possible solutions in such instances although it is worth noting that institutional
features of a given transfer program may be exploited to yield consistent estimates.
We present two examples to demonstrate the empirical importance of these estimation issues.
The first example makes use of the well-known U.S. Social Security “notch.”5 Social Security
benefits were indexed to inflation beginning in 1975 whereas previously the U.S. Congress made such
adjustments on an intermittent basis (Wilcox 1989). However, the first attempt at automatic cost
of living adjustments actually created a “double indexation” of benefits which led to a rapid growth
in payments for new benefit recipients in the years that followed. Congress ultimately decided not
to reduce benefits for those already receiving payments but rather adjusted the formula so that
benefits were reduced beginning with the 1917 birth cohort and culminated with the elimination
of double indexation with the 1921 birth cohort.
We follow Englehardt, Gruber, and Perry (2005) by using the notch to examine the impact of
Social Security income on the ability of elderly households to live independently. However, since
Social Security benefits are not imputed with respect to exact age in the CPS, but rather by using
broad age categories, the impact of the notch-based instrument on Social Security benefits is four
times larger for families with non-imputed benefits than those with imputed benefits. We find that
the IV estimate of the impact of Social Security benefits on living arrangements is biased upwards
by 20 to 30 percent.
Our second example examines the consumption response of Japanese households to child benefit
payments which arrive once every four months. To test whether consumption exhibits “excess
sensitivity,” the typical approach based on an Euler Equation framework is to regress changes in
consumption on changes in income. Since income changes can be comprised of both predictable and
unpredictable elements, it is common to instrument for income changes using a predictable income
change measure. We use the predictable pattern of Japanese child benefit payments, which depend
upon the age and number of children in the household, as an instrument for monthly household
income changes.
Since only one quarter of eligible households report receiving these child benefit payments in
survey data, the first stage slope coefficient from regressing changes in reported income on the
5

Krueger and Pischke (1992) discuss the details of the legislative changes surrounding the notch.

4

programmatic benefit changes is severely attenuated. We find that the IV estimate is dramatically
inconsistent in the upward direction and is overstated by more than a factor of three. However, we
know the first stage coefficient should equal one since benefit payments should lead to a one for one
increase in monthly income. Thus, the reduced form estimate, as the numerator of the IV estimate,
yields the correct excess sensitivity estimate and is substantially smaller than the IV estimate.
The measurement error induced by underreporting and imputations is akin to “mean reverting” measurement error (Bound and Krueger 1991; Bound, Brown, Duncan, and Rodgers 1994).
Berger, Black, and Scott (2000) analyze the inconsistency of the IV estimator when using one noisy
measure to instrument for another noisy measure when both are contaminated with mean reverting
measurement error.6 In our analysis, the inconsistency of the IV estimator arises when the endogenous regressor is either underreported or imputed even when the instrument is perfectly measured.
Our findings are appropriate for many settings where program benefit rules vary by well-measured
observable characteristics such as age and state of residence such that the instrumental variable
is correctly reported.7 Our results can easily be extended to situations in which the outcome of
interest is also underreported and/or imputed.

2

Econometric Framework

2.1

Model Setup

We focus on the population regression model for a continuous outcome y

y = β0 + β1 x + u

(1)

where x is an endogenous, continuous regressor such that Cov(x, u) 6= 0. It is straightforward to
extend our analysis to include additional exogenous covariates, as we show below, as well as to
binary variables.
Suppose that z is a valid, continuous instrumental variable for x such that Cov(x, z) 6= 0 and
6

See Kane, Rouse, and Staiger (1999) for a related analysis and Card (1996) for the case of with a binary
endogenous regressor and a binary instrument.
7
Mogstad and Wiswall (2012) examine the consistency of the IV estimator when the instrument is only observed
for a subset of observations.

5

Cov(z, u) = 0 and the population regression model for x is

x = π0 + π1 z + 

(2)

while the corresponding reduced form equation is

y = δ0 + δ1 z + ε

(3)

When the data are free of measurement error, the OLS estimators for the coefficients on z in
equations (2) and (3), π̂1 and δ̂1 , respectively, are consistent since z is assumed to be exogenous.
It is well-known that the instrumental variables (IV) estimator for β1 can be written as the
ratio of the OLS estimators of the slopes in the reduced form to the first stage equations
P
β̂1IV

=

i
P

(zi − z̄) (yi − ȳ)
(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)

i


 
P
2
(zi − z̄)
(zi − z̄) (yi − ȳ) /
i
i

 

P
P
(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄) /
(zi − z̄)2

P

=

i

=

(4)

i

δ̂1
π̂1

Typically the amount of government benefits received is the endogenous regressor when examining the impact of a program on an outcome of interest. However, the instrumental variables
used in the analysis typically are based on demographic characteristics that are far less likely to
be misreported. For example, Medicaid eligibility is driven primarily by the age of a child while
the maximum earned income tax credit (EITC) depends upon the number of children in the household. As such, the scenarios examined here in which the endogenous regressor is underreported or
imputed but the instrumental variable is not are relatively common.
Suppose the data contain an indicator, s, which allows us to group observations based upon
whether the endogenous regressor, x, is an actual report, s = 1, or an underreport/imputed values,

6

s = 0.8 As is well-known, we can write the OLS estimator as a weighted average of the OLS
estimators for each sub-group. Applying this result to the first stage slope coefficient yields
P
π̂1 =

i

(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)
P
(zi − z̄)2
i

P

P

(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)
P
(zi − z̄)2

=

(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)
s=1
+
P
(zi − z̄)2

=

P
P
(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)
(zi − z̄) (xi − x̄)
(zi − z̄)2
s=1
s=1
s=0
s=0
·
·
+ P
P
P
P
(zi − z̄)2
(zi − z̄)2
(zi − z̄)2
(zi − z̄)2

s=0

i

P

i

(zi − z̄)

2

P

s=1

i

=

(5)

i

s=0

SSz,s=1
SSz,s=0
· π̂1,s=1 +
· π̂1,s=0
SSz
SSz

Thus, the OLS estimator for the first stage slope coefficient, π̂1 , is a weighted average of the
corresponding estimators when the model is estimated separately for each group, π̂1,s=1 and π̂1,s=0 ,
where the weights are the share of the variation in the instrument, SSz , belonging to each group.

2.2

Interpreting the IV estimator When Non-Response is Random

Suppose that whether x is an actual or an under/imputed report is randomly assigned where
p = P rob [s = 1] is the probability of providing an actual report. The first stage slope estimator for
the sample of actual reporters, π̂1,s=1 , will be a consistent estimator for π1 . In addition, the weights
in the final line of (5),

SSz,s=1
SSz

and

SSz,s=0
SSz ,

are consistent estimators of p and 1 − p, respectively.

However, the corresponding estimator for the under/imputed reporters, π̂1,s=0 , depends upon the
corresponding underreporting or imputation process.
When the endogenous regressor is imputed, the impact on π̂1 depends upon the imputation
process. For example, the “hot deck” imputation procedure used by the U.S. Census Bureau to
allocate values when items are missing due to non-response selects a replacement amount from a
“donor” who has the same values for a small set of observed characteristics. While this procedure
retains the covariance between the allocated variable and the characteristics used as part of the
8

Most datasets contain flags to indicate which observations are imputed and which are not. Although underreporting is less likely to be flagged, this dichotomy is useful for understanding how this type of survey response can
affect the estimates.

7

matching process, Hirsch and Schumacher (2004) and Bollinger and Hirsch (2006) note that the
covariance between the allocated variable and other characteristics is not preserved. If the procedure
to impute missing values for the endogenous regressor x does not depend upon the instrumental
variable, then there will fail to be a correlation between x and z among the imputed observations.
Thus, π̂1,s=0 ≈ 0 and the probability limit of the first stage slope estimator π̂1 will equal pπ1 +
(1 − p) π1 = pπ1 .9
In the case of underreporting, suppose that the underreported value of x is a constant fraction θ
of actual x among all underreporters. It is straightforward to show that the probability limit of the
first stage slope coefficient for underreporters is θ · π1 . Thus, with underreporting, the probability
limit of the first stage estimator is pπ1 + (1 − p) θπ1 = π1 (p + [1 − p] θ) < π1 .
In the extreme case where individuals simply forget to report x (i.e., θ = 0), the probability
limit of π̂1 falls to pπ1 . Failure to report benefits might arise when benefits are small in value or
are received infrequently. Our analysis directly translates to some instances where benefits are not
reported, e.g., if program benefits are universal but yet respondents fail to report receipt of these
payments. In other instances, we may simply lack knowledge as to whether or not recipients in
fact took up these benefits. For example, Blank and Card (1991) find take-up rates of roughly
two-thirds among those eligible for Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits. However, Meyer, Mok,
and Sullivan (2009) find that roughly 75% of UI benefit payments are reported in many prominent
national surveys even when including imputed benefit payments. If under reporters are treated as
failing to take up benefits, then the issues raised here may be quite important for interpreting the
findings.
The impact of underreported and imputed values of x on the IV estimator can be seen by
9

In general, whether or not the probability limit of π̂ exceeds π depends upon the exact imputation procedure.
Bollinger and Hirsch (2006) and Heckman and LaFontaine (2006) show that the returns to a GED are overstated
in the CPS. The CPS pools GED recipients with high school graduates as well those attending a post secondary
institution (but not completing a four year degree). Regressions using these data yield larger GED returns among
those with imputed wages relative to those who provide wage information. In this case, plim (π̂) > π.

8

substituting in (5) and an analogous expression for the reduced form estimator into (4)

β̂1IV

=

δ̂1
π̂1

=

SSz,s=1
SSz
SSz,s=1
SSz

· δ̂1,s=1 +
· π̂1,s=1 +

SSz,s=0
SSz
SSz,s=0
SSz

· δ̂1,s=0
· π̂1,s=0

(6)

As we discussed above, the denominator will converge in probability to values smaller than π1 when
the endogenous regressor is either underreported or imputed. As long as the dependent variable
in the main equation, y, is not imputed or underreported, the reduced for slope coefficients, δ̂1,s=1
and δ̂1,s=0 , for the actual and under/imputed reporters, respectively, will yield consistent estimates
of δ1 . Thus, the probability limit of the IV estimator will exceed β1 due to the underreporting or
imputation of the endogenous regressor. In cases where either underreporters all state that they
received no benefit or where the imputations are uncorrelated with the instrumental variable, the
probability limit of β̂1IV becomes β1 /p > β1 .
Extending the analysis to include exogenous regressors is straightforward through an application
of the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell Theorem. As is well-known, the OLS estimate for the coefficient on x
when regressing y on x plus a vector of covariates w is numerically equivalent to performing the
following steps: a) regressing y on w and saving the residuals, y ∗ , b) regressing x on w and saving
the residuals, x∗ , and c) regressing y ∗ on x∗ . Similarly, the 2SLS estimate for the coefficient on x
when regressing y on x plus a vector of covariates w using z as an instrument for x is numerically
equivalent to first separately regressing y, x, and z on w and saving the residuals, y ∗ , x∗ , and
z ∗ , respectively, and then regressing y ∗ on x∗ using z ∗ as an instrument. Thus, we can continue
to apply (6) except that the reduced form and first stage coefficients are based on the regressions
using y ∗ , x∗ , and z ∗ and the weights depend upon the shares of the variation in z ∗ between the
actual and underreported/imputed sub-samples.
If the non-reporting of values is randomly assigned across observations then the practical solution is to simply restrict the analysis to only observations with non-imputed/non-underreported
values. IV estimates generated by using these samples will yield consistent estimates of the underlying parameters of interest. Of course, the most likely scenario is that non-reporting is not

9

generated by simple random assignment.

2.3

Accounting for Sample Selection

A number of straightforward approaches are available when the non-reporting of values follows
the selection on observables assumption. One approach is to estimate the equations of interest
using the non-imputed sample only but applying inverse propensity score weighting where the
weights are generated by first estimating a binary selection equation which includes the observable
determinants of selection (Bollinger and Hirsch 2006). Another approach is to construct a new
set of imputations which use the instruments as part of imputation process and then estimate the
models using the full sample (Hirsch and Schumacher 2004; Heckman and Lafontaine 2006). This
approach may be unattractive depending on the complexity of the imputation procedure. A third
option is to implement a modified version of the “general correction” formula derived by Bollinger
and Hirsch (2006) which adjusts the parameters for differences in the distributions of observable
characteristics between actual reporters and imputed reporters. These studies find no substantive
differences between the results using the non-imputed sample only and when implementing these
methods to account for selection on observables.
Multiple methods can be implemented to address non-reporting which results from selection on
unobservables. One approach is to jointly estimate a selection equation along with the first stage
equation and outcome of interest. Of course, outside of relying on functional form assumptions
to achieve identification, a plausible exclusion is required for the selection equation. Given that
in many circumstances the availability of a plausible instrument to account for the endogeneity of
benefits may have been a struggle to find, the requirement to find a valid exclusion restriction to
achieve identification may be quite limiting.
A number of alternative methods may also prove useful when confronted with non-random nonresponse. Recent estimation methods have focused on providing consistent point estimates when
data are missing as a function of the outcomes only (Tang, Little, and Raghunathan 2003; Ramalho
and Smith 2013) rather than as a function of the regressors as with the selection on observables
assumption. Another approach is to derive bounds on β1 . Although estimation using the nonimputed sample is inconsistent when the sample is subject to selection on unobservables, using the
10

full sample to estimate the reduced form equation (3) still yields a consistent estimate of δ1 . Thus,
the problem which arises is to generate a consistent estimate of the first stage slope parameter, π1 .
While in general it is challenging to produce bounds on E[x|z] since x may be unbounded, most
government benefits have a natural set of bounds due to programmatic rules. As such, it may be
possible to adapt methods developed by Manski (1997) and Kline and Santos (2013) to generate
bounds on π1 or use the approach of Manski and Pepper (2000) to derive bounds on β1 .10 We do
not pursue these approaches in the current paper but simply note that their use may be valuable
in some contexts.

3

Empirical Examples

3.1

The Impact of the Social Security Notch Using Imputed Social Security
Benefits

The U.S. Social Security “notch” generated a sizable change in Social Security benefits for the
affected birth cohorts. Social Security benefits were indexed to inflation beginning in 1975 rather
than having Congress make such adjustments on an intermittent basis as had been done previously.
However, the first attempt at automatic cost of living adjustments actually led to a “double indexation” of benefits. The double indexation resulted from using both a non-indexed measure of
average monthly earnings that increased with inflation along with having a replacement rate that
increased with inflation.11 Congress ultimately decided not to reduce benefits for those already
receiving benefit payments but rather adjusted the formula so that benefits were reduced beginning
with the 1917 birth cohort and culminated with the elimination of double indexation with the 1921
birth cohort.12
Englehardt, Gruber, and Perry (2005) (hereafter EGP) use the notch to investigate the impact
of Social Security income on the probability that elderly-headed families are living independently
using data from the 1980-1999 March CPS supplements. OLS regressions of this relationship are
10

See Kreider et al (2012) for a recent application of bounding when SNAP benefits are mis-reported.
The current formula first indexes average monthly earnings before computing the benefit amount but does not
index the replacement rate.
12
The
Social
Security
Administration’s
explanation
of
the
notch
is
found
at
http://www.ssa.gov/history/pdf/notch.pdf.
11

11

almost certainly inconsistent. Since Social Security benefits are a function of lifetime earnings,
differences in living arrangements are more likely to reflect permanent income differences across
households than the causal influence of Social Security income. Therefore, EGP use the variation
across birth cohorts driven by the notch to instrument for Social Security benefits. However, the
issues raised in our analytical discussion could be particularly important for the magnitude of the
findings since, as shown previously in Figure 1, roughly 20% of Social Security benefit recipients
in the CPS have imputed benefits during the 1980s while this figure steadily rises to nearly 30% of
recipients by 1999.
EGP limit their analysis to families where the Social Security recipient is age 65 and older in
the case where this recipient is male or a never married female and ages 62 and up in the case of
a widowed or divorced female.13 They also limit the analysis to the 1900-1933 birth cohorts which
are roughly symmetric around the 1916 cohort for whom the Social Security reached a peak before
the laws generating the notch became effective.
EGP create their instrument for the impact of the notch on Social Security benefits by computing
benefits for a fixed earnings profile across different birth cohorts. Specifically, they fix the earnings
profile to reflect the median male earner in the 1916 birth cohort. They then use this profile not
only to compute the Social Security benefit of someone born in 1916, but also for every birth cohort
from 1900-1933 by using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to inflate earnings across time.14 By
using the same earnings profile for each birth cohort, the idea is that the instrumental variable
will only reflect changes in the programmatic rules across birth cohorts. When the Social Security
recipient is a widowed or divorced female, the benefit is assumed to be based on her deceased/exhusband’s earnings record. Since they find through other data sources that these husbands were
on average three years older than their spouses, they base the instrument on the birth cohort three
years older than the woman’s birth cohort.
The solid line in Figure 2 shows the instrument by year of birth cohort.15 Benefits rise rapidly for
birth cohorts up to and including the 1916 birth cohort. Due to the correction for double indexation
13

They do not use the CPS definition of families within households but rather treat the primary CPS family as one
family and all other adults in the household as individual families. See their paper for more details of this procedure.
14
EGP assume that benefits are claimed beginning at age 65. They provide more details regarding the construction
of the instrument in their paper.
15
We thank Gary Englehardt for sharing the values of the instrument by birth cohort.

12

discussed above, the benefits fall rapidly for the 1917-1921 birth cohorts before remaining relatively
flat for the remaining birth cohorts displayed in the figure.
Imputations in the March CPS arise from two sources: item non-response and whole supplement
non-response. Item non-response occurs when the respondent indicates that they have received,
e.g., Social Security benefits, but do not recall or disclose the amount of benefits received. Whole
supplement non-response occurs when households finish the basic CPS interview but then refuse
to participant in the March Supplement. Whole supplement non-response has remained constant
at roughly ten percent such that the increase in non-reporting in recent years is driving by item
non-response.16
The CPS uses the “hot deck” imputation method to allocate missing values by taking a value
from a donor observation with the exact same set of characteristics. For whole supplement nonresponse, the entire set of responses to the supplement is taken from a donor. For the March
CPS supplement, all donors are drawn from the same year. A donor observation has the exact
same values for a subset of observable characteristics. To broaden the scope of potential matches,
continuous match characteristics are collapsed into categorical values (e.g., age) while some values
of a single categorical characteristic are combined (e.g., race/ethnicity).
In the case of item non-response for Social Security benefits, the characteristics used in the
match are age (7 categories), sex (2), marital status (4), race/ethnicity (3), education (3), work
status (2), and pension type (6) resulting in 6,048 possible combinations.17 If a donor cannot be
found within the same combination, the race/ethnicity and work status categories are dropped
from the procedure and a donor is pursued from the resulting 1,008 combinations.18
Most relevant for our analysis is that the method used to allocate missing Social Security benefits
due to item non-response is not based on exact year of birth/age. Instead, the seven age categories
used in this procedure are: less than 35, 35 to 54, 55 to 61, 62 to 64, 65 to 69, 70 to 74, and 75 and
16

Prior to 1988, information on whole supplement imputation was contained in the data allocation flag for each
income measure.
17
We thank Ed Welniak for providing us with the internal Census Bureau documents detailing the characteristics
used in the hot deck procedure beginning with the March 1989 CPS and retroactively applied to the March 1988 CPS.
These documents are available from the authors. We have not been able to determine the imputation procedures
used in earlier years.
18
According to the internal Census documents, in the “rare occurrence” that a donor is not found from this second
pass at generating an allocated value, an amount “will be imputed from a matrix.”

13

over. Since our analysis is restricted to those ages 65 and older (62 and older in the case of widowed
and divorced women), there are only three (four) relevant age categories used in the imputation
procedure. As such, the imputed benefits due to item non-response will fail to capture the sharp
spike in Social Security income by birth cohort that is exhibited by the notch instrument.
When the entire supplement is missing, the matching procedure depends first upon marital
status and labor force status. Within the five possible marital status/employment groupings, age
is again used a match category. However, ages 65 and up are always grouped together, and in some
cases ages 55 and up pooled together if a donor is not initially found. Thus, whole supplement
non-response will also fail to capture the year of birth based movements in Social Security benefits
due to the notch.
The long and short dashed lines in Figure 2 show the average Social Security income by birth
cohort for non-imputed and imputed values, respectively. Whereas the actual reports of Social
Security income in the CPS exhibit strong evidence of the notch, there is no evidence of a notch
among the imputed values. There certainly is evidence of an increase in benefits for the pre-notch
cohorts which is consistent with the fact that the imputations are based on somewhat close ages.
However, the imputation procedure does not capture the rapid decline in benefits following the
implementation of the notch.19
EGP estimate a model of the form

Pi,t = θSSIncomei,t + βXi,t + γ i + αt + φi + ui,t

(7)

where Pi,t is an indicator for having a shared living arrangement; SSIncomei,t is family Social Security income measured in thousands of dollars; Xi,t includes four categories each for the education
of the head and the spouse (if present), age of the spouse (if present), marital status (married,
widowed, and divorced), white, and female; γ i is a full set of indicators for the age (age+3 for
widowed and divorced women) from ages 65 to 90; αt is a set of survey year indicators, and φi
is a set of indicators for the nine Census divisions. The legislative Social Security benefits based
on the median earner from the 1916 birth cohort shown in Figure 2 is used as an instrument for
19

Although not shown here, when the imputed values are separated between item non-response and whole imputation non-response, neither series shows any evidence of a decline in benefits for those born after 1916.

14

SSIncomei,t .
We should note two differences between our analysis and EGP’s. First, we only have the Social
Security instrument for the 1900-1930 birth cohorts rather than through the 1933 birth cohort.
Given the limited number of missing birth cohorts, we do not believe that this omission has any
important impact on our analysis. Second, whereas EGP create age-by-year of birth cells for each
survey year, our analysis uses individual-level data. The results from using cell-level data, shown
in Appendix Table 1, are quite similar to our main results shown in Table 1.
Table 1 presents our results.20 Based on our discussion above, we apply the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell
theorem by first regressing the shared living indicator, Social Security income, and the instrument
on the remaining exogenous covariates in the model and saving the residuals. We then use these
residuals to estimate the first stage and reduced form models across both the full sample and the
two sub-samples to be consistent with the decomposition shown in equation (4). The OLS and
2SLS results do not use the residuals but rather are estimated separately for the full sample as well
as for each sub-sample.
Panel A in Table 1 presents our findings for the full sample of 256,710 families in column (1)
whereas are findings for those without and with imputed Social Security income are shown in
columns (2) and (3), respectively. Applying OLS to equation (7) finds that the probability of living
in a shared arrangement falls with increases in Social Security. The impact is more than twice as
large in the non-imputed sample than in the imputed sample which is consistent with attenuation
bias due to imputation reducing the estimate for those with allocated benefits.
The first stage estimates vary across the columns as predicted by our analytical results. The
estimated effect of the instrument on Social Security income is nearly 20% larger in the non-imputed
sample than in the full sample, consistent with the share of Social Security benefits that are imputed
in the CPS during this period. In addition, the estimated first stage relationship is more than three
times larger for the non-imputed sample than the imputed sample which is consistent with the
inability of the imputation proceed to match the sharp changes in benefits due to the notch.
There is some variability in the reduced form estimates across the three columns. The shared
20
All of our estimates are weighted by the individual sampling weight for the Social Security recipient. The standard
errors are clustered at the year of birth level.

15

living arrangements measure is based strictly on the household roster which is far less likely to be
affected by measurement error than Social Security income. There is no reason to expect that the
relationship between this variable and the instrument would systematically vary based on whether or
not Social Security income is imputed. Although the reduced form estimate for those with imputed
Social Security income sample is somewhat larger than our result for the non-imputed sample, the
standard errors are sufficiently large that these differences are not statistically meaningful.
The final row of Panel A shows the 2SLS estimates of the impact of Social Security income for
the full sample as well as separate estimates for the non-imputed and imputed samples. We see
that the 2SLS estimate of -0.023 is over 25% larger when using the full sample as opposed to the
estimate of -0.018 using the non-imputed sample only. Assuming that Social Security benefits are
missing at random, the results from the full sample substantially overstate the efficacy of Social
Security benefits in reducing shared living arrangements.
EGP also compute elasticities by combining the point estimate along with the sample fraction
living in shared arrangements and average Social Security income. Given that 25.1% of the full
sample is in shared living arrangements and average Social Security income is $5,769, and remembering that the income is measured in thousands of dollars in the regression, yields an elasticity of
-0.53.21 Doing the same calculation for the non-imputed sample lowers the elasticity to -0.41 which
means that the inclusion of the imputed values raises the estimated elasticity by over 25%.22
In the final column of Table 1, we present results that account for the fact that the nonimputed observations may constitute a selected sample. Following Bollinger and Hirsch (2006), we
use inverse propensity score weighting (IPW) to correct for sample selection based on observable
characteristics. We estimate a probit for using an indicator for reporting an actual Social Security
value as the dependent variable using the same regressors as we include in (7). We then re-estimate
all of the equations for the non-imputed sample using the IPW based on the probit estimates.
As shown in column (4), all of the results are nearly identical to those found when using the
non-imputed sample (column (2)).
21

EGP find an elasticity of -0.41. Our 2SLS estimate of -0.023 is quite close to their 2SLS estimate is -0.0205.
However, in their sample 26.5% have share living arrangements and average Social Security income is $5,323.
22
The share of the non-imputed sample living in shared arrangements is 0.248 while average Social Security income
is $5,627.

16

Panel B presents results for the sub-sample of widowed families for whom EGP find an elasticity
of -1.30. We find that the first stage estimate for the non-imputed sample is nearly 20% larger than
the pooled sample and is nearly 150% larger than in the imputed benefits sample. The reduced form
is somewhat larger for the imputed households relative to the non-imputed households although the
estimates for the entire sample of widows and those with non-imputed benefits are quite similar.
The 2SLS estimate of -0.112 for the full sample of widows shown in the final row of Panel B
is 25% larger than the corresponding estimate for the sample of families without imputed Social
Security benefits.23 The corresponding elasticities for the entire sample of widows and those with
non-imputed benefits are -1.71 and -1.37, respectively.24 Again, including families with imputed
benefits greatly overstates the impact of Social Security benefits on shared living arrangements.

3.2

Excess Sensitivity and the Underreporting of Japan’s Child Benefit

Public transfers to families on the basis of the age and number of their children are prevalent in a
number of developed countries (OECD 2011). In Japan, child benefits are paid three times a year,
in equal amounts, in February, June, and October. The Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis
(LCPIH) predicts that households will smooth consumption in response to predictable changes
in income including the receipt of regular income. A number of papers find that consumption is
sensitive to the timing of income receipt including various types of government transfer payments
(Stephens 2003; Shapiro 2005; Mastrobouni and Weinberg 2009; Stephens and Unayama 2011) and
paychecks (Stephens 2006).
We use monthly panel data from the Japanese Family Income and Expenditure Survey (JFIES)
to test whether consumption exhibits “excess sensitivity” to the receipt of child benefit payments.
Following the prior literature, we regress changes in consumption on changes in income but, since
observed changes in income may reflect unexpected information, instrument for income using the
changes in the child benefit payments based on the programmatic rules. However, child benefits
are greatly underreported in the JFIES with only one-quarter of eligible households reporting the
23

Our full widow sample estimate of -0.112 is slightly higher than their estimate of -0.086.
In the entire sample of widows, 30.0% are in shared living arrangements and average Social Security income is
$4,568. Among widow families with non-imputed benefit data, 29.5% are in shared living arrangements and average
Social Security income is $4,482.
24

17

receipt of these payments. As such, our analytical analysis indicates that excess sensitivity tests
will dramatically overstate the consumption response to child benefit receipt.
Japan introduced its child benefit system in 1972 although only households with three or more
children initially received benefits from this program. Families with two or children became eligible
in 1986 while eligibility was extended to families with one child in 1992. Benefits were initially
available until the child was fifteen although the eligibility age was reduced to three when the second
child became eligible in 1986.25 In subsequent years, the age limit has been raised repeatedly, rising
to six in 2000, to nine in 2004, to twelve in 2006, and to fifteen in 2009. Child benefits were means
tested until 2009 after which only the age and number of children are the criteria for the receiving
these payments.
While benefit eligibility changed with respect to parity and child age over this period, during
the 1970s and early 1980s, the benefit level per child remained relatively stable in real terms.
Beginning in 1992, benefits were set at five thousand yen per month for first and second child and
at ten thousand yen for each additional child. In 2006, the monthly benefit amount was set at ten
thousand yen regardless of parity but only until age three. Benefits were significantly increased
between 2009 and 2012, but then subsequently decreased. Stephens and Unayama (2014) find that
child benefits rise as a share of family income during this period, peaking at over 3.5 percent in the
late 1990s and remaining above 3 percent in the years that followed.
Using monthly JFIES data from 1992-2009, we test whether monthly household consumption
responds to the receipt of child benefit payments. We limit our sample to the period where families
with one child are eligible to receive child benefits but before the means test was eliminated.
Families are surveyed in the JFIES for six consecutive months. Each day during the survey period,
households are instructed to enter all expenditures and income into diary. Our sample contains
monthly summaries of expenditure and income in a detailed set of categories.26 We construct a
measure of monthly non-durable expenditure to test the LCPIH as this category is commonly used
in the literature testing excess sensitivity (e.g., see Parker 1999; and Souleles 1999).
Child benefits are included in the data as part of a variable titled “other social security.”
25
26

The effective eligible age was 5 in 1972 and 10 in 1973 as a transition.
Additional details regarding the JFIES are given in Stephens and Unayama (2011).

18

This variable contains benefits received from any social welfare program except for public pension
payments. In the months that benefits are distributed, we find that 24% of eligible households
report positive benefits for this variable. Among these positive reporters, 70% report values which
exactly match what we expect they would receive based on programmatic rules. Two-thirds of
the remaining positive reporting households give values that exceed the eligible value, consistent
with additional benefits being received and summed into this variable. In the months in which
benefits are not distributed, only 4% of households report positive benefit receipt which most likely
is attributable to other social welfare programs.
To examine whether non-durable consumption is excessively sensitive to child benefits, we estimate the equation
∆Ci,t = α0 + α∆HHincomei,t + γXi,t + ui,t

(8)

where ∆Ci,t is the change in consumption from month t − 1 to month t, ∆HHincomei,t is the
change in household income between adjacent months, and Xi,t are additional controls for monthly
consumption growth including calendar year and month indicators, survey month indicators, the
change in the number of household members, and the age of the household head and its square.
Of course, simply estimating (8) using OLS does not yield a valid test of the LCPIH since any
unanticipated changes in income might also influence consumption decisions. Since consumption
should not be correlated with predictable income changes, we can use the anticipated change in
income due to the timing of child benefit payments as an instrumental variable for income. We
construct the child benefit instrument based on the programmatic rules which are a function of
the age and number of children as well as the means test, i.e., whether or not household income
exceeds the annual income threshold to receive child benefits.27
Since we observe that roughly three-fourths of households do not report receipt of the child
benefit payments even though they are eligible for these transfers, we know that the IV estimator
will suffer from the inconsistency discussed in the previous section. One potential concern with
this interpretation might be that non-reporters may, in fact, be ineligible for child benefits. If we
27

Although households only appear in the JFIES for six months, upon entry into the sample households are asked
to report total household income for the twelve months prior to the survey period. We use this income measure to
determine whether or not households are above or below the means test threshold.

19

mis-measured benefit eligibility in this way, we would expect higher rates of zero benefit reporting
among higher income benefit eligible households since they are more likely to be misclassified.
However, as we show below, when we split the sample between high and low income households
to examine whether the response can be attributed to liquidity constraints (e.g., Zeldes 1989), we
find nearly identical first stage estimates of the impact of child benefits on income for both above
and below median income households.
Our measure of household income, HHincomei,t , includes all sources of household income
including regular earnings, interest payments, government transfers, etc. However, we exclude
bonus income from our measure of household income. The two months in which bonuses are
typically received in Japan are December and June, with June also being a month in which child
benefits are received. Since bonuses can be substantial relative to monthly household income, our
first stage estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of these payments.28
Table 2 reports the estimates of the excess sensitivity of consumption with respect to income.29
Our full sample estimates are reported in the first column. Our OLS estimates of the impact of the
marginal propensity of consume out of income, 0.086, while statistically significant, is somewhat
small.
Since the HHincome variable also contains many sources of income, some of which may have
been unanticipated, we instead instrument for the change in monthly benefits received with the
programmatic child benefit amount. We find a relatively large and significant estimate of 0.190
which typically would be interpreted as a marginal propensity to consume out of the income. A
finding of this magnitude typically is considered to be evidence of a substantial violation of the
LCPIH.
Turning to the first stage estimate, we see that the first stage estimate is 0.302. In the absence
of underreporting, we would expect this coefficient to equal one. That is, actual income should
increase one for one with programmatic benefits. However, the large degree of underreporting
attenuates the first stage estimate in the manner predicted by our analytical results. It is useful to
28

Our first stage estimate when including bonus income is nearly twice the size of the corresponding estimate shown
in Table 2. However, the result is still substantially less than one meaning that the IV estimates would still be biased
upwards if we were to include bonus income in our measure of household income.
29
The standard errors are clustered at the household level.

20

note that if reported benefits were only affected by classical measurement error, we would anticipate
that the estimated coefficient on the programmatic benefit would still equal one since left-hand side
measurement error does not affect the slope parameters in the classical errors-in-variables model.
The reduced form estimate of 0.057 for the full sample shown in the final row of Table 2 is the
consumption response to the programmatic change in benefits. Since the IV estimate is the ratio of
the reduced form estimate to the first stage estimate and the first stage estimate should equal one
if there is no underreporting, we would expect the IV estimate to simply equal the reduced form
estimate if benefits were not underreported. Thus, the underreporting of child benefits inflates the
causal estimate by more than a factor of three. While the reduced form estimate still rejects the
most basic LCPIH, the magnitude of the difference between this result and the above IV estimate
yields a quite different substantive interpretation as to the deviation of behavior from the standard
model.
One theoretical mechanism for why we might see excess sensitivity is the presence of liquidity
constraints. Households that wish to borrow from future income but are unable to do so will
respond to anticipated income changes since the marginal utility of a dollar today exceeds that of
a dollar tomorrow. A common approach to testing for the importance of liquidity constraints is
the split the sample between those that are likely to be constrained and those that are not (e.g.,
Zeldes 1989). Following in this tradition, we split the sample based upon whether the household is
above or below the median income of child benefit eligible families in each survey year.
The 2SLS estimates shown in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2 show a large consumption response
for both constrained (below median income) and unconstrained households. However, since the
first stage estimate is only slightly larger for constrained households relative to unconstrained
households, the reduced form findings are estimates of interest for the reasons discussed above.
The reduced form estimate of 0.063 is significant for constrained group while the estimate of 0.049
is insignificant for the unconstrained group. However, these estimates are quite similar across the
two groups. The key takeaway, however, is that the 2SLS estimates are dramatically overstated for
both groups due to underreporting of benefit receipt.
Under the assumption that underreporting occurs randomly, we examine the sample of “correct
reports” in column (4). We define correct reports as those observations in which the amount in the
21

“other social security” variable matches the amount found computed for the instrument based on
the structure of the child benefit program. Since benefits are only provided in a limited number of
months, we only lose roughly one-third of the overall sample (i.e., benefit changes are zero for the
majority of months and the vast majority of households report no benefits during these months).
We do, however, lose a far higher share of observations which include a month of benefit receipt. The
OLS estimate for the correct reports sample is quite similar to the full sample estimate. Moreover,
consistent with the prediction that each additional yen of child benefits should raise family income
by the same amount, we cannot reject the null that the first stage estimate is one.
However, the remaining estimates in column (4) suggest that the results from using the correct
reporters are subject to selection on unobservables. While it is true that the 2SLS estimate for the
correct reporters is roughly half as large as the corresponding full sample estimate, it is still much
larger than the full sample reduced form estimate of 0.057. In fact, the reduced form estimate for
the correct reports is twice as large as the full sample reduced form. One potential reason for this
discrepancy is that the households which are most likely to report receiving child benefits are much
more likely to change their spending due to these benefits. Adjusting the correct reports results
for selection on observables through inverse propensity score weighting (column (5)), does not alter
this conclusion. These results suggest that simply limiting the sample to non-missing observations
is not a universal panacea for addressing underreported and imputed data.

4

Discussion

Survey non-response has continued to rise in recent years which has generated an increase in
the share of observations with imputed values on a number of commonly used datasets. While the
importance of this trend has been long recognized for earnings data, the share of imputed values for
transfer benefits has received far less attention. In addition, benefits from a number of government
programs are substantially underreported by respondents even after imputations are taken into
account.
We demonstrate analytically that, under the assumption that non-reporting is random, the
underreporting and imputation of government transfers can lead to a substantial overstatement

22

of the impact of government transfers when applying instrumental variables methods to correct
for the endogeneity and/or measurement error in these measures. Our examples demonstrate the
empirical relevance of these results. Our findings suggest that IV estimates generated by analyses
that fail to account for imputed or underreported data may substantially overstate the impact of
the endogenous regressor.
Assuming that non-reporting is (conditionally) random provides straightforward adjustments
to yield consistent estimates. However, as our Japanese child benefit findings based on the correct
reports sample indicate, caution needs to be used when dropping non-responders. When benefits
are non-randomly missing, we still can generate consistent estimates of the reduced form equation
which means the issue shifts to finding a consistent estimate of the first stage parameters. In some
cases, such as with Japanese child benefits, we can rely on programmatic rules to determine what
the first stage estimate should be. In other cases, plausible bounds on the first stage estimate (or
even the IV estimate) may be available since nearly all transfers programs have natural bounds on
benefit amounts.
Our findings also suggest that researchers should pay close attention to the magnitude of the
first stage estimates in addition to carefully examining the strength of the instruments. While the
predicted magnitude of the first stage estimate is not always clear, as in the Social Security notch
example, in some instances we may have a strong prior regarding the first stage coefficients as in our
child benefit example. Deviations from these priors should not be assumed to be driven by classical
measurement error but rather carefully investigated as the consequences for the consistency of the
IV estimator could be quite severe.
Our review of recent published papers that we discussed in the introduction finds that the
vast majority of studies fail to acknowledge the presence of imputed values. We note that even
in the absence of the inconsistency issues discussed here, the usual standard errors are incorrect.
Abadie and Imbens (2012) derive analytic variances for estimators using imputed data and use
a Monte Carlo experiment to demonstrate that the usual variance formulas can be substantially
biased. Bootstrap methods are available which yield the correct variances if the researchers are
able to replicate the imputation method (Shao and Sitter 1996) although this approach has rarely
been implemented in the economic literature (see Heckman and LaFontaine 2006, for an example).
23

We do not apply such methods here since the emphasis of our analysis is the consistency of the
estimators.
Finally, the issues raised here may affect a broad range of studies which estimate the causal
effect of program benefits. A common empirical practice is to rely on variation in benefits across
U.S. states and over time within states. However, imputation procedures typically do not account
for state of residence. For example, only four items in the March CPS use state of residence as part
of the imputation process (unemployment insurance, worker’s compensation, Supplement Security
income, and welfare). Within these four items, state of residence is collapsed into five groups,
which do not reflect geographic location, and these groupings have not changed since the 1980s.
As such, these imputations will not reflect the programmatic variation being used to identify the
causal impact of benefits.

24

Bibliography
Abadie, Alberto and Guido W. Imbens (2012) “A Martingale Representation for Matching Estimators,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107(498):833-843.
Black, Dan A., Mark C Berger, and Frank A Scott (2000) “Bounding Parameter Estimates with
Nonclassical Measurement Error,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95(451):739748.
Bollinger, Christopher R. and Barry T. Hirsch (2006) “Match Bias from Earnings Imputation in
the Current Population Survey: The Case of Imperfect Matching,” Journal of Labor Economics,
24(3):483-519.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan and Willard L. Rodgers (1994) “Evidence on the
Validity of Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data,” Journal of Labor Economics,
12(3):345-368.
Bound, John and Alan B. Krueger (1991) “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?” Journal of Labor Economics, 9(1):1-24.
Card, David (1996) “The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis,”
Econometrica, 64(4):957-979.
Currie, Janet (2004) “The Take Up of Social Benefits,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 10488.
Engelhardt, Gary V., Jonathan Gruber, and Cynthia D. Perry (2005) “Social Security and Elderly Living Arrangements: Evidence from the Social Security Notch,” The Journal of Human
Resources, 40(2):354-72.
Heckman, James J., and Paul A. LaFontaine (2006) “Bias-Corrected Estimates of GED Returns,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3):661-700.
Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher (2004) “Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due to

25

Earnings Imputation,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(3):689-722.
Kane, Thomas J., Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Douglas Staiger (1999) “Estimating Returns to Schooling When Schooling is Misreported,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 7235.
Kline, Patrick and Andres Santos (2013) “Sensitivity to Missing Data Assumptions: Theory and
an Evaluation of the U.S. Wage Structure,” Quantitative Economics, 4(2):231-267.
Kreider, Brent, John V. Pepper, Craig Gundersen, and Dean Jolliffe (2012) “Identifying the Effects
of SNAP (Food Stamps) on Child Health Outcomes When Participation Is Endogenous and
Misreported,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107:499, 958-975.
Krueger, Alan B. and Bruce D. Meyer. (2002) “Labor Supply Effects of Social Insurance, Handbook
of Public Economics, Vol. 4, Part 7, Chapter 33.
Krueger, Alan B. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. (1992) “The Effect of Social Security on Labor Supply:
A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation”, Journal of Labor Economics, 10(4):412-437.
Lillard, Lee, James P. Smith, and Finis Welch (1986) “What Do We Really Know about Wages? The
Importance of Nonreporting and Census Imputation,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(3):489506.
Manski, Charles F. (1997) “Monotone Treatment Response,” Econometrica, 65(6):1311-1334.
Manski, Charles F. and John V. Pepper (2000) “Monotone Instrumental Variables: With an Application to the Returns to Schooling,” Econometrica, 68(4):997-1010.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni and Matthew Weinberg (2009) “Heterogeneity in Intra-Monthly Consumption Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy,1(2):163-89.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan (2009) “The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences,” National Bureau of Economic

26

Research Working Paper No. 15181.
Mogstad, Magne and Matthew Wiswall (2012) “Instrumental Variables Estimation With Partially
Missing Instruments,” Economics Letters, 114:186-189.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2011. Doing Better for Families. OECD Publishing.
Parker, Jonathan A. (1999) “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 89(4):959-73.
Paulin, Geoffrey D. and David L. Ferraro (1994) “Imputing income in the Consumer Expenditure
Survey,” Monthly Labor Review, 117(12):23-31.
Ramalho, E.A. and Smith, R.J. (2013) “Discrete choice nonresponse”, Review of Economic Studies,
80(1), 343-364.
Shao, Jun and Randy R. Sitter (1996) “Bootstrap for Imputed Survey Data,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(435):1278-1288.
Shapiro, Jesse M. (2005) “Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp Nutrition
Cycle,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3):303-25.
Souleles, Nicholas S. (1999) “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,”
American Economic Review, 89(4):947-58.
Stephens Jr., Melvin (2003) “‘3rd of tha Month’: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth Consumption Between Checks?” American Economic Review, 93(1):406-22.
Stephens Jr., Melvin (2006) “Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption,” The Economic
Journal, 116(513):680-701.
Stephens Jr., Melvin and Takashi Unayama (2011) “The Consumption Response to Seasonal Income: Evidence from Japanese Public Pension Benefits,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 3(4): 86-118.
27

Stephens Jr., Melvin and Takashi Unayama (2014) “Child Benefit Payments and Household Wealth
Accumulation,” manuscript.
Tang, Gong, Little, Roderick J.A., and Trivellore E. Raghunathan (2003) “Analysis of multivariate
missing data with nonignorable nonresponse,”Biometrika, 90, 4, pp. 747764.
Van Lancker, Wim, Joris Ghysels, and Bea Cantillon (2012) “An International Comparison of the
Impact of Child Benefits on Poverty Outcomes for Single Mothers,” Centre for Social Policy
Working Paper No. 12/03.
Wilcox, David W (1989) “Social Security Benefits, Consumption Expenditure, and the Life Cycle
Hypothesis,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2):288-304.
Zeldes, Stephen P. (1989) “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Political Economy, 97(2):305-46.

28

Table 1 - Social Security Notch Regressions
Sample:

Pooled

Non-Imputed
S.S. Income

Imputed
S.S. Income

Non-Imputed
S.S. Income
IPW

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

OLS

-0.010
(0.0005)

-0.012
(0.0005)

-0.005
(0.0008)

-0.011
(0.0005)

First Stage
(Residuals)

0.227
(0.050)

0.267
(0.056)

0.070
(0.040)

0.270
(0.059)

Reduced Form
(Residuals)

-0.0052
(0.0026)

-0.0048
(0.0023)

-0.0071
(0.0045)

-0.0049
(0.0022)

2SLS

-0.023
(0.014)

-0.018
(0.010)

-0.097
(0.068)

-0.018
(0.010)

N

256,710

203,983

52,727

203,983

OLS

-0.021
(0.001)

-0.023
(0.001)

-0.012
(0.002)

-0.023
(0.001)

First Stage
(Residuals)

0.139
(0.056)

0.162
(0.064)

0.052
(0.042)

0.164
(0.064)

Reduced Form
(Residuals)

-0.016
(0.003)

-0.015
(0.003)

-0.020
(0.006)

-0.015
(0.003)

2SLS

-0.112
(0.049)

-0.090
(0.037)

-0.306
(0.213)

-0.089
(0.036)

N

112,073

89,155

22,918

89,155

A. Full Sample

B. Widow Sample

Notes: Each estimate in the Table is from a separate regression. The dependent variable is an indicator whether the
family is living in a shared arrangement. The OLS and 2SLS estimates are the coefficients on family Social Security
income and also include as controls: four categories each for the education of the head and the spouse (if present), age
of the spouse (if present), marital status (married, widowed, and divorced), white, and female; a full set of indicators
for the age (age+3 for widowed and divorced women) from ages 65 to 90; survey year indicators, and indicators for the
nine Census divisions. The first stage and reduced form estimates are the coefficient on the Social Security instrument
described in the text where the variables used in estimation are the residuals from regressions of the measures on the
controls used in the OLS and 2SLS specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the year of birth.

Table 2 - Excess Sensitivity Regressions
Sample:

Full

Below
Median
Income

Above
Median
Income

Correct
Reports

Correct
Reports
IPW

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

OLS

0.086
(0.010)

0.073
(0.007)

0.093
(0.015)

0.083
(0.009)

0.085
(0.010)

2SLS

0.190
(0.074)

0.189
(0.084)

0.176
(0.121)

0.104
(0.035)

0.110
(0.037)

First Stage

0.302
(0.032)

0.331
(0.044)

0.281
(0.046)

1.08
(0.047)

1.10
(0.047)

Reduced Form

0.057
(0.023)

0.063
(0.028)

0.049
(0.034)

0.113
(0.039)

0.121
(0.042)

N

217,312

108,391

108,921

144,865

144,865

Notes: Each estimate in the Table is from a separate regression. The dependent variable is the change in in nondurable consumption from month t − 1 to month t. The OLS and 2SLS estimates are the coefficients on the change
in reported other social security income from month t − 1 to month t. The first stage and reduced form estimates
are the coefficient on the programmatic change in child benefits from month t − 1 to month t which are computed
based on the age and number of children in the household. Each regression also includes calendar year and month
indicators, survey month indicators, the change in the number of household members, and the age of the household
head and its square.

Appendix Table 1 - Social Security Notch Regressions
Cell Mean Regressions
Sample:

Pooled

Non-Imputed
S.S. Income

Imputed
S.S. Income

(1)

(2)

(3)

OLS

-0.016
(0.005)

-0.015
(0.004

-0.004
(0.009)

First Stage

0.260
(0.016)

0.311
(0.015)

0.049
(0.026)

Reduced Form

-0.0068
(0.0022)

-0.0064
(0.0016)

-0.0088
(0.0039)

2SLS

-0.026
(0.008)

-0.021
(0.005)

-0.178
(0.104)

456

456

456

OLS

-0.041
(0.009)

-0.039
(0.009)

-0.0015
(0.011)

First Stage

0.137
(0.010)

0.155
(0.012)

0.065
(0.024)

Reduced Form

-0.015
(0.003)

-0.014
(0.003)

-0.019
(0.005)

2SLS

-0.111
(0.021)

-0.088
(0.018)

-0.297
(0.117)

456

456

456

A. Full Sample

N
B. Widow Sample

N

Notes: Each estimate in the Table is from a separate regression. The data used in this table are cell means which are
averaged at the year of birth-age level using sample weights to construct the averages. The dependent variable is the
share of families in a cell living in a shared arrangement. The OLS and 2SLS estimates are the coefficients on family
Social Security income and also include as controls: shares in four education for the education of the head and the
spouse (if present), average age of the spouse (if present), share of heads in each marital status category (married,
widowed, and divorced), share white, and share female; a full set of indicators for the age (age+3 for widowed and
divorced women) from ages 65 to 90; survey year indicators, and share of the cell residing in each of the nine Census
divisions. The first stage and reduced form estimates are the coefficient on the Social Security instrument described
in the text where the variables used in estimation are the residuals from regressions of the measures on the controls
used in the OLS and 2SLS specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the year of birth.

1980

1990

2000

A. Earnings

2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

B. Social Security

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

2000

Year

1990

2010

1990

2000

2010

1980

1990

2000

2010

F. Worker's Compensation

1980

C. AFDC/TANF

Figure 1: March CPS Share Imputed Among Those With Positive Amounts 1988-2013

D. Supplemental Security Inc. E. Unemployment Insurance

.35

.3

.25

.2

.15

Share Imputed

.35

.3

.25

.2

.15

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
.35
.3
.25
.2
.15

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
.35
.3
.25
.2
.15

9000

8000

Instrument
7000

6000

5000

1900

Year of Birth
Instrument
S.S. Income: Imputed

1910

1930
S.S. Income: Non-Imputed

1920

Figure 2: Social Security Income and the Instrument by Year of Birth

7000
5000

5500
6000
6500
Reported S.S. Income

