NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAMPLE-SELECTION BIASES AND THE “INDUSTRIALIZATION PUZZLE”
Howard Bodenhorn
Timothy W. Guinnane
Thomas A. Mroz
Working Paper 21249
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21249

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

For comments and suggestions we thank Shameel Ahmad, Cihan Artunç, Gerard van den Berg, Claire
Brennecke, Raymond Cohn, Thomas Cvrcek, Jeremy Edwards, James Fenske, Amanda Gregg, Farly
Grubb, Sukjin Han, Brian A'Hearn, Philip Hoffmann, Sriya Iyer, John Komlos, John Murray, Sheilagh
Ogilvie, Jonathan Pritchett, Paul Rhode, Mark Rosenzweig, Gabrielle Santangelo, Richard Steckel,
Jochen Streb, William Sundstrom, Werner Troesken, James Trussell, Christopher Udry, Marianne
Wannamaker, John Warner, David Weir, anonymous referees, and participants in seminars at the University
of Michigan, the University of Nuremberg, Queen's University (Ontario), the Rhein-Westfälisches
Wirtschaftsintitut, Tulane University, and the 2012 Cliometrics meetings. We thank Emilia Arcaleni,
John Murray and Richard Steckel for sharing data. We acknowledge financial support from the Yale
University Economic Growth Center. Meng Liu, Yiming Ma, and Adèle Rossouw provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sample-selection biases and the “industrialization puzzle”
Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy W. Guinnane, and Thomas A. Mroz
NBER Working Paper No. 21249
June 2015
JEL No. J11,N11,N31
ABSTRACT
Understanding long-term changes in human well-being is central to understanding the consequences
of economic development. An extensive anthropometric literature purports to show that heights in
the United States declined between the 1830s and the 1890s, which is when the US economy industrialized
and urbanized. Most research argues that declining heights reflects the impact of the industrialization
process. This interpretation, however, relies on sources subject to selection bias. Changes in that selection
mechanism may account for the declining heights. We show that the evidentiary basis of the puzzle
is not as robust as previously believed. Our meta-analysis of more than 150 studies shows that declining-heights
finding emerges primarily in selected samples. Finally, we offer a parsimonious diagnostic test for
revealing (but not necessarily correcting for) selection bias. The diagnostic applied to four samples
that underlay the industrialization puzzle shows compelling evidence of selection.

Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com
Timothy W. Guinnane
Department of Economics
Yale University
PO Box 208269
New Haven CT 06520
timothy.guinnane@yale.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21249

Thomas A. Mroz
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
33 Gilmer St SE
Atlanta, GA 30302
tmroz@clemson.edu

1. Introduction
Introduced into economic history just over three decades ago, anthropometric
history is now one component of the cliometrician’s standard toolkit. Roderick Floud et
al (2011, 374 hereafter FFHH) note that anthropometric history originated with the
limited objective of establishing the heights and health of the inhabitants of North
America and Western Europe in the eighteenth century. Since then, the study of heights
has “mushroomed into a study of the long-term development of human society,” drawing
on the tools and insights of economics, statistics, and medicine, among others. It is fair to
say that no other branch of cliometric history has had as many resources devoted to it in
the past two decades as historical anthropometrics (Voth and Leunig 1996, 541).
Anthropometricians have developed a systematic approach to the study of the
connection between changes in the human body and economic development labeled the
“techno-physical” approach, which is built on four premises (FFHH 2011). First, the
typical body size and shape of a population reflect that generation’s longevity and work
capacity. Second, a generation’s work capacity and the technology available to it
determine its outputs. Third, a generation’s outputs and, therefore, its physical wellbeing,
is both an inheritance from previous generations and a legacy to generations to follow.
Thus, fourth, a society can embark on a path of long-run economic growth only if it
witnesses improvements in each generation’s physical wellbeing, which it then passes to
subsequent generations.1
Physiological improvement – greater mean stature, increases in mean body mass
index toward modern norms – takes a central place in the list of factors that influence
1

Deaton (2013) offers a related argument.

2

economic development in the long run. But, as FFHH (2011) note in their summary of
the British and American experiences, nutritional wellbeing in these now-rich economies
did not grow monotonically. Most of the available evidence from these two countries
reveals that heights stagnated or declined in the early phase of modern economic growth.
In the United States, in particular, mean height apparently declined for cohorts born
between (approximately) the 1830s and the 1890s. This apparent anomaly, now widely
labeled the “antebellum puzzle,” is one of the most-studied issues in the field of
economic history (FFHH 2010, 298). Similar substantial, long-term declines have also
been identified for Great Britain, Sweden, and the Habsburg monarchy, although at
different times (Floud, Wachter and Gregory 1990, Sandberg and Steckel 1987, Komlos
1989). Komlos (1994a, 493) calls the decline in heights in the early phase of economic
modernization in these countries “the most amazing discovery” of anthropometric
history. Studies have identified a number of potential causes, though most focus on the
failure of food supplies (measured by quantity, quality or both) and public health, broadly
conceived, to keep up with population growth and urbanization.2 “Economic growth in
the nineteenth century,” write FFHH (2011, 348), “was very costly because economic
booms caused rapid population growth, internal and external migration, urbanization,
sanitation problems, and rampant diseases; all these reduced people’s productivity and
their ability to accumulate human capital.”
The apparent decline in heights in the United States, Great Britain, Sweden and
Habsburg-era central Europe is indeed interesting. But we doubt the evidence adduced

2

Komlos (2012 working paper) also provides a summary of the literature and identifies at least a dozen

different explanations for the puzzle.

3

for this apparent decline. These countries had very different economies at the time of the
height reversal. But they did share an important feature: they filled their military ranks
with volunteers rather than conscripts. Thus the samples height scholars rely on for the
reversals are selected, in the sense that they contain only individuals who decided to join
the army. Elsewhere we have shown that the sample-selection problems in inferring
population heights from a group of volunteers can be grave (Bodenhorn, Guinnane and
Mroz 2014). The implications of selection bias make the observed “shrinking in a
growing economy” less of an anomaly (Komlos 1998a). As the economy grew, the
outside option of military service became less attractive, especially to the productive and
the tall. Military heights declined because tall people disproportionately chose nonmilitary employment. Thus, we cannot really say whether population heights declined;
perhaps only the heights of those willing to enlist in the military declined. Below we
draw on published heights studies to document an important feature of the data: height
reversals or “puzzles” emerge only rarely in countries that filled their ranks through (near
universal) conscription.
Sample selection can take two forms that the heights literature sometimes
confuses. Exogenous selection pertains to sampling on an observable, exogenous
characteristic, such as race or gender. Modern surveys often deliberately over-sample on
such characteristics. If we know the proportions of such groups in the population, then we
can construct and apply weights to obtain estimates that reflect the population’s
characteristics. Endogenous selection reflects a situation where an individual enters the
sample in part because of unmeasured characteristics that also are related to outcomes of
interest. That is, a soldier in a volunteer army (for example) made a decision based on his

4

individual unobserved characteristics. We cannot use simple sampling weights to
overcome endogenous selection because the required weights would be individualspecific and depend upon unmeasured characteristics.
Endogenous selection likely afflicts many of the samples cliometricians use; the
problem is not limited to the antebellum puzzle. But we focus on that issue. Two points
warrant emphasis. First, endogenous selection typically produces samples that have a
disproportionate number of people sharing some observable characteristic. But this fact
reflects both choices made by individuals and constraints on data availability. The
endogenous selection depends on both observable and unobservable characteristics.
Unless we are willing to make heroic assumptions, we cannot adjust the selected sample
to reflect the population through re-weighting on observed characteristics alone. Second,
the mechanism underlying endogenous sampling can change over time, as succeeding
cohorts differ and as the opportunities and constraints they face change. Because of the
selection mechanism, army recruits in a given year will differ from the population; and in
different years they will differ from the true population in a different ways. Researchers
cannot assume that biases created by endogenous selection “average out” over time.
Some cliometricians contend that the issues surrounding selection and selection
bias are now well understood and that most researchers account for (or at least qualify
their conclusions based on) any potential selection bias issues. We disagree. Sample
selection problems of the endogenous type tend to be minimized when they are discussed
at all.3 Others make a virtue of the fact that many samples over-represent the poor and

3

A recent study of Portuguese heights is typical. After a consideration of declining minimum height

requirements from 62 polegadas (Portuguese inches) between 1763 and 1774 to 56.6 polegadas (post-

5

working classes (Carson 2006, 2008, 2009). But this argument both confuses exogenous
with endogenous selection and misses the consequence of endogenous selection. Military
and prison samples, for example, over-represent the poor and working classes not
because the poor were randomly over-sampled to achieve that result, but because poor
and working-class men have unobserved characteristics that made them more likely to
find soldiering or crime to be their best option at that moment. Equally important, the
poor men who entered the military or the prison are not a random sample of poor men; as
we argue below, there is good reason to believe that even for those of a given class
background, men in the army are shorter than those who did not join. And this
endogenous selection likely changes over time.
Our argument is not what the anthropometricians have labeled the “basketball
problem,” which “refers to the possibility that the military [or any self-selected group] is
drawn from a normal distribution that is not typical of the entire male distribution”
because basketball rewards height (Sandberg and Steckel 1987, 103). Endogenous
selection is not the basketball problem per se because it is usually presented as one of
invariant height-based selection: the mean height of basketball players is presumed to be
greater than the mean height of the adult male population by an amount that remains
(approximately) constant over time. But as competitive strategies in professional

1886), Stolz et al (2013, p. 548-550) note that military recruitment was “extremely unpopular” and that
“informal protection networks enabled many ordinary persons as well as many of those in the upper social
strata to avoid recruitment altogether.” Despite the ability of the rich and the ordinary to avoid recruitment,
the authors contend that their sample, which spans birth cohorts between 1730 and 1820, provides a
“relatively unbiased sample of recruitment-aged males.”

6

basketball have changed over time, the average height of world-class basketball players
has changed. This is an example of endogenous selection.4
We are not the first to recognize the problem of endogenous selection in the
historical heights literature. We may be the first to systematically explore whether it can
explain the most important anomalies in the literature, the most notable being the
apparent reversals in average heights observed in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
and labeled the “antebellum puzzle” in the case of the nineteenth-century US or the
“industrialization puzzle” elsewhere.5 Our discussion proceeds as follows. Section 2
4

In their study of US baseball players, Saint Onge et al (2008, 487) discuss something close to this when

they write: “Changes in height may also be related to different strategies for playing the game over time,
and thus, selection for different kinds of players.”
5

In his reanalysis of boys recruited by the Marine Society in eighteenth-century UK, Komlos

(1993, 119) argued that Floud, Wachter and Gregory (1990) reported changes in heights that were
“unreasonably abrupt and unacceptably large.” Komlos attributed the abrupt changes to changing
recruitment practices and changes in the types of boys offered for recruitment. Similarly, Johnson
and Nicholas (1995) claim that a 2.25-inch decline in the mean height of young adult males
entering the military between 1822 and 1847 is too large to be consistent with the nutritional
insults suffered by these cohorts. Johnson and Nicholas (1995, 471) attribute some part of that
decline to selection bias in military samples. For early statements of the puzzle, see Komlos
(1996; 1998a). Using a state of the art, two-step semi-parametric estimator for choice based
samples with possible selection on a single event (i.e., in sample vs. not in sample), Zimran
(2015) reports that selection issues are important when one examines height data based derived
from U.S. military records in the mid1800s. The selection biases he uncovers with this approach
are not severe enough to completely overturn the apparent downward trend in heights over this
time period. Selection into his sample, however, depends on both a model of occupational choice
7

describes the puzzle and its empirical basis in more detail. Section 3 reports a metaanalysis of the height literature, documenting the striking fact that the puzzle appears
most often in studies that rely on selected or small samples. Section 4 describes a simple
economic model of endogenous selection and discusses the few heights studies that
appear to have recognized the issue in the past. Section 5 outlines the problem of testing
for selection bias in selected samples, and section 6 reports tests for selection bias in a
collection of influential U.S. and British sources.

2. The antebellum puzzle
Margo and Steckel (1983) and Fogel (1986) report an anomaly; the heights of
adult male native-born Americans began to decline among those born in the 1830s.6 The
downward trend persisted until the 1870s or 1880s and was not reversed until the last
decade of the century, after which adult male stature increased at the relatively rapid rate
of 1.8cm per decade between 1902 and 1931 (Fogel 1986, 511). The pattern of declining
during one’s early adult years and a selection model of how one can link successfully these
military records to micro-level information from the US. Censuses.

As Mroz (2015)

demonstrates, a two-step estimator using information from just a single compound event when the
underlying selection mechanism depends on multiple underlying events can seldom control
adequately for selection biases and can actually exacerbate the severity of the selection biases.
Zimran’s (2105) study clearly indicates that there are potentially severe sample selection issues.

6

Throughout the paper, references to dates when discussing heights will pertain to birth year, not

observation year unless otherwise noted.

8

heights at mid-century is “puzzling because according to conventional indicators the
American economy was expanding rapidly during the antebellum decades” (Komlos
1987, 898). Ordinarily one expects periods of economic growth to witness rising living
standards.
The antebellum puzzle is all the more puzzling because, among the early
industrializers, only England, Sweden and Austria-Hungary appear to have experienced a
puzzle. Figure 1 reproduces Fogel’s (1986) graph of US adult male heights. The data
underlying this graph form the foundation of what has come to be labeled the
“antebellum puzzle.” We superimpose on Fogel’s graph the mean heights reported for
several other countries. The heights of the Dutch, Swedes, Italians, and French traced out
long secular growth paths that, while country-specific, demonstrated no sharp reversals.
The heights of Russians, Bulgarians, and Japanese (not shown) similarly all increased
without reversal between the mid-nineteenth and early twentieth century. Only three
other countries – Britain, Sweden and Austria-Hungary -- exhibit a US-like pattern of
declining heights during early industrialization. Komlos (1998b, 236; 1998a; 2012)
reviews the puzzle literature and concludes that the “pattern has been found repeatedly ....
[and] is surely not a statistical artefact [sic].” A similar pattern of height decline appears
in samples of military academy students, prisoners, and manumitted slaves, among
others. Given its appearance in multiple samples, attention turned to uncovering its
sources. Explanations for the puzzle have focused on declines in available foodstuffs (or
a rise in their relative price) that led to a long-run decline in net nutrition; to increases in
the disease load due to urbanization and a widening transportation network; to increased
income inequality, which negatively affected the height of the lower classes more than

9

secular growth positively affected the height of the middle and upper classes; to increased
work intensity, which also would have more negatively affected the height of factory
workers relative to farmers (who already worked hard) and white-collar workers; and to
increased immigration around mid-century, which would reduce mean adult height if
immigrants were shorter than native-born Americans and if the children and
grandchildren of immigrants carried the immigrant height disadvantage across
generations.7 The puzzle literature has become part of the continuing debate between
“pessimists” who argue that industrialization diminished aggregate well-being in the
short run and “optimists” who think the opposite (Feinstein 1998). The finding of
declining average height supports the pessimist’s case.

2.1 The empirical basis of the “puzzle”
Although broadly accepted as a fact in the heights literature, the puzzle has a
surprisingly limited evidentiary basis. In an early summary, Komlos (1998a, 782)
discussed 21 heights samples, 14 of which report declining mean height. In three other
samples, mean height increased, and one implies no change in mean height. Komlos also
reports the approximate turning point in mean height, with dates ranging between the
1780s and the 1840s. Excluding the three studies that report increasing height, the modal
downturn begins in the 1830s; the median downturn occurs in the 1820s (Komlos 1998b,
236). Since Komlos’s 1998 summary, more than a dozen articles have appeared that
document or discuss the puzzle. We collected these studies to summarize results from 36

7

See Sunder (2004, 76-77) and Komlos (2012) for the details of these and other explanations that have

been advanced in the literature..

10

samples that span all or part of the puzzle era (1830s-1880s). These 19 different studies
do not constitute a census of puzzle articles, but they span the range of sources this
literature uses, including volunteer armies, students, prisoners, as well as free, enslaved,
and emancipated African-Americans.8 Table 1 summarizes the sources and their results.
We list author and publication year, the decades covered, the measured group, the mean
height change among that group, and which of the five broad explanations for the puzzle
that the authors attribute to the height change when one is invoked.
Even an unsophisticated summary reveals that, taken at face value, the published
studies of the heights puzzle do not present an overwhelming case. Column 5 of Table 1
reports the change in mean height reported for each sample. The mean change is -0.44%;
the median estimate is -0.5% and the modal estimate is -0.8%. The mean estimate is
consistent with a decline of about three-quarters of centimeter if we assume the mean
height before the onset of the decline was 172cm.9 While a 0.75cm decline is nontrivial,
it is not consistent with a mid-century nutritional crisis.
This overall estimate may mask more subtle patterns, so we probed a bit further.
One concern is that the 36 samples span different decades, so we calculate the average
8

The studies we summarize sometimes report results from new data, and sometimes rework earlier

material. Four, for example, rely wholly or in part on the Union Army samples. But no two samples use the
identical data. Haines’ (1998) analysis of the Union Army data uses only soldier who enlisted in New
York; A’Hearn’s (1998) analysis subdivides the sample by occupation and place of residence and we
include three of Komlos’s (1998) analyses of black soldiers because he uses three alternative methods of
dealing with left-tail truncation. All these studies use different methods and report results from different
samples than that used in Margo and Steckel’s (1982) original analysis.
9

This 172cm estimate is approximately the mean reported by Fogel (1986, 511) for the 1720s through the

1790s

11

decline in height per decade. The result is a change in mean height of -0.08% per decade.
But this estimate may also mislead, because the puzzle is considered a post-1830
phenomenon. So we recalculate the change assuming that the entire reported change in
mean height occurred in whatever decades the sample spans between the 1830s and the
1880s. This calculation yields a much larger change in mean height of -0.23% per
decade. One might also worry about the different sample sizes, which range between 454
and 41,173 measured individuals. When we weight the mean change in heights by sample
size, the decline for all decades is -0.10% per decade, or -0.14% (=-0.24cm) per decade if
we assume that entire decline occurred between the 1830s and 1880s.10 To sum up: the
weighted mean of the three dozen estimates suggests that height declined by 1.48cm
(=0.58 inches) over six decades. This nontrivial decline is modest, even if true. The
remainder of the current paper explains why we think heights probably did not decline
even by this small amount and that the puzzle is, in fact, an artifact.

3. A meta analysis of the historical heights literature
Our analysis of about three dozen antebellum puzzle studies casts some doubts on
whether the mid-century decline in heights was a real phenomenon. But these studies
alone cannot resolve whether the observed decline in height was a consequence of the
selected nature of the samples. Ideally, we would need to compare selected samples to
non-selected samples drawn from the same populations. That is not possible, for obvious
reasons. Figure 1 does the next-best thing: it compares results from volunteer and
10

The standard deviation (error) of the estimate is 0.02. If we assume that the sampling distribution of the

estimated sample-size weighted per decade percentage changes is normally distributed, the 95% confidence
intervals for the 0.14% estimate are bounded by -0.18% and -0.10%.

12

conscript armies for different countries. Universal conscription, a system under which
nearly all young men eligible for military service were called for medical examination to
determine their fitness, was common across Europe during the nineteenth and twentieth
century. In theory, all men of a certain age were eligible to serve; in practice, of course,
some young men were able to avoid service for various reasons. Unless a significant
fraction of the eligible young men were able to avoid and that ability was correlated,
either positively or negatively, with the young men’s height, conscript samples should
provide good estimates of the true mean height-at-age of each cohort.
Conscript data have additional appealing features. One advantage is that because
men were typically examined at a given age, an age that did not change much over time,
the data create snapshots of, say, 20-year olds across several decades. This feature makes
inter-temporal comparisons relatively straightforward. A second advantage is that many
countries called young men when they were near their terminal adult height. Third,
because the samples are self-weighted, the econometrician does not have to rely on a
census to determine the sampling weights needed to reconstruct a population estimate.
Figure 1 reports just a few examples. We expanded the range of examples by
drawing on approximately 150 historical heights studies. (The appendix describes our
strategy in identifying these studies.)11 We classify the source according to type of
sample (conscript, volunteer, prisoner, students, passport applicant, etc.), the time period
11

Briefly stated, we used the following procedure to identify and classify articles for inclusion: (1) search
for studies that use conscripts; (2) search for studies that use volunteers; (3) identify nonmilitary historical
height articles in the principal outlets (i.e., economic history journals, collected essay volumes, and human
biology journals) published between 1995 and 2014; (4) read nearly all of the articles identified in steps one
and two and read a selection of articles from step three until we reached a total of 150 articles. The
resulting sample includes 169 samples drawn from 144 separate sources (some articles, books or chapters
report more than one independent sample). Our sample of studies includes 50 conscript samples, 39
volunteers and 80 “other.” It also includes a wide range of countries, though it is over-weighted with North
America and western Europe, which is also consistent with the larger literature. We also include some pre1995 studies when, in reading the more recent literature, they seemed particularly salient to our project.

13

covered, mean height in the first year the series is observed, mean height in the last year
the series is observed, and whether the study reported a significant height reversal during
any decade. A “reversal” here means a decline in heights that breaks a longer-term
increase in heights. We coded a reversal as significant if during any decade mean height
declined by one centimeter or more. 12
The database reports results from 167 samples (some papers report more than one
sample). Fifty of these rely on conscripts. The meta analysis includes a fair representation
of the other sources commonly used in the historical heights literature: 39 samples of
volunteer soldiers; 14 samples of students, including students at military academies; 23
samples of prisoners; and 41 samples that we classify as under the heading of Other,
which includes an eclectic mix of runaway and manumitted slaves, indentured servants,
immigrant workers, voters, passport applicants, government employees, enrollees in
health and life insurance programs, unclaimed Korean corpses, and American baseball
players, among others. Only a few of the non-conscript samples are national in scope.
Some are very small; one has only 151 observations over 34 years, though the median
number of observations in the “Other” group is nearly 3,900 spread over a median period
of 40 years. The database includes samples from 40 different countries, including 36
entries for the United States. Table 2 reports the proportion of samples that document a
height reversal (a decline of 1cm or more) in any decade (Column 1) or a decline across
12

Our 1cm standard for identifying a reversal provides a relatively low threshold, but one that still occurs

so irregularly that we are not falling into what Komlos (1993a, 130) notes is the trap of attaching “too much
significance to slight deviations from the main trend” in heights. Baten (2009, 172) and Baten and Komlos
(1998) contend that a 1-1.2cm change in a decade is a biologically (and economically) significant change in
mean male adult height.

14

two or more decades (Column 2). Twenty percent of studies based on conscripts identify
at least one reversal across an average sample period of five decades (median of six
decades). The other 80% of conscript samples show no evidence of a substantive height
reversal in any decade. Just four percent of conscript studies identify at least two puzzlelike reversals. Compare this to the 56% of volunteer samples that identify one reversal
over an average sample period of four decades (median of three decades). One-third of
volunteer samples identify two or more reversals. More than one-half of studies involving
students identify one reversal; 70% of prisoner studies identify a reversal; and, one-third
of the catch-all “Other” samples imply reversals.
This meta-analysis shows that the phenomenon associated with the
industrialization puzzle appears most often in samples subject to selection bias. We
sharpen this conclusion with the assistance of a series of probit regressions in which the
dependent variable equals one if the study reports at least one reversal (or, alternatively,
two or more reversals), and zero otherwise. This approach allows us to control for other
effects. Table 3 reports the marginal effects from two specifications. In each case the
difference is relative to a conscript sample. Column 1 provides summary statistics for
each variable coded from our reading of each study. The sample has approximately equal
representation of conscripts, volunteers, students/prisoners, and others. The studies differ
in that some cover less than two complete decades; others span a century or more. They
also vary widely in sample size, from less than 200 to more than 10 million. And about
two-thirds of the volunteer sample results were reported after making a correction for
left-tail truncation.

15

Columns 2 and 3 report marginal effects for a given type of data on the presence
of a reversal (or two). The probability of observing at least one 1cm or more decline in
average height in at least one decade is 44 percentage points greater for a sample of
volunteer soldiers and 31 percentage points greater for prison samples. The estimated
probability was notably higher for samples of students, though the estimates are
imprecise. The marginal probability of observing a decline was greater for samples that
spanned longer periods, but lower for those that are nationally representative. The puzzle,
however, is not about a short-term decline in heights that may in occur in a single decade,
but rather a longer term phenomenon. Thus, in Column 3 we estimate the marginal
probabilities of observing at least two (not necessarily consecutive) decades of declining
mean heights. The results are broadly consistent with the one-decade decline results:
samples involving volunteer soldiers and prisoners are more likely to exhibit two
reversals; the marginal probabilities are higher for samples that encompass more years
and smaller for larger samples.
Although this analysis includes studies far removed from the period that spans the
puzzle, it provides an important insight into the literature. The United States did not have
military conscription until the twentieth century.13 Yet that history makes the
cliometrician’s work more difficult, because U.S. height data before the twentieth century
comes almost exclusively from selected samples. Thus the basic constraints of U.S.
sources make definitive statements about the antebellum puzzle tenuous.

4. Endogenous selection

13

Except for a brief period during the Civil War. Most men could avoid that draft (A’Hearn 1998).

16

Endogenous selection arises when individuals appear in a sample only because
they (or possibly someone else) make decisions that reflect unmeasured individual
constraints and preferences that are related to key outcomes of interest. The most general
case is soldiers joining a volunteer army, but the relevant decision can also be made by
someone other than the person whose height is measured: runaway or transported slaves,
for example. To make this problem concrete, we summarize the Roy-style model
described in detail in Bodenhorn, Guinnane and Mroz 2014. The Roy (1951) model is a
workhorse tool in labor economics and other areas, applied to situations where
individuals make a binary choice.14 The model assumes that each individual decides
whether to work in the civilian or military sector (that is, join the army), and only the
latter appear in the height sample. Each individual has a prospective civilian and military
wage; at least one of these wages reflects, in part, their height.
Wages could be correlated with height under two different interpretations. The
first is that the army or some civilian occupations might reward height itself. Promotion
might come faster to taller soldiers because of their height, and in some military and
civilian occupations a person might be more productive because he is tall. A second
interpretation seems more consistent with the basic tenets of the heights literature.
Height is correlated with a person’s (mostly unobserved) health human capital and thus
their productivity (Schultz 2002). The model also assumes that each person receives

14

Our model draws on Roy (1951), and resembles Heckman and Sedlacek’s (1985) two-sector

occupational choice model.

17

individual-specific shocks to their civilian and military wages, and has individual–
specific preferences over civilian versus military life.15
The decision to join the army reflects individual shocks and preferences, as well
as individual height and the return to height. The distribution of heights for men who join
the army can then be written as the product of the population height distribution (say,
f(h)) and a second expression (Z(h)) that summarizes the decisions made by individuals
of different heights. Z(h) is a function of all model parameters, most importantly, the
return to height or its unobserved correlates in the civilian sector (βC) and the military
sector (βM). If βC > βM then the heights of volunteer soldiers will understate the
population height. We assume that in general the military rewards individual traits such
as height less than the civilian sector. The degree of height understatement in the selected
sample depends critically on the relative sizes of βC and βM (as well as the other
parameters); as the parameters change over time (or space), the size of the selection bias
will change. The simulations reported in Bodenhorn, Guinnane and Mroz (2014)
demonstrate that small variations in the incentives to join the army can generate
empirically important variations in the height of the resulting sample, even when we hold
constant the heights of the underlying population.
The model also suggests that a sample selected endogenously can look like it was
selected exogenously. Suppose that a sample has proportionally more common laborers
than are known to exist in the population. This might reflect exogenous selection: the
sampling procedure took a random sample of workers, but for some reason over-

15

The simulations reported in BGM use parameter values that imply that height only “explains” a small

proportion of an individual’s height.

18

weighted the laborers. If so, then it is simple to re-weight the sample to obtain correct
population estimates. More likely, the over-representation of laborers reflects the fact that
laborers were more likely to find their best option in the military. If this is the case then
we cannot simply re-weight the sample to obtain population estimates, because the
correct weights would be individual-specific and are unknown. The necessary weights
would need to reflect the individual’s height in addition to their productivity and taste
parameters. There is a second, related problem. If we had too many laborers because of
careful exogenous sampling, then the sample height of laborers would be a good estimate
of the heights of laborers in the population. Such is not the case for endogenous selection.
The Roy model implies that the laborers who joined the army would be on average
shorter than the laborers who did not, with the degree of shortfall varying directly with
civilian-sector opportunities.
The heights literature contains numerous examples of studies that suffer from
some type of endogenous selection. Komlos (1994a), for example, compares trends in
the heights of upper-class French students and French conscripts. His sample of students
enrolling in the Ecole Polytechnique between the 1780s and 1860s shows sharp declines
in the 1820s (Parisian students) and 1830s (provincial students). He argues that the
student sample reflects a type of exogenous selection, and interprets his results as
showing a height reversal even for the comparatively well-off portions of French society.
The French series in our Figure 1 come from Weir (1997), who shows that the heights of
French conscripts rose continuously throughout the nineteenth century. Komlos’ findings
more likely reflect changes in the endogenous selection of French university students.
Komlos’s sample of 18-year old students are always taller than the general population,

19

but over time they become relatively shorter compared to the population of 20-year old
French men called up for military medical examination. This is one of the few cases
where data exist to compare a selected sample to one that is more nationally
representative. The selected sample’s misrepresentation of the population trends closely
tracks the predictions of the Roy model. Conclusions drawn on the basis of the selected,
student sample would lead to incorrect conclusions about trends in France’s economy or
the well-being of French men.16
Volunteer soldiers, militia men, National Guardsmen, prisoners, runaway servants
or manumitted slaves: all were measured only because of something they or someone else
did. We are not the first to recognize the problem of endogenous, as opposed to
exogenous, selection. Brennan, McDonald and Shlomowitz (1994a; 1994b; 1997) raise
this issue in their study of Indian workers who migrated to Fiji. They acknowledge that
temporal changes in the mean observed height may be driven, at least in part, by changes
in the underlying demand and supply of eligible migrants due to changes in
macroeconomic conditions. Similarly, in his discussion of the declining heights of
London boys recruited into the Marine Society in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
Komlos (1993, p. 122) discusses what he labels the “offer curve” of recruits, which may
16

Komlos (2008) compares U.S. military volunteers born in 1940 and 1950 to random draws from the U.S.

population. The relevant enlistment period spans the height of the Vietnam War. The military sample
shows a decline and then recovery in average heights not reflected in the random sample.

These

differences between population heights and volunteer soldier heights cast doubt on any conclusions that
may be drawn considering only the heights of volunteer soldiers, a fact that Komlos (2008, 447) endorses,
when he writes: “these [military] data have their own limitations insofar as they pertain to those who
selected into the US military at moderate wages.”

20

have shifted over time in response to changing economic conditions. He does not,
however, push this idea. Ricardo Salvatore (1998, 105), in describing selection issues
surrounding his sample of Argentine soldiers between the 1780s and 1830s, writes that
the shift from a (mostly) volunteer army in the 1810-1829 period to a (mostly) mercenary
army in the 1850-1865 period “made the quality of recruits more dependent on labor
market conditions,” which he acknowledges may have been responsible for some of the
observed changes in average height over time. In the end, however, Salvatore dismisses
the potential importance of this process. In their study of English prisoners transported to
New South Wales, Nicholas and Steckel (1991, 949) raise the possibility of endogenous
selection (they labeled it a “period effect”), which they defined as the possibility that
crime became more concentrated among “poorer and shorter men” over time.17
The clearest earlier discussion of endogenous selection appears in Mokyr and
O’Grada’s (1994; 1996) two articles investigating the heights of Irish recruits into the
Royal Navy and the English East India Company. They find that Irish recruits were
(surprisingly) taller than English recruits and attribute the finding to relative Irish
poverty. A man of given height in Ireland had fewer non-military opportunities than a
similarly situated Englishman of equal stature and was, therefore, more inclined to join
the military. (In the Roy model, the finding is consistent with the idea that the Irish and

17

Nicholas and Steckel conclude this was not the case because their Jarque-Bera tests failed to reject

normality for those transported before and after 1833. Bodenhorn, Guinnane and Mroz (2014) show that the
standard tests for normality are unlikely to reveal changes in height-based selection, because the tests have
very low power so that even samples known to be selected can appear normal. Baten et al (2012) also
allude to something like endogenous selection.

21

English have identical population height distributions, but that βC - βM was smaller in
Ireland than in England.) Remarkably, many heights papers report Mokyr and O’Grada’s
“tall but poor Irish” result without any discussion of the fact that they attribute the
apparent anomaly to differential selection on height (see, for example, Nicholas and
Steckel 1991; A’Hearn 1998; Salvatore 2004; Morgan 2004; Canfield and Inwood 2011;
Riggs and Cuff 2013).
Gallman (1996, 194), too, raises concerns with both exogenous and endogenous
selection in his critique of Komlos’s (1987) study of West Point cadets. West Point
cadets are interesting only if they can be taken to represent “a random sample of some
larger, more interesting group – say all young white men in the United States.” But they
are not. Not everyone was eligible for West Point, and those who applied were primarily
interested in pursuing a military or engineering career. Gallman notes that the sample
might still be useful if the pool of candidates from which the cadets were drawn “retained
an unchanging character.” He suspected they were not. The fact that the post-Civil War
army was full of former brigadiers, colonels, majors and captains with battlefield and
command experience “surely caused more than a few potential soldiers to seek other
careers” (Gallman 1996, 194-195).

5. Selection bias and identification
Few historical data sets were collected as random samples from the populations of
birth cohorts, and for some important countries such as the U.S., we have none at all. Can
we estimate trends in historical heights from biased samples? In the simplest of all
possible cases, exemplified by the classic description of enlistment in the military (e.g.,

22

Trussel and Wachter, 1982), researchers would observe only a random sample of the
population for those whose height exceeded some minimum height requirement. Three
prominent methods have been discussed in the literature to account for such simple
sample selection issues: reduced sample maximum likelihood estimation or truncated
regression (Wachter and Trussel 1982), quantile bend (Wachter 1981), and Komlos-Kim
regression (1990). Unfortunately, the methods devised to deal with this simple selection
mechanism must assume that any height-based selection implied by the Roy model not
take place. That is, all of these approaches require that an individual’s propensity to enter
the military or some other sample be independent of height (above the minimum height
threshold, if there is one). The Roy model implies that we should expect this assumption
to be violated, so long as individuals from better socioeconomic backgrounds or who
have better civilian labor market opportunities are less likely to enlist in the military.
Uncovering temporal trends in mean height requires the anthropometrician to use
multiple birth cohort samples, where changing economic and military conditions could
lead to across cohort samples exhibiting non-constant degrees of selection biases.
To address the general problem, we separate the height distribution in a birthcohort from the process of selection into an observed sample. The former is the object of
interest, and the latter is the source of possible selection. The distribution of observed
heights is a convolution of these two functions: the distribution of observed (sampled)
heights depends on both the parameters of the birth-cohort height distribution and the
parameters of the selection function. Consider a simple world where individuals born at
date b grow until just before they turn age w. At date b+w, all have reached their height
potential. Immediately when they turn age w they make a decision that affects whether or

23

not they enter the observable sample.18 The distribution of observed height in this
example depends on two distinct sets of factors: those that affect growth, dated from time
period b to time period b+w-1, and those that influence the decision to join the sample,
observed at date b+w. The distribution of height for the entire birth cohort b depends only
on the collection of factors that affect growth from date b to b+w-1. We denote these
factors by e(b). Let v(tb) denote the factors that could affect the chance that a birth
cohort’s member is in the observable sample. The mean height for birth cohort b would
then be a function of e(b) alone, while the mean height for the those selected into the
sample would depend on both e(b) and v(tb). Denote the expected height of birth cohort
b by EbT(H)=f(e(b)). Then let the expected height among those selected into the
observable sample be Eb0(H) = h(g(e(b), v(tb)) = f(e(b)) + g(e(b), v(tb)). This expression
equals the true height of the birth cohort plus a bias term represented by g(). One can
obtain a consistent estimator of the mean height in the selected sample. Without further
assumptions, however, it is not possible to decompose this estimate into the part of the
observable mean height that is due to the cohort’s growth environment (which is what we
want) and the part due to the selection into the observed sample (which is just bias).
Now consider a comparison of individuals born in different years: those born in
year b (as above) and those born in year c. Can we reliably estimate the trend in heights
from selected samples? The mean height of those born in year c and of those born in year
c who were selected into observable sample at date tc are EcT(H)=f(e(c)) and Ec0(H) =
h(g(e(c), v(tc)) = f(e(c)) + g(e(c), v(tc)). To assess changes in heights over time we want

18

There could be minimum or maximum height requirements. These are assumed built into the selection

function.

24

estimates of f(e(c))-f(e(b)). This expression relies on random samples from the two
populations which we do not typically have. Thus most studies use the expected observed
heights to proxy for the change in height across birth cohorts: Ec0(H) – Eb0(H) = [f(e(c)) f(e(b))] + [g(e(c), v(tC)) - (g(e(b), v(tb))]. The second term in square braces captures the
bias from using the observed heights.
We observe only a single difference in expected mean height. But we need to deconvolute this difference into two changes: the change in the cohort-specific height and
the change in the difference of the bias terms. This is a classic identification problem.
There are three possible ways to identify the difference. First, if we had true random
samples from each of the birth cohorts, then each component of the bias would be zero.
Second, we could assume that the biases in each cohort are identical. This requires,
however, the unlikely claim that selection does not depend on any temporal changes in
macroeconomic or environmental conditions between dates b+w and c+w.
Komlos and Kim (1990) propose a third approach that does not yield consistent
estimators of the difference in mean heights, but allows one to infer the sign of the
differences in mean height. Their approach, however, requires that any height-based
selection involves only the very tall or very short. Their approach also requires that the
considerations that led men in two successive cohorts to join the army not change over
time. The effect of labor-market conditions on the decision to join the army, for example,
must be identical across cohorts. These are strong assumptions.

5.1 An indirect test of selection bias

25

We cannot estimate the true height from a selected sample, but we can
nonetheless detect the presence of selection itself. Suppose we have two different dates
when members of a birth cohort could be selected into a sample. These could be two ages
at which an individual can enlist. Call these ages

and

. In the absence of height-

based selection, the distribution of height for those born in cohort b and “observed” at
date

should be identical to those born in the same year and “observed” at date

.

If there is no selection, then an individual from a given cohort should not be shorter or
taller because he joined at one date rather than another. A rejection of the null hypothesis
of equal mean height in different “observation” years for the same birth cohort, provided
all members are sufficiently old to have reached full height, would be evidence of heightbased selection. A simple regression model can easily carry out this test.
Evidence of this type of height-based selection, however, still faces an
identification problem. This is due to the classic perfect collinearity of cohort, age, and
calendar time. What could appear to be selection biases due to calendar year effects from
tests described above could instead be described by just age and cohort effects. Suppose,
for example, that 21 year olds from any birth cohort who join the army are always on
average .5 cm taller than 20 year-olds from the same cohort who join the army. Then the
difference in the average height between birth cohorts, with or without adjusting for age
dummy variables, would reflect true differences in mean height in the birth cohorts’
population mean height provided the relative fractions enlisting at ages 20 and 21 are the
same across cohorts. The test described above, however, would indicate biases due to
height-based selection.

26

This example demonstrates that not all samples exhibiting height-based selection
will provide biased estimates of how mean height varies in the population across birth
cohorts. The cliometrician could always make the implausible argument that there are
no calendar year effects indicating age-based selection, and instead attribute all such
variations about birth cohort specific means to age effects. This argument becomes
implausible if we compare cross-cohort differences in the posited age-specific mean
height differentials. That is, suppose the difference in height between age 20 and age 21
for birth cohort b is different than it is for birth cohort (b+1). Then then one would need
to make a compelling argument for why focusing on height differentials at one particular
age, say age 21 rather than age 20, would capture the true difference in mean population
height across birth cohorts. One might consider taking some average of the age-specific
differentials to measure the birth cohort height differential. Positing that any selection
biases over time would “cancel out” without specifying the reasons for the across age
differences, however, would be unwise. Variations in age specific height differentials
across cohorts need not be due to cohort specific differences in selection on
unobservables, but the presumption should be that they do unless one has specific
knowledge about why they vary.
A simple way to address much of the above discussion would be to assume that a
random sample from each birth cohort is required at each calendar date at which the
cohort could enter an observed sample. This is in itself a strong assumption, and any
violation of the assumption would become exacerbated as a cohort ages. In military
samples, for example, height is typically measured at age of enlistment; entering the
military at age 20 typically precludes one from being in the population at risk to enter the

27

military at age 21 or later. Consequently, if there were any height-dependent selection
into a sample at younger ages, then this would affect the at risk population’s distribution
of height at older ages.

5.2 Recruitment-year effects in the heights literature
Most heights studies use cohort dummies or similar controls. The justification for
including birth cohorts is well understood, and is cogently articulated by Mironov (1999,
3-4). The forgoing discussion, however, suggests the inclusion of a set of recruitmentyear (or observation-year) effects. This has been much less common in the literature.
Brennan, McDonald and Shlomowitz (1997, 199) recognize that the inclusion of
recruitment-year effects will capture “varying recruitment conditions …. [and] is the
preferred specification because it ... allow[s] for variation in the recruiting environment”
(Brennan, McDonald, and Shlomowitz 1997, Table 10, 200).19 In his study of earlymodern French volunteers, Komlos (2003a, 167) reports the results of some preliminary
regressions that include only enlistment-decade effects; he finds statistically significant
coefficients of relatively large magnitude (-0.88cm to 2.52cm). But because he observes
an inconsistent pattern between youth (less than 23 years) and adults (23 to 49 years)
during a given decade he is reluctant to attribute the estimated effects to either changes in
measurement techniques or to changes in the supply or demand for height. “While it is
imaginable,” Komlos (2003a, 167) writes, “that somewhat taller men entered the army
during economic downturns, the inconsistencies across age groups lead us not to attribute
19

See also, Brennan, McDonald and Shlomowitz (1997, Table 12 and 14) for instances in which the

inclusion of recruitment-year effects reduces the magnitude and significance of birth-year effects for Indian
recruits emigrating to Mauritius.

28

much significance to this result.” His finding strongly suggests a form of endogenous
selection.
Only a handful of heights studies control for both birth-year and recruitment-year
effects. They include some research on Union Army soldiers (Margo and Steckel 1983;
A’Hearn 1998; Haines 1998). In each paper, the inclusion of recruitment-year effects
reduces the magnitude and statistical significance of the birth-year effects. A’Hearn
(1998) notes that the recruitment-year effects reflect selection.

6. Testing for selection in U.S. sources
In this section we apply the selection diagnostic described above to some of the
height samples that form the backbone of the antebellum puzzle. The puzzle first
appeared in volunteer military samples and as Komlos (1996, 2020) notes, “subsequent
research has reproduced these results many times over: among the free blacks of
Maryland [and Virginia], among Georgia convicts, … among Amherst students … and
among Pennsylvanian [Union Army] soldiers.”20 We use these, or closely related samples
to investigate whether these samples exhibit selection and whether selection might be the
source of the observed decline in heights in the mid-nineteenth-century United States and
Britain.
The discussion above suggests a simple regression-based diagnostic for the
presence of height-based selection. Suppose that individuals who are born in the same
year are of different full heights depending on the age at which they join the army. Such a
20

Haines (1998, 156) recites the same list of studies that offer evidence in support of the puzzle, almost

verbatim. He then argues that the trend in height of New York recruits into the Union Army exhibit a
pattern consistent with the puzzle.

29

result would imply that the labor-market and other forces obtaining when an individual
makes this decision act as the Roy model implies: the army sample would exhibit heightbased selection. We use this idea to test for the presence of height-based selection in two
different ways. We first ask whether age at recruitment appears to affect the heights of
men born in a given year. This test can yield evidence of selection that is equal across
cohorts, under the following conditions: for example, suppose that men who join the
army at age 21 are always taller than those who join at age 20, and by the same amount
across all birth cohorts. Although implausible, if this were true, one could still use such
selected samples to examine trends in heights across cohorts. (Under this assumption,
however, the height estimated for any particular cohort would not correspond to the
actual population). There is a more exacting test that allows all age-at-recruitment effects
to vary by birth cohort. This amounts to including in the regression all possible
interactions of birth-year and age-at-recruitment dummies. We then test the null
hypothesis that any height variations by age at recruitment are constant across birth
cohorts. A rejection of this null implies height-based selection that cannot be averaged
away in a simple fashion.
The same intuition suggests an alternative specification. We construct parallel
tests in which we hold constant birth year, and vary the calendar-year an individual
joined the military. Without interactions terms, the estimates of the calendar-year
dummies would imply that all individuals joining in a particular year are either shorter or
taller than their birth-cohort specific mean. Such a model would ignore the fact that
individuals from two different birth cohorts joining in the same year are of different ages.
There is once again a more exacting test: we interact dummies for all birth years with

30

dummies for all calendar years, and test the null that the calendar-year effects do not vary
by birth cohort. Once again, rejection of this null generally implies the height-based
selection implied by the Roy model.
These tests ask whether there is a type of homogeneity in the age- or calendaryear patterns of recruitment across birth cohorts. While one can imagine selection that
would be homogeneous in this sense, the absence of this homogeneity implies selection
patterns that are complex and not easily averaged out over successive cohorts. We report
parallel tests of these models for two samples of British soldiers, for three subsets of the
Union Army data, for free people of color, and for Pennsylvania prisoners. To restrict the
estimation sample to those who have reached full height, the models only use
observations for men in age ranges specified in the tables below. All models use OLS
with standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity. Table 4 reports the results for the
two British Army samples. (The appendix provides sources for all data used in this
section.) The data reject the homogeneity hypothesis, with the exception of the last model
estimated with the AMD data.
Table 5 reports the results for three subsets of the Union Army. These subsets
differ by how they measure the soldier’s age at enlistment. The first relies on an integer
age variable directly available in the Union Army data set; here, birth cohort is defined as
enlistment year minus this reported age at enlistment. The second constructs an (integer)
age at enlistment from the difference between the date of enlistment and the birth date.
The third subset discards all observations for which these two integer age measures do
not agree exactly; the sample size with this restriction is fairly small. As Table 5 shows,
the model rejects the null of homogeneity for all but some versions of model 4. The

31

Union Army results may reflect the fact that the recruitment period spans a just five
years. Figure 2 reports a graphical warning based on the Union Army results. A model
with birth-year dummies only implies that soldiers born in the 1840s were indeed shorter
than those born in the late 1830s. But this result disappears in models that control for
recruitment year as well. The figure underscores results such as A’Hearn (1998) and
Haines (1998).
Two other types of sources have figured heavily in the puzzle literature: free-born
and manumitted African Americans, and prisoners. Virginia’s and Maryland’s “black
code” required all free and manumitted African Americans to register with the local
county clerk. Any noncompliant free person risked arrest and jailor’s fees, which might
be expected to have encouraged near universal registration because the law was enforced,
even if unevenly (Komlos 1992, Bodenhorn 1999). But only a fraction of African
Americans actually registered. A second feature of Virginia’s 1793 act imposed a $5 fine
(per act) on any employer who hired a free person of color without a proper registration.
This provision might lead to selective registration; most free-born registrants appear in
the records between the ages of 17 and 25, when young adults typically enter the paid
workforce. The literature on manumission gives good reason to think that freed slaves
themselves would not represent a random draw from the population of AfricanAmericans born into slavery, so we have several reasons to think that samples of free
blacks would suffer endogenous selection. Table 6 reports tests of homogeneity for free
blacks. The model rejects homogeneity for the recruitment-year version of the model, but
not for models 1 and 2.

32

Many studies of the antebellum puzzle use data drawn from the heights of
prisoners.21 We ask whether there is evidence of self-selection in a typical sample of
convicts incarcerated during the era of early industrialization, drawing on data from the
Pennsylvania penitentiary system between the late 1820s and the late 1870s. Prisoners,
especially those confined to state penitentiaries in the nineteenth century, were unlikely
to represent random draws from the wider population. Prisoners might not even be
representative of criminals. The imprisoned arrived after traversing a criminal process
required several decisions by different agents: individuals chose to (allegedly) commit a
crime; the police chose whether to arrest and charge the suspect; the prosecutor chose
whether to prosecute the case; a judge and jury chose to convict and to impose a sentence
of more than one year of incarceration. Ultimately, men committed to the state prisons
were those who were convicted of relatively serious crimes. Bodenhorn, Moehling and
Price (2012), in fact, show criminals were short relative to their contemporaries and that
shorter men entered prison at younger ages. The mean age at admission into the Eastern
and Western penitentiaries was 28.5 years, and ages ranged from 11 to 89 years.
Criminologists identify the prime offending ages from the mid-teens to the mid-twenties,
which is consistent with the historical data as well.22 Because less-privileged individuals
tended to not reach their terminal adult heights until age 20 or later and, because
immigrants faced different childhood environments, we limit the sample to native-born
21

For studies of US prisons, see Komlos and Coclanis (1997); Carson (2009); Maloney and Carson

(2008); Tatarek (2006); Sunder (2004).Nicholas and Steckel (1991) and Nicholas and Oxley (1993)
investigate heights using prison records from Great Britain. Frank (2012) and Twrdek and Manzel (2012)
use heights from Peruvian prisons.
22

Moehling and Piehl, “Immigration, Crime and Incarceration .”

33

men between 23 and 50 years. Table 6 reports results that parallel those for free blacks.
The model rejects the homogeneity assumption for models based on enlistment year, but
not for those based on age.

7. Conclusions
For several decades now, anthropometricians have discussed the industrialization
(or “antebellum”) puzzle: the apparent finding that human heights declined during
periods of rising real incomes. The industrialization puzzle has achieved the status of
stylized fact in its depiction of the nature of economic growth, modernization, and
urbanization in the mid- to late nineteenth-century United States. The findings for the U.S
have led heights researchers to look for similar patterns in other countries. The core
issues this literature discusses are central to understanding the process of modern
economic growth; the “standard of living debate” gets to the heart of how economic
growth affects human welfare.
Unfortunately, the heights literature has relied heavily on sources that likely
reflect various forms of endogenous sampling. Volunteer militaries are the most common
source. The decision to join the army reflects an individual’s evaluation of his best
prospects in life. Those prospects depend on unobserved, individual-specific factors that
are a function of the individual’s human capital, and thus likely correlated with height.
Thus the heights of recruits at any one time cannot yield unbiased estimates of population
heights. In addition, the heights of those in the choice-based sample (the army) will react
to changing economic conditions in complex ways. The Roy model reported in
Bodenhorn, Guinnane and Mroz (2014) implies that improvements in civilian labor

34

markets will lead to a shorter army. That is, the industrialization is no puzzle once one
appreciates the consequences of the endogenous selection process underlying many
heights sources.
Direct testing of the selection hypothesis requires matching military records (for
example) to some other source, a process that can induce its own selection problems. The
heights sources contain internal evidence of sample-selection bias, however. We develop
and report a series of tests that rely on the idea that the decision to join the military (for
example) reflects conditions at the time one joins, while, under the basic idea of the
heights literature, the forces that determine adult height reflect events that occurred long
before the age people join the military. The tests look for selection that will not “average
out” over a cohort’s lifetime; all show that the sources underlying the industrialization
puzzle findings cannot yield unbiased estimates of heights or trends in heights.
Despite the claims made by this literature, the direct evidence for the puzzle is
less robust than one would want. A meta-analysis of some 167 papers that deal with this
subject demonstrates that most findings of a height reversal rely on selected or small
samples. In the vast majority of cases where conscription provided something near to a
random sample of young men, or the population of young men, heights grew
monotonically throughout the nineteenth century. The United States, which is the core
example for the puzzle literature, did not have a meaningful draft during the nineteenth
century.
So is the industrialization puzzle real? Scholars who believe it is typically point to
a range of evidence other than heights to support the findings based on heights alone.
Mortality rates remained stubbornly high through the early decades of industrialization,

35

for example, and in some cases actually increased, as cities became larger and more
unhealthy. Real wages rarely fell, but there is reason to doubt that feeble nominal-wage
growth protected the lowest strata from the consequences of food-price shocks. The
largest standard of living debate continues for the simple reason that there is evidence of
both improvement and deterioration of living standards as part of the process of
economic growth. If anthropometric evidence is to contribute to this debate, scholars
must bear in mind the sample-selection bias demonstrated here.

8. References
A’Hearn, Brian. “The Antebellum Puzzle Revisited: A New Look at the Physical Stature
of Union Army recruits during the Civil War.” In The Biological Standard of
Living in Comparative Perspective, 250-267. Edited by John Komlos and Joerg
Baten. Stuttgart: Steiner, 1998.
Baten, Joerg. “Protein Supply and Nutritional Status in Nineteenth Century Bavaria,
Prussia and France.” Economics and Human Biology 7, no. 2 (2009): 165-180.
Baten, Joerg, and John Komlos. "Height and the Standard of Living." The Journal of
Economic History 58.03 (1998): 866-870.
Bodenhorn, Howard. “A Troublesome Caste: Height and Nutrition of Antebellum
Virginia’s Rural Free Blacks.” Journal of Economic History 59, no. 4 (1999):
972-996.
Bodenhorn, Howard, Timothy Guinanne, and Thomas A. Mroz. “Sample Selection Bias
in the Historical Heights Literature.” Cowles Foundation Working Paper, Yale
University, 2014.
Bodenhorn, Howard, Carolyn Moehling and Gregory N. Price. “Short Criminals: Stature
and Crime in Early America.” Journal of Law and Economics 55, no. 2 (2012):
393-419.
36

Brennan, Lance, John McDonald and Ralph Shlomowitz. “The Heights and Economic
Well-Being of North Indians under British Rule.” Social Science History 18, no. 2
(1994a): 271-307.
Brennan, Lance, John McDonald and Ralph Shlomowitz. “Trends in the Economic wellBeing of South Indians under British Rule: The Anthropometric Evidence.”
Explorations in Economic History 31, no. 2 (1994b): 225-260.
Brennan, Lance, John McDonald, and Ralph Shlomowitz. “Toward an Anthropometric
History of Indians under British Rule.” Research in Economic History 17 (1997):
185-246.
Carson, Scott Alan. “The Biological Living Conditions of Nineteenth-Century Chinese
Males in America.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 37, no. 2 (2006): 201217.
Carson, Scott Alan. “The Effect of Geography and Vitamin D on African American
Stature in the Nineteenth Century: Evidence from Prison Records.” Journal of
Economic History 68, no. 3 (2008): 812-831.
Carson, Scott Alan. “African-American and White Inequality in the Nineteenth Century
American South: A Biological Comparison.” Journal of Population Economics
22, no. 3 (2009): 739-755.
Cranfield, John and Kris Inwood. “Stayers and Leavers, Diggers and Canucks: The 19141918 War in Comparative Perspective.” Working paper, University of Guelph
(2011).
Deaton, Angus. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth and the Origins of Inequality.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013.
Feinstein, Charles. “”Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard of Living in
Britain during and after the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic History
58, no. 3 (1998): 625-658.
Floud, Roderick, Robert W. Fogel, Bernard Harris, and Sok Chul Hong. The Changing
Body: Health, Nutrition, and Human Development in the Western World since
1700. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011.

37

Floud, Roderick, Kenneth Wachter, and Annabel Gregory. Height, Health and History:
Nutritional Status in the United Kingdom, 1750-1980. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
Fogel, Robert William. “Nutrition and the Decline in Mortality since 1700: Some
Preliminary Findings.” In Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth,
439-556. Edited by Stanley L. Engerman and Robert E. Gallman. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press (1986).
Gallman, Robert E. “Dietary Change in Antebellum America.” Journal of Economic
History 56, No. 1 (1996): 193-201.
Haines, Michael R. “Height, Nutrition and Mortality.” In The Biological Standard of
Living in Comparative Perspective, 155-180. Edited by John Komlos and Joerg
Baten. Stuttgart: Steiner, 1998.
Heckman, James J. and Guilherme Sedlacek. “Heterogeneity, Aggregation and Market
Wage Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-Selection in the Labor Market.”
Journal of Political Economy 93, no. 6 (1985): 1077-1125.
Johnson, Paul and Stephen Nicholas. “Male and Female Living Standards in England and
Wales, 1812-1857: Evidence from Criminal Height Records.” Economic History
Review 48, no. 3 (1995): 470-481.
Komlos, John. “The Height and Weight of West Point Cadets: Dietary Change in
Antebellum America.” Journal of Economic History 47, no. 4 (1987): 897-927.
Komlos, John. Nutrition and Economic Development in the Eighteenth-Century
Habsburg Monarchy. Princeton: Princeton University Press (1989).
Komlos, John. “Toward an Anthropometric History of African-Americans: The Case of
Free Blacks in Antebellum Maryland.” In Strategic Factors in Nineteenth
American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel, pp. 297-329.
Edited by Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1992.
Komlos, John. “The Secular Trend in the Biological Standard of Living in the United
Kingdom, 1730-1860.” Economic History Review 46, no. 1 (1993a): 115-144.

38

Komlos, John. “A Malthusian Episode Revisited: The Height of British and Irish
Servants in Colonial America.” Economic History Review 46, no. 4 (1993b): 768782.
Komlos, John. “The Nutritional Status of French Students.” Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 24, no. 3 (1994a): 493-508.
Komlos, John. “Anomalies in Economic History: Toward a Resolution of the
‘Antebellum Puzzle’.” Journal of Economic History 56, no. 1 (1996): 202-214.
Komlos, John. “Shrinking in a Growing Economy? The Mystery of Physical Stature
during the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Economic History 58, no. 3 (1998a):
779-802.
Komlos, John. “On the Biological Standard of Living of African Americans: The Case of
the Civil War Soldiers.” In The Biological Standard of Living in Comparative
Perspective, 236-249 Edited by John Komlos and Joerg Baten. Stuttgart: Steiner,
1998b.
Komlos, John. “Stagnation of Height among Second-Generation US-Born Army
Personnel.” Social Science Quarterly 89, no. 2 (2008): 445-455.
Komlos, John. “A Three Decade ‘Kuhnian’ History of the Antebellum Puzzle:
Explaining the Shrinking of the U.S. Population at the Onset of Modern
Economic Growth.” Working paper, University of Munich (2012).
Komlos, John, and Joo Han Kim. "Estimating Trends in Historical Heights."Historical
Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 23, no. 3
(1990): 116-120.
Komlos, John, and Peter Coclanis. "On the Puzzling Cycle in the Biological Standard of
Living: the Case of Antebellum Georgia." Explorations in Economic History 34.4
(1997): 433-459.
Maloney, Thomas N. and Scott Alan Carson. “Living Standards in Black and White:
Evidence from the Heights of Ohio Prison Inmates, 1829-1913.” Economics and
Human Biology 6, no. 2 (2008): 237-251.
Margo, Robert A. and Richard H. Steckel. “Heights of Native-Born Whites during the
Antebellum Period.” Journal of Economic History 43, no. 1 (1983): 167-174.

39

Moehling, Carolyn, and Anne Morrison Piehl. "Immigration, Crime, and Incarceration in
Early Twentieth-Century America." Demography 46, no .4 (2009): 739-763.
Mokyr, Joel, and Cormac O'Grada. "The Heights of the British and the Irish c. 18001815: Evidence from Recruits to the East India Company's Army." In Stature,
Living Standards, and Economic Development. Edited by John Komlos. Essays in
Anthropometric History, 39-59. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Mokyr, Joel, and Cormac Ó Gráda. "Height and Health in the United Kingdom 1815–
1860: Evidence from the East India Company Army." Explorations in Economic
History 33, no. 2 (1996): 141-168.
Morgan, Stephen L. “Economic Growth and the Biological Standard of Living in China,
1880-1930.” Economics and Human Biology 2, no. 2 (2004): 197-218.
Nicholas, Stephen, and Deborah Oxley. "The Living Standards of Women during the
Industrial Revolution, 1795‐18201." Economic History Review 46, no. 4 (1993):
723-749.
Nicholas, Stephen and Richard H. Steckel. “Heights and Living Standards of English
Workers during the Early Years of Industrialization, 1770-1815.” Journal of
Economic History 51, no. 4 (1991): 937-957.
Riggs, Paul. “The Standard of Living in Scotland, 1800-1850.” In Stature, Living
Standards, and Economic Development: Essays in Anthropometric History, 6075. Edited by John Komlos. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
1994.
Riggs, Paul and Timothy Cuff. “Ladies from Hell, Aberdeen Free Gardeners, and the
Russian Influenza: An Anthropometric Analysis of WWI-Era Scottish Soldiers
and Civilians.” Economics and Human Biology 11, no. 1 (2013): 69-77.
Roy, A. D. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers
3, no. 2 (1951): 135-146.
Saint Onge, Jarron M., Patrick M. Krueger, and Richard G. Rogers. “Historical Trends in
Height, Weight, and Body Mass: Data from U.S. Major League Baseball Players,
1869-1983.” Economics and Human Biology 6, no. 3 (2008): 482-488.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. “Heights and Welfare in Late-Colonial and Post-Independence
Argentina.” In The Biological Standard of Living in Comparative Perspective, 9740

121. Edited by John Komlos and Joerg Baten. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
1998.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. “Status Decline and Recovery in a Food-Rich Export Economy:
Argentina, 1900-1934.” Explorations in Economic History 41, no. 3 (2004): 233255.
Sandberg, Lars G. and Richard H. Steckel. “Heights and Economic History: The Swedish
Case.” Annals of Human Biology 14, no. 2 (1987): 101-110.
Schultz, T. Paul. “Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health Human
Capital.” American Economic Review 92, no. 2 (2002): 349-353.
Sunder, Marco. “The Height of Tennessee Convicts: Another Piece of the ‘Antebellum
Puzzle’.” Economics and Human Biology 2, no. 1 (2004): 75-86.
Tatarek, Nancy E. “Geographical Height Variation among Ohio Caucasian Male
Convicts Born 1780-1849.” Economics and Human Biology 4, no. 2 (2006): 222236.
Twrdek, Linda, and Kerstin Manzel. "The Seed of Abundance and Misery: Peruvian
Living Standards from the Early Republican Period to the End of the Guano Era
(1820–1880)." Economics & Human Biology 8, no. 2 (2010): 145-152.
Voth, Hans-Joachim and Tim Leunig. “Did Smallpox Reduce Height? Stature and the
Standard of Living in London, 1770-1873.” Economic History Review 49, no. 3
(1996): 541-560.
Wachter, Kenneth W. "Graphical Estimation of Military Heights." Historical Methods: A
Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 14, no. 1 (1981): 31-42.
Wachter, Kenneth W. and James Trussell. “Estimating Historical Heights.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 77, no. 378 (1982): 279-293.
Weir, David. "Economic welfare and physical well-being in France, 1750-1990."In
Health and Welfare during Industrialization, 161-200. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1997.
Zimran, Ariel. “Does Sample Selection Bias Explain the Industrialization Puzzle?
Evidence from Military Enlistment in the Nineteenth Century United States.
Working paper, Northwestern University (2015).

41

42

Table 1
Summaries of antebellum puzzle studies
Sample
Height Nutritio
Diseas
Work
chang
n
e
intensit
e
y

Author(s)

Pub
year

Perio
d

Margo and
Steckel
Margo and
Steckel
Margo and
Steckel
Fogel

198
2
198
2
198
3
198
6
198
7
199
2
199
2
199
4
199
6

1790s1830s
1810s1830s
1810s1830s
1820s1890s
1820s1860s
1800s1840s
1800s1840s
1840s1890s
1820s1860s

Slaves

+1.4%

Black
recruits
Union
army
Military

-0.5%

?

0.0% +0.3%
-2.3%

?

?

?

?

?

Y

?

Y

West Point

-0.8%

Y

N

?

N

Black
women
Black men

-1.4%

Y

-0.5%

Y

National
guard
West Point

-2.2%

?
N

?

Komlos

199
6

1820s1870s

Y

N

Y

Coclanis
and
Komlos
Coclanis
and
Komlos
A’Hearn

199
7

1860s1880s

West Point
(middleclass)
Citadel
(18yrs)

-0.8%
+0.1%
+1.1%
-0.5%

Y

Y

Y

199
7

1860s1880s

Citadel
(17yrs)

+0.6%

Y

Y

Y

199
8

1810s1830s

+0.2%

Y

?

A’Hearn

199
8
199
8
199
8
199
8
199
8

1810s1830s
1810s1830s
1810s1840s
1810s1840s
1810s1840s

+0.1%

Y

?

+0.1%

Y

?

na

Y

-0.8%

Y

Komlos

199
8

1810s1840s

Komlos

199
8

1810s1840s

Union
armyfarmers
Union
army-rural
Union
army-urban
Union
army
Union
army - NY
Union
armyblacks
(RSML)
Union
armyblacks
(TOLS)
Union
army-black
(Komlos-

Komlos
Komlos
Komlos
Steckel and
Haurin
Gallman

A’Hearn
Craig and
Weiss
Haines
Komlos

-0.6%

+0.2%

0.0%

43

Immigratio
n

Inequalit
y

?

Y

?

?

Kim)
199
1800s- Free-born
-0.8%
Y
9
1830s
black men
Bodenhorn 199
1800s- Manumitte
+1.5%
Y
9
1830s
d men
Bodenhorn 199
1800s- Free-born
-1.3%
Y
9
1830s
women
Bodenhorn 199
1800s- Manumitte
-1.6%
Y
9
1830s
d men
Margo
200
1820s- Convicts
-0.3%
Y
0
1830s
Margo
200
1840s- National
-0.8%
Y
0
1850s
guard
Haines et 200
1830s- Union
-1.7%
Y
Y
al
3
1860s
army
Sunder
200
1830s- Prisoners+0.4%
Y
4
1850s
white
Sunder
200
1830s- Prisoners+2.4%
Y
4
1850s
black
Cuff
200
1810s- Union
-1.4%
Y
Y
6
1840s
army -Penn
Tatarek
200
1790s- Prisoners-0.6%
6
1840s
white
Maloney
200
1780s- Prisoners-0.3%
and Carson 8
1880s
white
Maloney
200
1800s- Prisoners-1.7%
and Carson 8
1880s
black
Bodenhorn 201
1790s- NY
-2.7%
0
1840s
legislators
Hiermeyer
201
1860s- West Point
+0.8%
Y
Y
0
1880s
Zehetmaye 201
1840s- US army
-0.6%
Y
Y
Y
r
1
1890s
Notes: decades reported may not represent all the decades included in the original study; only those relevant to the
puzzle period. Y = some evidence provided in support of hypothesis; N = cause rejected as unlikely, either directly or
by inference; ? = discussed as likely cause, but with qualifications and/or without supporting evidence.
Bodenhorn

44

Table 2
Sample type and fraction demonstrating a 1cm or more reversal
One reversal
Two or more reversals
0.20
0.04
Conscripts
0.56
0.33
Volunteers
0.57
0.15
Students
0.70
0.35
Prisoners
0.34
0.07
Other
Notes: see text for explanation of sample types.
Sources: see online appendix table.

45

Table 3
Probit regressions results – observation of 1cm or more decline in any decade
Summary
At least one
At least two
statistics
1cm decline
1cm declines
Conscript
0.265
<reference>
<reference>
Volunteer

0.247

0.442
0.283
(0.148)**
(0.177)
Prisoner
0.146
0.313
0.310
(0.151)*
(0.177)*
Student
0.082
0.250
0.029
(0.171)
(0.177)
Other
0.259
0.054
0.024
(0.139)
(0.104)
ln(Years)
3.799
0.373
0.183
(0.526)
(0.105)**
(0.058)**
ln(Observations)
8.945
-0.090
-0.042
(2.128)
(0.031)**
(0.019)*
National
0.228
-0.114
0.066
(0.108)
(0.064)
Shortfall correction
0.171
-0.101
0.121
(0.141)
(0.109)
N
158
158
158
Notes: columns 2 and 3 report marginal effects. dependent variable in column 2 = 1 if study
reports a 1cm or greater decline in height during any decade, =0 otherwise; dependent variable in
column 3 =1 if study reports more than one 1cm or greater decline in mean height during any
decade, =0 otherwise. Other category includes indentured servants, slaves, migrant workers,
baseball players and sundry other groupings of individuals. See appendix Table A.x for details.
ln(Years) variable calculated as difference between first year and last year included in the study.
If the study reported dates as, say, 1820s – 1880s, the first year is taken to be 1820 and the last
year is 1889. National =1 if the study uses nationally representative sample. Shortfall
correction=1 if study reports period mean heights only after correcting for left-tail shortfall using
any of the standard methods: RSMLE, QBE, or Komlos-Kim.
Sources:

46

Ages
included
Observations

Table 4: British Army
Summary of selection diagnostic tests using cohorts and observation years
British
Army
23-27
5879

Model 1: Adding age dummies to a model with only birth-cohort dummies
F-stat: 4 age dummies
3.83
P-value
0.0041
DF
[4, 5759]
Model 2: Adding year dummies to a model with only birth-cohort dummies
F-stat: 92 year dummies
2.4
P-value
DF

0
[92, 5671]

AMD
23-25
71109

2 dummies

34
dummies

6.32
0.0018
[2,71064]

2.1
0.0002
[34,71032]

Model 3: Adding age by observation year dummies to a model with birth cohort and age dummies
66
F-stat: 92 age by observation dummies
2.4
dummies
1.56
P-value
0
0.0025
DF
[228, 5531]
[66,70998]
Model 4: Adding birth by enlistment year dummies to a model with birth-cohort and enlistment years
34
F-stat: 4 age dummies
1.41
dummies
1.27
P-value
0.0012
0.1367
DF
[140, 5531]
[34,70998]

47

Table 5: Union Army
Tests for non-homogenous heights: Ages 23-30
With 3 different age definitions for the Union Army Data
Reported

Constructed

Reported

age at

age at

and

enlistment

enlistment

constructed
ages agree

Sample Size

11,372

4,315

2,227

4.76

2.06

Model 1:Adding age dummies to a model with only birth cohort dummies
F-Statistic: 7 age dummies

16.92

P-value

<0.0001

<0.0001

0.0445

DF

[7,11353]

[7,4296]

[7,2208]

Model2: Adding enlistment year dummies to a model with only birth cohort dumies
F-Statistic: 4 year dummies

33.9

9.15

P-value

<0.0001

<0.0001

DF

[4,11356]

[4,4299]

3.32
0.0101
[4,2211]

Model 3: Adding age by enlistment year dummies to birth and age at enlistment dummies
F-Statistic: 21 unique dummies
P-value
DF

1.84

2.55

1.57

0.0106

0.0001

0.0473

[21,11332]

[21,4275]

[21,2187]

Model 4: Adding birth by enlistment year dummies to birth cohort and enlistment years
F-Statistic: 24 unique dummies

0.9

P-value
DF

0.606
[24,11332]

48

2.07
0.0017
[24,4275]

1.37
0.1068
[24,2187]

TABLE 6
Tests for non-homogenous heights: Ages 23-30
PA Prisoners and Free Black Samples
PA Prisoners
Sample Size

Free Blacks

1,800

4,797

Model 1:Adding age dummies to a model with only birth cohort dummies
F-Statistic: 7 age dummies
P-value
Degrees of freedom

1.81

1.39

0.0812

0.2032

[7,1744]

[7,4725]

Model 2: Adding observation year dummies to a model with only birth cohort dumies
F-Statistic:
P-value
Degrees of freedom

0.94

0.86

0.5929

0.7563

[44,1707]

[57,4675]

Model 3: Adding age by observation year dummies to birth cohort and age dummies
F-Statistic:
P-value
Degrees of freedom

1.25

1.19

0.0242

0.015

[157,1587]

[308,4417]

Model 4: Adding birth cohort by enlistment year dummies to cohort and enlistment years
F-Statistic:
P-value
Degrees of freedom

49

1.22

1.2

0.0606

0.0182

[120,1587]

[258,4417]

Figure 1: Mean heights of volunteer soldiers in the United States and in selected countries
with conscription
180
178

176

172
170
168
166
164

162

1980

1970

1960

1950

1940

1930

1920

1910

1900

1890

1880

1870

1860

1850

1840

1830

1820

1810

160
1800

Centimeters

174

Birth year
Netherlands

Italy

France

50

Sweden

US soldiers

Netherlands

Figure 2

Birth-cohort effects with and without recruit-year dummies

-.5
-1
-1.5

Inches

0

.5

Union Army, recruits aged 23-30

1830

1835

1840

1845

Birth year
Birth-cohort effect but no recruitment year effect
Birth-cohort effect and recruit-year effect
Error band for model with recruitment-year effect
Error band for model with recruitment-year effect

Note: the figure plots the birth cohort effects estimated by Model 3 reported in Table 5.

51

