                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     REVIVING THE LIMIT CYCLE VIEW OF MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

                                           Paul Beaudry
                                           Dana Galizia
                                           Franck Portier

                                        Working Paper 21241
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21241


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




The authors thank Jess Benhabib and Kiminori Matsuyama for helpful discussions. The authors would
also like to thank seminar participants at Banque de France, Pompeu Fabra-Toulouse skiminar, the
University of Pennsylvania and Northwestern University for comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21241.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Paul Beaudry, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Reviving the Limit Cycle View of Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Paul Beaudry, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier
NBER Working Paper No. 21241
June 2015
JEL No. E3

                                             ABSTRACT

There is a long tradition in macroeconomics suggesting that market imperfections may explain why
economies repeatedly go through periods of booms and busts, with booms sowing the seeds of the
subsequent busts. This idea can be captured mathematically as a limit cycle. For several reasons, limit
cycles play almost no role in current mainstream business cycle theory. In this paper we present both
a general structure and a particular model with the aim of giving new life to this mostly dismissed
view of fluctuations. We begin by showing why and when models with strategic complementarities—which
are quite common in macroeconomics—give rise to unique equilibrium dynamics characterized by
a limit cycle. We then develop and estimate a fully-specified dynamic general equilibrium model
that embeds a demand complementarity to see whether the data favors a configuration supportive
of a limit cycle. Booms and busts arise endogenously in our setting because agents want to concentrate
their purchases of goods at times when purchases by others are high, since in such situations unemployment
is low and therefore taking on debt is perceived as being less risky. A key feature of our approach
is that we allow limit-cycle forces to compete with exogenous disturbances in explaining the data.
Our estimation results indicate that US business cycle fluctuations in employment and output can
be well explained by endogenous demand-driven cycles buffeted by technological disturbances that
render those fluctuations irregular.


Paul Beaudry                                        Franck Portier
Vancouver School of Economics                       Toulouse School of Economics
University of British Columbia                      University of Toulouse
997-1873 East Mall                                  Manufacture des Tabacs
Vancouver, B.C.                                     21 Allee de Brienne
Canada, V6T 1Z1                                     31000 Toulouse, FRANCE
and University of British Columbia                  and CEPR
and also NBER                                       franck.portier@tse-fr.eu
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

Dana Galizia
Vancouver School Of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada, V6T 1Z1
dana.galizia@gmail.com
Introduction
In most modern business cycle models, the underlying economic system is very stable. In
particular, in the absence of shocks, the variables in these systems tend to converge either
to a steady state or to a balanced growth path. In such frameworks, business cycles are
viewed as emerging from shocks—which could be either fundamental or non-fundamental—
that disturb an otherwise stable system. However, it is well known that this is not the only
framework that could give rise to business cycles. In particular, it may well be that economic
forces naturally produce cyclical phenomena; that is, in the absence of any shocks (including
shocks to agents’ beliefs) economic forces by themselves may favor recurrent periods of high
economic activity followed by periods of low economic activity. This sort of outcome will
arise, for example, if the underlying economic system generates a limit cycle.1 In such a
framework, irregular business cycles can emerge from these underlying regular forces when
combined with shocks that move the system away from an attracting orbit.
    The idea of self-sustaining trade cycles, to use the terminology of the early years of
macroeconomics, can be found in the dynamic version of the Keynesian theory proposed by
Kalecki [1937], and more formally later on in the nonlinear versions of Samuelson’s [1939]
accelerator proposed by Kaldor [1940], Hicks [1950] and Goodwin [1951].2 In the 1970s and
1980s, a larger literature emerged that examined the conditions under which qualitatively and
quantitatively reasonable economic fluctuations might occur in purely deterministic settings
(see, e.g., Benhabib and Nishimura [1979] and [1985], Day [1982] and [1983], Grandmont
[1985], Boldrin and Montrucchio [1986], Day and Shafer [1987]; for surveys of the literature,
see Boldrin and Woodford [1990] and Scheinkman [1990]). By the early 1990s, however, the
interest in such models for understanding business cycle fluctuations greatly diminished and
became quite removed from the mainstream research agenda.3
    There appear to be several key reasons why interest in limit cycles may have waned, each
of which are addressed in the present paper. First, the earlier literature on deterministic
fluctuations can be broadly sub-divided into two categories: models with and without op-
timizing, forward-looking agents.4 The latter category, which were generally more capable
of producing reasonable deterministic fluctuations than the former, likely fell out of favor as
macro in general moved toward more micro-founded models.
    Second, in the category of models featuring optimizing forward-looking agents, the pri-
mary focus was on models with a neoclassical, competitive-equilibrium structure.5 Such
   1
     Informally, limit cycles are repeating patterns, which are capable of emerging in some dynamic systems.
   2
     An earlier mention of self-sustaining cycles as a model for economic fluctuations is found in Le Corbeiller
[1933] in the first volume of Econometrica.
   3
     There are at least two strands of the macroeconomic literature that has productively continued to pursue
ideas related to limit cycles: a literature on innovation cycles and growth (see, for, example Shleifer [1986]
and Matsuyama [1999]), and a literature on endogenous credit cycles in an OLG setting (see, for example,
Azariadis and Smith [1998], Matsuyama [2007] and [2013], and Myerson [2012]).
   4
     The first category includes, for example, Benhabib and Nishimura [1979] and [1985], and Boldrin and
Montrucchio [1986], while the latter includes, for example, the pre-1970s examples cited above, as well as
Day [1982] and [1983].
   5
     While there are some exceptions, they are comparatively rare. Perhaps the clearest example is Ham-
mour [1989], chapter 1, which is focused on deterministic fluctuations in an environment of increasing returns.
Other exceptions include models in the search literature that are capable of generating deterministic fluctu-



                                                       1
models were often found to require relatively extreme parameter values in order to gener-
ate deterministic fluctuations. For example, the Turnpike Theorem of Scheinkman [1976]
establishes that, under certain basic conditions met by these models and holding all other
parameters constant, for a sufficiently high discount factor—i.e., for agents that are “forward-
looking” enough—the steady state of the model is globally attractive, so that persistent
deterministic fluctuations cannot appear.6 While in principle this does not rule out deter-
ministic fluctuations completely, in practice the size of the discount factor needed to generate
them was often implausibly low. For example, in a survey of such models by Boldrin and
Woodford [1990], discount factors for several of the models they discuss were on the order of
0.3 or less.7 As the present paper illustrates, however, if one departs from the assumptions
of a neoclassical, competitive-equilibrium environment—for example, if there is a demand
externality—then a discount factor arbitrarily close to one can relatively easily support de-
terministic fluctuations in equilibrium.
    Third, models producing periodic cycles—that is, cycles which exactly repeat themselves
every k periods—are clearly at odds with the data, where such consistently regular cycles
cannot be found.8 This can be observed by looking at the spectrum of data generated by
such models, which will generally feature one or more large spikes at frequencies associated
with k-period cycles. Spectra estimated on macroeconomic data generally lack such spikes,9
which suggests much less regularity in real-world cycles. To address this issue, papers from
the earlier literature frequently sought to establish conditions under which such irregular
cycles could emerge in a purely deterministic setting via chaotic dynamics.10 While in a
number of cases this was found to be possible, the conditions are often more restrictive
than those required to generate simple periodic cycles. In contrast, rather than restricting
attention to a purely deterministic setting, this paper embeds a limit cycle mechanism into
a stochastic environment in which irregular fluctuations emerge as the interplay between
exogenous shocks and endogenous cycles.
    Finally, being inherently non-linear, economic models that are capable of generating
deterministic fluctuations are often difficult to work with analytically beyond the very sim-
plest of settings, and quantitative results often require computationally-expensive solution
algorithms. Prior to relatively recent advances in computing technology, obtaining these
ations, such as Diamond and Fudenberg [1989], Boldrin, Kiyotaki, and Wright [1993], and Coles and Wright
[1998]. Note however that these search papers were mainly concerned with characterizing the set of possible
equilibrium for a particular model (which for some parameterizations included limit cycles), rather than
being focused on cycles directly.
    6
      See the discussion in section 2.3 for further details.
    7
      It is possible in principle to rationalize such low discount factors by choosing a longer period length for
the model. However, if households discount the future with a quarterly discount factor of 0.99 or greater—as
is frequently the case in the business-cycle literature—a factor of 0.3 would be associated with a period
length of 120+ quarters (30+ years). Since the minimum period length of a cycle is two periods, this would
generate cycles on the order of 60+ years, well outside of what is normally thought of as the business cycle.
    8
      In Boldrin and Woodford [1990], the authors mention private communication with Sir John Hicks in
which Hicks indicated that he lost interest in endogenous cycle models because actual business cycles were
far from being regular periodic motions.
    9
      See Figure 6.
   10
      Roughly, chaotic fluctuations appear in systems where the orbits emanating from two different initial
points typically cannot be made arbitrarily close by choosing those initial points sufficiently close together.
Chaotic systems “appear” random, despite being entirely deterministic.


                                                       2
quantitative results may have been infeasible and, as a result, a number of potentially fruit-
ful areas of research—such as, for example, combining deterministic and stochastic cyclical
forces11 —have gone largely unexplored.
    In this paper, we re-examine the issue of limit cycles as a foundation to a theory of
business cycles by building on models with demand externalities. Our first goal is to show
that limit cycles tend to arise quite naturally in the presence of demand complementarities.
In particular, we clarify why demand complementarities, when they relate to a good that
can be accumulated, are more likely to give rise to local instability and limit cycles than
to multiple equilibrium. To make this point, we first present a simple but fairly general
reduced-form setup. Our second goal is to present a particular but fully specified model
wherein limit cycles can arise as the result of demand complementarities stemming from
an interplay between unemployment risk and precautionary savings. We estimate a DSGE
version of this model to see how it chooses to explain features of the data.
    The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 1, we present a simple reduced-form
dynamic model to highlight what type of interaction between agents tends to give rise to
limit cycles. In particular, we show how and when demand complementarities can cause
the steady state of the system to become unstable and a limit cycle to appear around it
as part of a Hopf bifurcation,12,13 and further establish a simple condition under which this
limit cycle will be attractive. In Section 2, we introduce an optimization-based model which
incorporates unemployment risk that in turn causes agents’ consumption decisions to be
strategic complements as a result of precautionary behavior. The model builds on Beaudry,
Galizia, and Portier [2015]. We will show that this explicit model exhibits the main features
emphasized by the reduced-form model. Section 3 takes the model to the data to see whether
estimation will reveal the presence of a limit cycle. Since our estimation framework allows the
limit cycle to compete with exogenous disturbances in explaining the data, we will be able to
assess the extent to which it can reduce the reliance on exogenous disturbances in explaining
business cycle fluctuations. Finally, in the last section we offer concluding comments.


1      Demand Complementarities and Limit Cycles: A
       Reduced-Form Model
In this section we present a simple reduced-form dynamic model aimed at illustrating how
and when limit cycles can emerge in an environment with demand complementarities. As
  11
     One notable paper that combines these forces is Benhabib and Nishimura [1989], who consider the
theoretical question of how such a combination would affect the joint probability distribution of the variables
of the system.
  12
     Since our model is formulated in discrete time, the bifurcation we consider is more appropriately referred
to as a Neimark-Sacker (rather than Hopf) bifurcation. Nonetheless, we will typically follow convention in
applying the term “Hopf bifurcation” to both continuous and discrete environments.
  13
     Informally, a Hopf bifurcation—which may occur in both continuous and discrete formulations—is cha-
racterized by a loss of stability in which the resulting limit cycle involves rotation around the steady state
in two-dimensional phase space. Discrete (but not continuous) systems may also produce limit cycles in a
one-dimensional setting via a “flip” bifurcation, in which case the system “jumps” back and forth over the
steady state. As discussed further in Section 1, for several reasons we will largely focus our discussion around
the dynamics associated with Hopf bifurcations.


                                                       3
we show, the key mechanism that allows the model to generate limit cycles is the interplay
between the demand complementarities and the dynamic forces associated with the fact that
the good in the model can be accumulated. We begin with a reduced-form setup so as to
highlight the generality of this mechanism, regardless of the source of the precise micro-
foundations that drive agents’ interaction. In the next section we will present a structural
model that rationalizes this set-up, and in which this key mechanism emerges naturally.
    In addition to establishing that the model can, under fairly general conditions, produce a
Hopf bifurcation associated with an attractive limit cycle, an important goal of the analysis
in this section is to show that this happens even when we restrict the strength of the demand
complementarities to be too weak to create static multiple equilibrium. In fact, as we make
clear, the strength of the demand complementarities necessary for a limit cycle to appear in
this environment is always less than that needed to generate multiple equilibrium.

1.1     The Environment
Consider an environment with a large number N of agents index by i, where each agent
can accumulate a good Xit and where Xit can represent either physical capital or a durable
consumption good. The accumulation equation is given by
                                Xit+1 = (1 − δ)Xit + Iit ,          0 < δ < 1,                                (1)
where Iit is agents i’s investment in the good. Suppose initially that there is no interaction
between agents and that the decision rule for agent i’s investment is given simply by
                                        Iit = α0 − α1 Xit + α2 Iit−1 ,                                        (2)
where all parameters are strictly positive and 0 < α1 < 1, 0 < α2 < 1. In this decision rule,
the effect of Xit on investment is assumed to be negative so as to reflect some underlying
decreasing returns to capital accumulation, while the effect of past investment is positive so
as to reflect sluggish response that may be due, for example, to adjustment costs.14
    When all agents behave symmetrically, the aggregate dynamics of the economy are given
by the linear system:
                                                           
                        It       α2 − α1 −α1 (1 − δ)     It−1       α0
                            =                                   +        .                 (3)
                        Xt          1        1−δ        Xt−1         0
                               |         {z           }
                                                 ML

The stability of this system is established in the following proposition.
Proposition 1. Both eigenvalues of the matrix ML lie strictly inside the unit circle. There-
fore, system (3) is stable.
   All proofs are given in the appendix. According to Proposition 1, the dynamics are
extreme simplely, with the system converging to its steady state for any starting values of
Xit = Xt and Iit−1 = It−1 . We now add agent interaction to the model and study how is the
dynamics are affected.
  14
    We focus here on a system with two state variables. We do this since we need a system with at least
two state variable for the possibility of a Hopf bifurcation to arise. It is our conjecture that limit cycles that
emerge from a Hopf bifurcation are more likely to be relevant for business cycle analysis than those arising
from a Flip bifurcation, where the later can arise in a one dimensional system.

                                                        4
1.2    Adding Interaction Between Agents
To generalize the previous setup in order to allow for interaction between individuals, we
modify the investment decision rule to
                                                          P 
                                                             Ijt
                         Iit = α0 − α1 Xit + α2 Iit−1 + F        ,                      (4)
                                                            N
while keeping the law of motion for X (equation (1)) unchanged. We assume that the function
F (·) is continuous and differentiable at least three times and that F (0) = 0. The function
F (·) P
      captures how the actions of others, summarized by the average level of investment
It ≡      Ijt /N , affect agent i’s investment decision Iit . For example, the function F (·) can
capture implicitly the price increase induced by the demand of others if F 0 (·) < 0, or can
capture demand complementarities if F 0 (·) > 0. In this formulation, we are assuming that
agents take the average actions in the economy as given, so that (4) can be interpreted as
agent i’s best-response rule to the average action.

                   Figure 1: Best-Response Rule for Two Different Histories




             Iit
                                                             Iit = It
                                                                        Iit = αt0 + F (It )




                                                                        Iit = αt + F (It )



             αt0




             αt
                                                                            It

  Notes: This
           P figure plots      the best-response rule (equation (4)), Iit = αt + F (It ), with αt ≡
  α0 − α1 ∞  j=0 (1 − δ) τI                                            0
                            it−1−j + α2 Iit−1 . The intercepts αt and αt correspond to two different
  histories of the model.


   Figure 1 illustrates this best-response rule for two different  values of the intercept. Note
that in this diagram the intercept is given by αt = α0 −α1 ∞            j
                                                           P
                                                              j=0 (1−δ)   Iit−1−j +α2 Iit−1 , which

                                                  5
is a function of the history of the economy prior to date t. Thus, past investment decisions
determine the location of the best-response rule, which in turn determines the current level
of investment, which then feeds into the determination of the next period’s intercept, and so
on.15 In order to rule out static multiple equilibrium—that is, multiple solutions for Iit for
given values of Iit−1 and Xit —we assume that F 0 (It ) < 1. Thus, we are restricting attention
to cases where demand complementarities, if they are present, are never strong enough to
produce static multiple equilibrium.
    In what follows we consider only symmetric equilibrium, so that we may henceforth drop
the subscript i. We make the additional assumption that α2 < α1 /δ so that a unique steady
state necessarily exists and is unique, and let I s and X s denote the steady state values of
I and X. Note that the condition α2 < α1 /δ will always be satisfied when δ is sufficiently
small, since both α1 and α2 are strictly positive.
    Our goal is to examine how the dynamics of the system (1) and (4) are affected by the
properties of the interaction effects, and especially what conditions on F (·) will give rise to
a Hopf bifurcation that is associated with the emergence of an attractive limit cycle.

1.3     The Local Dynamics of the Model with Interaction Between
        Agents
We now consider the dynamics implied by the bivariate system (1) and (4). In order to
understand the dynamics of this system, it is useful to first look at local dynamics in the
neighborhood of the steady state. The first-order approximation of this dynamic system is
given by
                                              !           h                 i                     !
           α2 −α1              α1 (1−δ)                        α2 −α1         s α1 (1−δ)      s
          It     1−F 0 (I s )
                               − 1−F 0 (I s )    It−1        1 − 1−F 0 (I s ) I + 1−F 0 (I s ) X
                                                         +                                           . (5)
          Xt        1            1−δ            X  t−1                         0
              |               {z              }
                               M

The eigenvalues of the matrix M are the solutions to the quadratic equation

                                        Q(λ) = λ2 − T λ + D = 0,

where T is the trace of M (and also the sum of its eigenvalues) and D is the determinant of
M (and also the product of its eigenvalues). The two eigenvalues are thus given by
                                             s 
                                                     2
                                        T        T
                                 λ, λ = ±              −D                               (6)
                                        2        2

where
                                                α2 − α1
                                         T ≡                  +1−δ                                          (7)
                                               1 − F 0 (I s )
  15
    Under the condition F 0 (It ) < 1, the static equilibrium depicted in Figure 1 is generally viewed as stable
under a tâtonnement-type adjustment process. This stability property is not the focus of the current paper.
Instead we are interested in the explicit dynamics induced by the system (1) and (4).



                                                       6
and
                                                   α2 (1 − δ)
                                             D≡                   .                             (8)
                                                   1 − F 0 (I s )
   When F 0 (I s ) = 0, the model dynamics is locally the same as in the model without
demand complementarities, and in particular, as noted in Proposition 1, the roots of the
system lie inside the unit circle in this case. More generally, we may (locally) parameterize
F by F 0 (I s ) and ask what happens as F 0 varies in this range.

Geometric analysis:             It is informative to consider a geometric analysis of the location
of the two eigenvalues of the linearized system (5). This is done in Figure 2, which presents
the plane (T, D). A point in this plane is a pair (Trace, Determinant) of matrix M that
corresponds to a particular configuration of the model parameters (including F 0 (I s )). We
have drawn three lines and a parabola in that plane. The line BC corresponds to D = 1,
the line AB to the equation Q(−1) = 0 (⇔ D = −T − 1) and the line AC to the equation
Q(1) = 0 (⇔ D = T − 1). On the perimeter of triangle ABC,       [ at least one eigenvalue has a
modulus of one. We review in the appendix why both eigenvalues of the system are inside
the unit circle when (T, D) is inside ABC,  [ while at least one eigenvalue is outside the unit
circle when (T, D) is outside ABC.   [ Whether the eigenvalues are real or complex depends
                                                                                            2
on the sign of the discriminant of the equation Q(λ) = 0, which is given by ∆ ≡ T2 − D.
The parabola in Figure 2 corresponds to the equation ∆ = 0 (⇔ D = T 2 /4). Above the
parabola, the eigenvalues are complex and conjugate, while on or below the parabola they
are real. The possible configurations of the local dynamics can then be easily characterized
by considering the location of (T, D) within this diagram.
    Without any restrictions on F 0 (I s ), the steady state can be locally stable, unstable, or a
saddle, with either real or complex eigenvalues. Proposition 1 proves that when F 0 (I s ) = 0,
the steady state values of corresponds to a point E , E 0 or E 00 (depending on the parameters)
that are inside ABC.[ Furthermore, it is easy to verify that D is always greater than zero, so
that the steady state must lie in the top half of ABC. [ As an example, in Figure 2 we have
                 0
put E and E in the region of stability with complex eigenvalues and D > 0.
    As F 0 (I s ) varies, the eigenvalues of the system will vary, implying changes to the dynamic
behavior of I and X. From equations (7) and (8), assuming α1 6= α2 ,16 we may obtain the
following relationship between the trace and determinant of matrix M :

                                           α2 (1 − δ)    α2 (1 − δ)2
                                     D=               T−             .                          (9)
                                            α2 − α1       α2 − α1
Therefore, when F 0 (I s ) varies, T and D move along the line (9) in (T, D)-space, which allows
for an easy characterization of the impact of F 0 (I s ) on the location of the eigenvalues, and
therefore also of the stability of the steady state. We need to systematically consider the two
cases α2 > α1 and α2 < α1 , as the line (9) slopes positively in the former case and negatively
in the latter.
    Let us consider first the strategic substitutability case where F 0 (I s ) is negative; that is,
where the investment decisions of others have a negative effect on one’s own decision. In
  16
       The case where α1 = α2 is addressed in the appendix.


                                                      7
that case, it is clear from equations (7) and (8) that
                                           lim         T =1−δ
                                       F 0 (I s )→−∞

and
                                             lim         D=0
                                         F 0 (I s )→−∞

We will denote the point (1 − δ, 0) by E1 on Figure 2. Note that E1 lies inside the “stability”
triangle ABC.
          [
    Let’s assume that the steady state without strategic interactions is E and α2 > α1 . When
  0 s
F (I ) goes from 0 to −∞, the point (T, D) moves from E to E1 along the line given by
equation (9). This movement corresponds to the half-line denoted (a) on Figure 2. As E
and E1 both belong to the interior of ABC,
                                         [ and because the interior of ABC    [ is a convex
set, any point of the segment [E, E1 ] also belongs to the interior of triangle ABC.[ The
same argument applies if parameters are such that the steady state corresponds to E 0 and
α2 < α1 , with the relevant half-line being (a0 ). Thus, the following proposition holds:
Proposition 2. As F 0 (I s ) varies from 0 to −∞, the eigenvalues of M always stay within
the complex unit circle, and therefore the system remains locally stable.
     Proposition 2 indicates that, when the actions of others play the role of strategic substi-
tutes with one’s own action, the system always maintains stability. Since Walrasian settings
are typically characterized by strategic substitutability, this is one reason why dynamic Wal-
rasian environments are generally stable.
     We now turn to exploring how the presence of strategic complementarities (i.e., when
F (I ) > 0) affects the dynamics of the system. In Figure 2, a rise in F 0 (I s ) beginning from
  0 s

F 0 (I s ) = 0 corresponds to movement along the line given by equation (9), starting from the
point E or E 0 and in the opposite direction of E1 . This movement is denoted by the half-lines
(b), (b’) or (b”) in Figure 2. It can also be easily verified that, as F 0 (I s ) gets closer to one,
(T, D) will necessarily cross the perimeter of triangle ABC, [ thereby causing the steady state
to change from being locally stable to being unstable. The location of the crossing depends
on parameters.
     Consider first the case where α2 > α1 , and assume that the steady state corresponds to
E on Figure 2. Under our earlier assumption that α2 < α1 /δ (which helped guarantee a
unique steady state), it can be verified that the half line (b) will never cross line segment
AC, which is the line segment associated with the largest of two real eigenvalues being equal
to one. Thus, when α2 > α1 , (b) must cross line segment BC; that is, the point at which
the system loses stability as F 0 (I s ) increases must be associated with complex eigenvalues.
Now consider the case where α2 < α1 , and assume that the steady state corresponds to
E on Figure 2. In this case, (T, D) can cross the perimeter of triangle ABC         [ under two
different possible configurations. If the slope of line (9) is sufficiently negative, it will cross
line segment BC, at which point the eigenvalues will be complex. This is the case drawn
in the figure as half line (b’). On the other hand, if the slope of line (9) is negative but
sufficiently flat, the point F 0 (I s ) = 0 will be associated with a point in (T, D)-space like E 0
rather that in E. In that case, as shown by half-line (b”) in Figure 2, as F 0 (I s ) increases
(T, D) will cross line segment AB, which is the line segment associated with the smaller of
two real eigenvalues being equal to negative one.

                                                   8
                     Figure 2: Local Stability when F 0 (I s ) ∈ (−∞, 1)

                                                D




                                  (b’)                            (b)
                      B                            1                          C
                                          E0
                                (b”)                         E
                                            (a’)       E1 (a)
                                                                                               T
                    -2           -1                    1-δ          1             2



                                               A -1




               Saddle, real eigenvalues                          Stable, real eigenvalues

               Unstable, complex eigenvalues                     Stable, complex eigenvalues

               Unstable, real eigenvalues

Notes: This figure shows the plane (T, D), where T is the trace and D the determinant of matrix
M . The points E and correspond to the various configurations of the model without demand
externalities. According to Proposition 1, those points are inside the triangle of stability ABC.
                                                                                             \
They are arbitrarily placed in the zone where the two eigenvalues are complex. E and arrows
(a) and (b) correspond to the case where α2 > α1 ; E 0 and arrows (a’), (b’) and (b”) to the
case where α2 < α1 .




                                                    9
1.4     Bifurcations and the Occurrence of Limit Cycles
Our graphical analysis of the previous subsection shows that the presence of demand com-
plementarities can change the qualitative dynamics of the system. In particular, if the
complementarities become strong enough the system will transition from being locally sta-
ble to being local unstable. In the theory of dynamical systems, a change in local stability
when a parameter varies is referred to as a bifurcation. Bifurcations are of interest since
there is a close relationship between the nature of a bifurcation and the emergence of limit
cycles. We formalize the nature of possible bifurcations for our bivariate system (1) and (4)
in the following proposition.
Proposition 3. As F 0 (I s ) increases from zero towards one, the dynamic system given by
(1) and (4) will eventually become locally unstable. In particular:
  − If α2 > α1 /(2 − δ)2 , then a Hopf (Neimark-Sacker) bifurcation will occur.
  − If α2 < α1 /(2 − δ)2 , then a flip bifurcation will occur.
    A flip bifurcation occurs with the appearance of an eigenvalue equal to negative one, and
a Hopf bifurcation with the appearance of two complex conjugate eigenvalues of modulus
one. The proof of Proposition 3 is given in the appendix, and involves establishing conditions
under which line (9) crosses line segment BC (for the Hopf bifurcation) or line segment AB
(for the flip bifurcation) as F 0 (I s ) increases from zero. In either case, the bifurcation that
occurs as F 0 (I s ) increases will be associated with the emergence of a limit cycle. In the
case of a flip bifurcation, the limit cycle that emerges close to the bifurcation point will be
of period two, i.e., will involve jumps back and forth over the steady state every period.
Such extreme fluctuations are unlikely to be very relevant for business cycle analysis.17 We
therefore henceforth focus on the more interesting case from our point of view, which is the
case where the system experiences a Hopf bifurcation. In this case, close to the bifurcation
point there will emerge around the steady state (in (X, I)-space) a unique isolated closed
invariant curve.18 Beginning from any point on this closed curve, the system will remain
on it thereafter, neither converging to a single point nor diverging to infinity, but instead
rotating around the steady state along that curve indefinitely. Further, in contrast to the
flip bifurcation, the cycle that emerges near a Hopf bifurcation may be of any period length
and hence the resulting dynamics appear more promising for understanding business cycles.
    The condition on α2 under which a Hopf bifurcation (rather than a flip bifurcation) will
arise according to Proposition 3 may, at first pass, look rather restrictive. In fact, as δ → 1
this condition approaches α2 ≥ α1 , which necessitates a fairly large amount of sluggishness
  17
      Note that, in the absence of any agent interaction (F (0) = 0), the system can also exhibit a flip
bifurcation if α1 is allowed to increase above one. Such bifurcations create two period cycles. In our opinion,
such cycles are unlikely to be helpful for understanding business cycle phenomena.
   18
      We have to this point side-stepped a minor technical issue, which is that, in discrete time, the bounded
non-convergent orbits appearing near a Hopf bifurcation will possess the basic qualitative features of a limit
cycle, but may never exactly repeat themselves and thus may not strictly speaking be limit cycles. For
example, in a bivariate discrete-time system characterized by rotation around the unit circle by θ radians
per period, if θ/π is irrational then the system will never return to the same point twice, despite the clear
sense in which the dynamics are cyclical. We will ignore this uninteresting technicality and apply the term
“limit cycle” broadly to also include the entire isolated closed invariant curve (e.g., the entire unit circle in
the example of this footnote) that emerges.

                                                       10
in investment. However, if δ is small, the condition becomes significantly less restrictive.
For example, as δ → 0 the condition becomes α2 > α1 /4, a simple lower bound on the
degree of sluggishness. Given these considerations, one could loosely re-state Proposition 2
as indicating that if depreciation is not too fast, and sluggishness not too small, then the
system will experience a Hopf bifurcation as F 0 (I s ) increases from 0 towards 1.19
    Having established conditions under which a Hopf bifurcation emerges, we turn now to
the question of whether such a limit cycle is attractive; that is, whether the economy would
be expected to converge towards such an orbit given an arbitrary starting point. To use
language from the theory of dynamical systems, a bifurcation may be either supercritical or
subcritical. In a supercritical bifurcation, the limit cycle emerges on the “unstable” side of
the bifurcation and attracts nearby orbits, while in a subcritical bifurcation the limit cycle
emerges on the “stable” side of the bifurcation and repels nearby orbits.
    The emergence of a limit cycle is mainly of interest to us if it is attractive, so that
departures from the steady state will approach the limit cycle over time. The conditions
governing whether a Hopf bifurcation is supercritical or subcritical are often hard to state.
However, in our setup, a simple sufficient condition can be given to ensure that the Hopf
bifurcation is supercritical. This is stated in Proposition 4, where we make use of the Wan
[1978] theorem.
Proposition 4. If F 000 (I s ) is sufficiently negative, then the Hopf bifurcation noted in Propo-
sition 3 will be supercritical.
    The economics for why increasing F 0 (I s ) will cause the system to become unstable are
rather intuitive. A high value of F 0 (I s ) implies that an individual agent has a large incen-
tive to accumulate more capital at times when other agents increase their accumulation.
This leads to a feedback effect whereby any initial individual desire to have high current
investment—due to some combination of a low current capital stock (the decreasing returns
channel) and a high level of investment in the previous period (the sluggishness channel)—
becomes amplified in equilibrium through a multiplier-type mechanism. When this feedback
effect is strong enough, it will cause small initial deviations from the steady state to grow
over time, pushing the system away from the fixed point. As a result, the economy will tend
to go through repeated episodes of periods of high accumulation followed by periods of low
accumulation, even in the absence of any exogenous shocks. Such behavior contrasts sharply
with the steady flow of I over time that would be the natural point of rest of the system in
the absence of complementarities.
    The requirement that F 000 (I s ) be sufficiently negative for the emergence of an attrac-
tive limit cycle can also be related to economic forces. If the best-response function, F , is
positively sloped near the steady state and F 000 (I s ) is negative, then it will take an S-shaped
form.20 Note that Figure 1 was drawn with these features. The intuition for why an S-shaped
best-response function favors the emergence of an attractive limit cycle can be understood as
follows. As noted above, when the system is locally unstable, the demand complementarities
are strong enough near the steady state that any perturbation from that point will tend
  19
     Note also that it is precisely when δ is small that our earlier condition on α2 guaranteeing a unique
steady state (i.e., α2 < α1 /δ) is also likely to be satisfied.
  20
     A parametric example of such an S-shaped function is the sigmoid function F (x) = 1+e1−x for x on the
real line.

                                                   11
to induce outward “explosive” forces. If the best-response function is S-shaped, however,
then as the system moves away from the steady state the demand complementarities will
eventually fade out (i.e., F 0 (I) eventually falls), so that the explosive forces that are in play
near the steady state are gradually replaced with inward “stabilizing” ones. As long as
F 000 (I s ) is sufficiently negative, these stabilizing forces will emerge quickly enough, and an
attractive limit cycle will appear at the boundary between the inner explosiveness region
and the outer stability region. Such a configuration for F is illustrated in panel (a) of Figure
3.
      If instead the best-response function has F 000 (I s ) > 0 positive, then instead of dying out,
the demand complementarities would tend to grow in strength as the system moves away
from the steady state,21 so that inward stabilizing forces do not appear. This configuration
for F is illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 3. In this case, when F 0 (I s ) is large enough for
the system to become unstable, the Wan [1978] theorem implies the presence of a subcritical
Hopf bifurcation in which a repulsive limit cycle appears just before the system becomes
unstable.22

    The general insight we take away from the Wan [1978] theorem regarding Hopf bifurca-
tions is that attractive limit cycles are likely to emerge in our setting if demand compleme-
natrities are strong and create instability near the steady state, but tend to die out as one
moves away from the steady state. We may refer to such a setting as one with strong local
demand complementarities. In an economic environment, it is quite reasonable to expect
that positive demand externalities are likely to die out if activity gets very large. For ex-
ample, if investment demand becomes sufficient large, some resource constraints are likely
to become binding, causing strategic substitutability to emerge in place of complementari-
ties. Similarly, physical constraints, such as a non-negativity restrictions on investment and
capital or Inada conditions implying that marginal productivity of capital tend to infinity
at zero are reasonable considerations in economic environments that will limit systems from
diverging to zero or to negative activity. Such forces will in general favor the emergence of
attractive limit cycles in the presence of demand complementarities.
  21
     A parametric example of   such 
                                     a function is the logit function, which is the reciprocal of the sigmoid,
                                   y
and takes the form g(y) = log 1−y for y ∈ (0, 1).
  22
     Note that subcriticality of a bifurcation does not necessarily imply global explosiveness, nor does it
rule out the emergence of an attractive limit cycle on the unstable side of the bifurcation. Rather, the
results of this section (including those based on Wan [1978]) are inherently about the local behavior of the
system, where “local” in this case means “to a third-order Taylor approximation on some sufficiently small
neighborhood of the steady state”. Conclusions about the global behavior of the system cannot in general
be inferred from these local results. In particular, subcriticality only implies that if an attractive limit cycle
does emerge, then it must involve terms higher than third order. For example, if we impose the additional
assumptions that limI→0 F (I) = ∞ and limI→I¯ F (I) = −∞ for some I¯ ∈ (0, ∞), then the system never
becomes explosive, even if the Hopf bifurcation of Proposition 4 is subcritical.




                                                       12
Figure 3: Best-Response Rule when F 000 (I s ) < 0 (panel (a)) or F 000 (I s ) < 0 (panel (b)),
Causing the Limit Cycle to Be (a) Attractive or (b) Repulsive


                       (a)                                                (b)


  Iit                               Iit = It             Iit                           Iit = It




                                Iit = αs + F (It )       Is                       Iit = αs + F (It )

  Is
                                                         αt
  αs


                  Is                           It                        Is                       It

Notes: This figure plots the best-response rule Iit = αs + F (It ) (equation (4)), with αs = α0 −
α1 X s + α2 I s . The intercept αs corresponds to an economy that is at the steady state. Panel (a)
corresponds to the case where F 000 (I s ) < 0 and panel (b) to F 000 (I s ) > 0




                                                    13
2      Unemployment Risk and Precautionary Saving as a
       Source of Demand Complementarities
In this section we present a model with unemployment risk and precautionary savings, where
equilibrium behavior will exhibit the main features emphasized in our reduced-form model.
The model builds on Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier [2015]. Before presenting the model’s
formal structure, we first discuss its main components informally in order to help motivate
the setup and assumptions.
    Our aim is to choose a setup that captures a common notion of demand complementarities
that is often associated with macroeconomic fluctuations.23 In effect, we want to capture the
idea that agents may be hesitant to make large purchases when unemployment is high because
they fear becoming unemployed. Thus, we require the model to feature unemployment risk
that cannot be fully insured. Simultaneously, we want to allow for the possibility of a
feedback effect whereby unemployment can be high in part because agents are holding back
on their purchases out of fear of becoming unemployed. This feedback effect will be the
source of the demand complementarity in the model. While in general multiple equilibrium
could arise if this effect is strong enough, we will focus on situations where this is not the
case, i.e., where the equilibrium is unique. Finally, we want to explore an environment where
the emergence of limit cycles does not rely on the conduct of monetary policy since we view
boom bust phenomena as being ubiquitous across monetary regimes. To achieve all these
goals, we consider a flexible price environment where agents can buy goods using credit, but
where not all trades are coordinated in centralized markets. In particular, this will allow
agents to buy goods even if they are unsure whether they will manage to sell their labor
during the period. Meanwhile, the unemployment risk and precautionary behavior in the
model come from the assumption that some segments of the labor market are characterized
by search frictions. As a result, ex-ante identical agents will have heterogeneous outcomes in
terms of debt due to the fact that their labor income will have an idiosyncratic component.
Since we want to avoid the complications associated with full-fledged heterogeneous-agent
models (i.e., where we would need to track the distribution of debt across periods), we will
adopt a sequence-of-markets approach wherein costly debt can be incurred in a first sub-
period and then repaid in a second sub-period. This will allow us to maintain many of the
attractive analytical features of a representative-agent setup while simultaneously allowing
for sufficient heterogeneity in employment outcomes to create a role for precautionary saving,
and for a path for this precautionary saving to feed back in to unemployment risk. The
desire to coordinate activity will arise in the model as a result of agents having an incentive
to purchase higher levels of goods when others’ purchases are high, since unemployment
  23
     The model of this section shares key features with the long tradition of macro models emphasizing
strategic complementarities, aggregate demand externalities and multipliers, such as Diamond [1982] and
Cooper and John [1988], though we do not emphasize multiple equilibrium. Unemployment risk and its
effects on consumption decisions is at the core of the model. The empirical relevance of precautionary saving
as it relates to unemployment risk has been documented by many, including Carroll [1992], Carroll and
Dunn [1997], Carroll, Sommer, and Slacalek [2012] and Alan, Crossley, and Low [2012]. Recently, there have
been several papers that explore the role of unemployment risk and precautionary savings in business cycle
models; see, for example, Challe and Ragot [2013] and Heathcote and Perri [2012], Ravn and Sterk [2012],
and den Haan, Rendahl, and Riegler [2014].


                                                     14
would be low and therefore buying on credit less risky. Because these goods will be partially
durable, however, any boom driven by purchases will eventually come to an end since, at
some point, the rising stock of durables will cause the marginal utility of new purchases to
fall enough that agents stop buying. These two forces—one favoring the bunching of durable
purchases and the other limiting booms by the diminishing marginal utility of goods—will
allow for the emergence of limit cycles. Note that the model is highly stylized and omits
many elements known to be relevant for business cycle analysis. For example, the model
abstracts from the accumulation of productive capital and focuses only on consumer capital.
Despite these omissions, we will interpret the model as a description of the functioning of
the aggregate economy.

2.1     The Environment
Time is discrete. There is a [0, 1] continuum of households indexed by j who live forever
with discount factor β ∈ (0, 1). At the beginning of time, households are endowed with the
same level of durable goods Xj0 = X0 . Each period is divided into morning and afternoon
sub-periods.24 Agents consume goods and supply labor in both sub-periods, with preferences   h      i
                                 ν (`ej ), where cj and `j ∈ 0, `¯ (respectively e
                                                             
given by U (cj )−ν(`j )+ U
                         e (e
                            cj )−e                                               cj and `ej ∈ 0, ē` )
are consumption and labor in the morning (respectively in the afternoon). Intertemporal
preferences are therefore given by
                              ∞
                              X                                               
                                      t
                                     β U (cjt ) − ν(`jt ) + U (e
                                                            e  cjt ) − νe(`jt ) .
                                                                          e                              (10)
                               t=0


Mornings:       In the morning, households can purchase consumption goods and search for
employment. We will refer to this good as the morning good, and it will be at least partially
durable. There is no money in this economy, but there is credit. When the household
buys morning goods, its bank account is debited, and when (and if) it receives employment
income its bank account is credited. As we shall see, households will in general end the first
sub-period with a non-zero bank account balance. In order to limit the state space of the
system, we assume that households must balance their asset positions in the afternoon by
repaying any outstanding debts or receiving a payment for any surplus.25 These payments
are made in terms of the afternoon good, which is the numéraire in this economy.
    U is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly concave, while the dis-utility of work
function ν is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly convex, with ν(0) = 0. Households
accumulate a stock of the morning goods, which they can either consume or trade. This stock
  24
     As will become clear, the alternation of decentralized mornings and centralized afternoons will be useful
in obtaining a degenerate distribution of wealth at the end of each period, which helps in solving the model.
In a monetary model, Lagos and Wright [2005] use a similar assumption to obtain a degenerate distribution
of money holdings. See also Rocheteau and Wright [2005], and more recently Kaplan and Menzio [2014].
  25
     This assumption, together with the symmetric initial endowment of durable goods and the fact that
morning purchases are not employment-state-contingent (see below), will imply that all households exit the
period-t afternoon with the same levels of both durable goods and financial assets (although they are in
general heterogeneous at the end of the morning period). This degeneracy in the wealth distribution makes
the analysis much more tractable.


                                                       15
evolves according to
                                         Xjt+1 = (1 − δ) (Xjt + γejt ) ,                                           (11)
where Xjt is the stock brought into morning t and ejt is quantity of morning-goods purchases
in morning t. For simplicity, we assume that a constant fraction γ ∈ (0, 1] of these purchases
are durable.26 δ ∈ (0, 1] is the depreciation rate.
    Trade in the morning good is subject to a coordination problem because of frictions in
the labor market. At the beginning of the morning sub-period, the household splits up
responsibilities between two members. The first member, called the buyer, goes to the goods
market to make purchases. The second member searches for employment opportunities in
the labor market. The goods market functions in a Walrasian fashion, with both buyers
and firms taking the price of these goods pt (in units of the afternoon good) as given. The
morning market for labor is subject to a matching friction, with sellers of labor searching for
employers and employers searching for labor. The important assumption is that buyers do
not know, when choosing how much to buy, whether the worker member of the household
has secured a match. This assumption implies that buyers make purchase decisions in the
presence of unemployment risk.
    There is a large set of potential firms in the economy who can decide to search for workers
in view of supplying the morning good to the market. Each firm can hire one worker and
has access to a decreasing-returns-to-scale production function F (`t ), where `t is the number
of hours supplied by the worker in a match.27 In order to match with a worker, a firm is
required to post a vacancy at fixed cost Φ in terms of the morning good, so that the net
production of a firm hiring `t hours of labor is F (`t ) − Φ. Firms search for workers and, upon
finding a worker, they jointly decide on the number of hours worked and on the wage to be
paid. Upon a match, the determination of the wage and hours worked within a firm is done
efficiently though a type of Walrasian bargaining process similar in spirit to that in Lucas
and Prescott [1974]; that is, given a match, the wage and hours worked are determined so
as to equate the demand for labor by the firm to the supply of labor by the worker.28 As
a result, in equilibrium workers will be paid their marginal products (pF 0 (`t ) = wt ), and
further wt will be equal to a worker’s marginal dis-utility of work. It is easy to verify that
this bargaining outcome lies within the bargaining set between the firm and the worker.
    The labor market operates as follows. All workers are assumed to search for employment.
Letting Nt represent the number of firms searching for workers, the number of matches Mt is
then given by the constant-returns-to-scale matching function M (·) , with Mt = M (Nt , 1).
Note that Mt is also the employment rate, so that ut = 1 − Mt is the unemployment rate.
  26
     In the quantitative exercise below, we will interpret “durables” as including conventional durable goods
as well as residential investment.
  27
     We also assume that F is such that both F 0 (`t ) `t and [F (`t ) − F 0 (`t ) `t ] are strictly increasing functions
of `t , and that F (0) = 0. These properties are exhibited, for example, by the Cobb-Douglas function
F (`t ) = A`α
            t.
  28
     We make this assumption here for analytical convenience. In the quantitative model of section 3, we
replace this assumption by the more standard one of Nash bargaining. In Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier
[2015] it is shown that the demand complementarity we exploit here is robust to alternative bargaining
protocols.




                                                          16
The resource constraint for the morning good is then given by
                             Z 1
                                 (cjt − Xjt )dj = Mt F (`t ) − Nt Φ,
                                   0

where the left-hand side is total purchases of consumption goods and the right-hand side
is the total available supply after subtracting firms’ vacancy-posting costs. Firms enter the
market up to the point where expected profits are zero. This condition can be written29
                                                    
                                    Mt            wt
                                         F (`t ) − `t = Φ.                               (12)
                                    Nt            pt
    At the end of the morning, a household’s individual state is summarized by its net
financial asset position ajt (expressed in units of the afternoon good), which is equal to
ajt = wt `jt − pt (cjt − Xjt ) if the worker was employed, and ajt = −pt (cjt − Xjt ) if the
worker was unemployed.

Afternoons: The afternoon market is set up so as to allow households to pay back any
debt incurred in the morning market. In fact, the afternoon economy will be modeled in
such a way that if there were no frictions in the morning, there would be no trade between
agents in the afternoon. In particular, we assume that U   e (·) is increasing and strictly concave
in e
   cjt , but assume that the dis-utility of work is linear in the afternoon, i.e.,

                                              νe(`ejt ) = v `ejt
To ensure that taking on debt is potentially risky (which will induce precautionary savings),
we assume that, in the afternoon, households can produce a good for their own consumption
using one unit of labor to produce one unit of goods. However, in order to produce goods in
the afternoon that can be transferred to others to satisfy debts incurred in the morning, a
household must supply 1 + τ units of labor, τ > 0. The parameter τ will play an important
role in the analysis since it controls the perceived risk associated with accumulating debt in
the morning sub-period.
    Since a household’s financial asset position ajt is pre-determined when entering the af-
ternoon sub-period, decisions for e cjt and `ejt will satisfy

                                 v=U  e 0 (`ejt + ajt ),
                                      (
                                        `ejt + ajt                 if ajt ≥ 0,
                                cjt =
                                e
                                        `ejt + (1 + τ ) ajt        if ajt < 0.

Letting V (ajt ) denote the afternoon-period utility (U     cj ) − νe(`ej )) associated with entering
                                                         e (e
the afternoon with financial assets ajt , it is easy to check that V is given (up to a constant)
by                                      (
                                           vajt           if ajt ≥ 0,
                             V (ajt ) =
                                           (1 + τ ) vajt if ajt < 0.
  29
    We assume that searching firms pool their ex-post profits and losses so that they each make exactly zero
profits in equilibrium, regardless of whether they are matched with a worker.

                                                     17
This function V (·) is piecewise linear and concave, with a kink at a = 0.30 Here, the marginal
value of financial assets is given by v when assets are positive and (1 + τ ) v when assets
are negative. Since buyers in general face unemployment risk when making their purchase
decisions, the wedge between the marginal value of assets when in deficit and that when in
surplus generates self-insurance behavior. In particular, a fall in the employment rate causes
buyers to reduce their purchases, since they fear ending up in the unemployment state with
debt that is costly to serve. This mechanism is central to the strategic complementarity that
emerges in the model, which in turn is necessary to generate local instability and limit-cycle
dynamics. The strength of this mechanism is governed to a large extent by the parameter τ .
    In order to repay creditors, households exiting the morning in debt are forced to work
more than non-indebted households in the afternoon, with all financial asset positions being
fully resolved (i.e., reset to zero) by the end of the afternoon sub-period. Meanwhile, since
the durables-accumulation decision was made in the morning prior to realization of the
idiosyncratic labor market status of the households, and since all households are assumed to
have a symmetric initial endowment of durables Xj0 = X0 , in equilibrium they will all exit
period t with the same level of durables Xjt+1 = Xt+1 . Thus, despite heterogeneity in labor
market outcomes, the distribution of both financial and capital assets at the end of every
period will be degenerate.

Intertemporal Equilibrium: Substituting V (a) from above into the objective function
(10), the buyer’s problem is to choose paths for Xjt+1 and ejt to maximize
    ∞
    X                                                                                               
              t
             β U (Xjt + ejt ) + (1 − ut ) [−ν (`jt ) + v (wt `jt − pt ejt )] + ut (1 + τ )v(−pt ejt )     (13)
       t=0

subject to the accumulation equation (11). Meanwhile, if the worker finds a match, his labor
supply decision is given by the `jt that maximizes −ν (`jt ) + v (wt `jt − pt ejt ).
    A symmetric intertemporal equilibrium for this economy is then given by sequences of
relative prices of goods pt , wage rates wt , goods purchases et , labor supplied in matches `t ,
vacancy postings Nt , the stock of durables Xt+1 , and unemployment rates ut such that:
  1. {et } and {Xt+1 } maximize the buyer’s objective function (13) subject to the accumu-
     lation equation (11), taking prices, the unemployment rate and {`t } as given;
  2. `t solves the worker’s labor-supply problem, taking et and prices as given;
  3. `t maximizes firm profits conditional on a match, taking prices as given;
  4. The goods market clears, i.e., et = (1 − ut )F (`) − Nt Φ;
  5. Firms’ entry decisions are such that the zero-profit condition (12) holds; and
  6. Jobs are created according to the matching function, i.e., 1 − ut = M (Nt , 1); and
  30
    As noted in Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier [2015], what matters here is that the marginal value of financial
assets be smaller in surplus than in deficit.




                                                        18
2.2     Understanding the Period-t Equilibrium in the Myopic Case
In order to most clearly highlight the nature of the demand complementarity in the model,
it is useful to temporarily focus on the myopic case where β = 0. In this case, we simply
have a repeated sequence of static decisions by households, with the only linkage between
periods being the inherited stock of durable goods Xt . To further simplify the analysis, let
us assume that the matching function takes the form M = min{Nt , 1}; that is, that the
number of matches in the economy is given by the short side of the market.
    Letting et denote the average level of morning purchases in the economy, one may show
that household j’s optimal consumption-choice decision can be expressed as31

                                  U 0 (Xt + ejt ) = p (et ) v [1 + τ u (et )] ,                            (14)

where p (·) and u (·) are the price of consumption goods and the unemployment rate, re-
spectively, expressed as functions of aggregate purchases. The left-hand side of (14) is
household j’s marginal utility of consumption. The right-hand side captures buyer j’s ex-
pected marginal-utility cost of funds. When the economy is at full employment (u (et ) = 0),
this is simply equal to the price p (et ) of morning goods in terms of afternoon ones, times the
marginal value v of those afternoon goods when assets are non-negative. When there is un-
employment, however, the buyer faces some positive probability of ending up in the negative-
asset state, which is associated with a higher marginal value of assets (i.e., (1 + τ ) v). As a
result, the expected marginal-utility cost of funds is higher and, all else equal, household j
would choose a lower level of purchases.
     A period-t equilibrium for this economy is given by a solution to (14) with the additional
restriction that ejt = et . To understand how the equilibrium is affected by the initial level of
durables Xt , note the following properties of the equilibrium functions p (·) and u (·). First,
one may show that 1 − u (et ) = min {et /e? , 1}, where e? is output (net of vacancy-posting
costs) produced per firm when there is a positive level of unemployment.32 Second, one may
show that p (·) is a continuous function of et , with p0 (et ) = 0 for et < e? , and p0 (et ) > 0 for
et > e? .33 The consequences of these two properties for the marginal-utility cost of funds
(i.e., the right-hand side of (14)) are illustrated by the curve labeled “cost of funds” in
panel (a) of Figure 4. For et sufficiently small, the curve is downward-sloping: as e rises,
output is increased along the extensive labor margin, lowering the unemployment rate and
making purchases feel less expensive to households. Once e reaches the full-employment level
e? , however, additional increases in output come via the intensive labor margin, which is
associated with a rising price and thus an increased cost of funds.
     The two regimes—unemployment and full-employment—are associated with different
  31
     See Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier [2015].
  32
     When there is unemployment, the “min” matching function and the firm’s zero-profit condition together
imply F (`t ) − F 0 (`t ) ` = Φ. Since Φ is a constant, conditional on there being unemployment this implies
that `t = `? , where `? solves this zero-profit equation. Output net of vacancy costs is then e? ≡ F (`? ) − Φ.
  33
     Combining the household’s labor supply condition and the firm’s labor demand condition, one may
obtain pt = ν 0 (`t ) / [vF 0 (`t )]. As pointed out in footnote 32, when et < e? we have `t = `? , so that
pt = p? ≡ ν 0 (`? ) / [vF 0 (`? )]. Further, once the economy achieves full employment, a rise in output must
come through the intensive margin of labor (i.e., through a rise in `t ), which causes p (·) to be increasing in
et on et > e? .



                                                       19
               Figure 4: Period t Equilibrium Determination in the Myopic Model


              (a) Unemployment regime                             (b) Full-employment regime

                                       cost of                                                 cost of
                                       funds                                                   funds
         ∆Xt                                                                  ∆Xt




                                  U 0 (Xt + et )
                                                                                               U 0 (Xt + et )
                                                   et                                                     et
        e2t          e1t                                                         e2t    e1t



equilibrium properties depending on different levels of the inherited Xt .34 Panel (a) of Figure
4 shows the case for the unemployment regime. With low Xt , the economy is in equilibrium
at the level e1t of purchases, which occurs at the intersection of the cost-of-funds curve and
the solid marginal-utility function U 0 (Xt + et ). In such a situation, if the inherited stock of
durables is increased by an amount ∆Xt , the marginal-utility function shifts to the left by
∆X units, as represented by the dashed curve in the figure. We see that the equilibrium
level of purchases is smaller as a result of the higher level of Xt , and furthermore that it has
fallen by more than ∆Xt (so that total consumption ct = Xt + et is lower). This amplified
response is due to the strategic complementarity that exists in the unemployment regime:
a rise in the inherited stock of durables causes households to reduce their demand for new
goods which, via an extensive labor-margin adjustment, increases the unemployment rate
ut , which in turn raises the cost of funds, causing households to reduce purchases further,
further lowering the employment rate, etc. In contrast, panel (b) of Figure 4 shows the same
experiment but beginning from the full-employment regime. In this case, we again see that a
higher Xt is associated with a fall in equilibrium purchases, but in this case the fall is by less
than ∆Xt (so that total consumption rises). This damped response occurs as a result of the
strategic substitutability that exists when the economy is at full employment: a rise in the
inherited stock of durables causes households to reduce their demand for new goods which,
via an intensive labor margin adjustment, lowers hours-per-worker, which lowers the price
p, in turn lowering the cost of funds and causing households to increase their purchases.
  34
    As shown in Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier [2015], if τ is sufficiently large there may be more than one
equilibrium. While this is an interesting theoretical possibility, the evidence obtained from the quantitative
exercise of section 3, gives no indication that multiple equilibrium are of concern. We therefore restrict
attention throughout this paper to the case where the equilibrium is unique, i.e., where τ is not too large.


                                                        20
    The sensitivity of purchases to the initial level of Xt in the unemployment regime comes
from the presence of strategic complementarity, and the corresponding reduced insensitivity
in the full-employment regime comes from strategic substitutability. This will play a crucial
part in generating limit cycles. Note also that the sensitivity of et to Xt in the unemployment
regime is increasing in the steepness of the slope of the cost-of-funds schedule in that regime.
Since this steepness in turn depends positively on the parameter τ , we see that τ controls
the degree of strategic complementarity in the unemployment regime.
    In order to see the link between the current model and our previous reduced-form model,
Figure 5 illustrates the relationship between the household’s decision ejt and the decision by
other households et . In effect, it is possible to express the expenditure ejt of household j as
a function of aggregate expenditure et and the stock of durable goods Xt−1 as follows:
                                            ejt = Z(et ) − X                                           (15)
where
                                          Z(e) ≡ U 0−1 (Q(e))
with                               0 ?
                                   ν 0(` ?) 1 + τ − τ e?
                                                          
                                    F (` )             e
                                                            if 0 < e < e? ,
                           Q (e) ≡ ν 0 (Ω−1 (e))
                                   0 −1
                                    F (Ω (e))
                                                            if e ≥ e? .
Here, Ω(`) ≡ F 0 (`)` is output net of search costs per employed worker and e? ≡ Ω(`? ) is
the level of output (net of firms’ search costs) that would be produced if all workers were
employed, with hours per employed worker equal to `? .35
    As can be seen, Figure 5 has similarities with Figure 1 of the reduced-form model, and
in particular features a regime of strategic complementarity and a regime of strategic substi-
tutability, with the vertical location of household j’s optimal-expenditure (i.e., best-response)
function depending on the history of the economy. Two best-response functions are plotted
in the figure. In the lower one—which captures a situation where Xt is high—purchases of
goods play the role of strategic complements. On the other hand, in the higher one—which
captures a situation where Xt is low—purchases play the role of strategic substitutes. Note
also that as long as τ is not too large, then the best-response function in Figure 5 necessarily
crosses the 45-degree line only once, implying that the equilibrium is unique.
    It is easy to verify that this myopic economy can exhibit limit cycles, with periods
of high purchases followed by periods of low purchases.36 In particular, using the logic
presented in Section 1, it can be verified that, as long as δ is sufficiently low (so that the
steady state is in the unemployment regime), increasing the degree of complementarity by
increasing τ will eventually cause this system to become locally unstable. However, the
system nevertheless remains globally stable, since once Xt becomes too small the economy
reaches full employment, while once Xt becomes too large it reaches zero employment.37
  35
      Note that Q is precisely the cost-of-funds curve discussed above.
  36
      Should we add an appendix that discusses this, since we already have most of the argument. I just
blocked it out above to help reduce space and improve flow.
   37
      The fact that the non-negativity constraint on employment binds in some periods when the steady state
is locally unstable is due to several stark assumptions made in this section for expositional purposes only.
In the quantitative exercise below we will relax these assumptions, allowing for the presence of endogenous
forces that prevent employment from falling to zero.

                                                    21
In either case, the strong local demand complementarities in effect at the steady state are
replaced with complementarities, thereby preventing the system from exploding.

               Figure 5: Equilibrium Determination for Two Different Histories

                        ejt
                                                                           ejt = et




                                                                                           0
                                                                                Z (et ) − Xt−1
                     0
             Z(0) − Xt−1




                                                                                Z (et ) − Xt−1
             Z(0) − Xt−1



                                                                                       et

  Notes: This figure plots the optimal spending of household j as a function of total spending,
  ejt = Z (et ) − Xt (equation (15)). The
                                        Pintercepts  correspond to two different histories of the
                                          ∞        j
  model, Xt = (1 − δ)(Xt−1 + γet−1 ) = 1 (1 − δ) γet−j .




2.3     The General Case
In the previous subsection we saw that, when β = 0, the actions of individual agents will be
strategic complements when X is high and strategic substitutes when X is low. While the
myopic case is useful for building intuition and relating the current structural model with
the reduced-form model of Section 1, of more general interest is whether limit cycles may
occur in the current setting for an arbitrary β. It is not immediately obvious that this should
hold, and indeed, as a “Turnpike Theorem” (due to Scheinkman [1976]) below highlights, in
a class of models widely used in the literature, limit cycles cannot occur for β sufficiently
close to one (holding all else constant).38
  38
    See also Brock and Scheinkman [1976] and McKenzie [1976]. It is important to understand the meaning
and scope of the turnpike theorem. That theorem highlights a trade-off between the level of discounting
and the “curvature” of preferences plus technology. With the preference and technology used in quantita-
tive macroeconomics, curvature is in general low enough so that low β is needed for limit cycle to occur.
Nevertheless, as shown by Benhabib and Rustichini [1990], for any positive discount rate there exists a large
family of standard Cobb-Douglas technologies with three sectors which have optimal growth paths of per-


                                                     22
    In particular, consider a general deterministic dynamic economy with date-t state vector
zt ∈ Rn . Let W (zt , zt+1 ) denote the period-t return function when the current state is zt and
the subsequent period’s state is zt+1 .39 ThePfollowing theorem characterizes the solution to
the problem of maximizing lifetime utility        β t W (zt , zt+1 ), where β is the discount factor.

Turnpike Theorem (Scheinkman [1976]) If W is concave, then there exists a β̄ < 1
such that if β̄ ≤ β ≤ 1 then the steady state is unique and globally stable.40

    The key property that ensures global stability in this theorem is the assumption that
W is concave. Since, all else equal, fluctuations are payoff-decreasing when W is concave,
when β is sufficiently close to one it is in general optimal to take temporarily costly action
in the present in order to avoid permanent fluctuations in the future. This in turn results in
global convergence to the steady state, so that limit cycles cannot occur. Concavity of W
is a property that holds in a wide variety of economic models that have become standard
in the literature, including many popular quantitative models of the business cycle. As we
shall see, however, in the unemployment-risk model discussed above, concavity of W may
be violated, in which case global stability may not obtain.
    As a first step in establishing the potential for limit cycles in the unemployment-risk
model, the following proposition verifies that the system satisfies a key condition needed for
the existence of a stable limit cycle, non-explosiveness.

Proposition 5. Given any initial endowment of durables X0 , lim supt→∞ |Xt | < ∞.

    Proposition 5 ensures that in the limit the system either exhibits deterministic fluctua-
tions (such as a limit cycle) or converges to a fixed point. The following proposition estab-
lishes that, in contrast to models for which the Turnpike Theorem applies, local instability
is possible in this model for an arbitrarily high discount factor.

Proposition 6. There exists parameter values and functional forms such that, for some
β̄ < 1, if β̄ ≤ β < 1 then the (unique) steady state is locally unstable.

    In combination with Proposition 5, Proposition 6 confirms that there are parameter
values and functional forms for which the model will generate deterministic fluctuations
even if β is arbitrarily close to one. The reasons for the failure of the Turnpike Theorem to
hold for this model can be clarified as follows. Suppose the steady state of the model is in
the unemployment regime, and let W (Xt , Xt+1 ) be a period-t return function such that the
solution to the problem
                                         X∞
                                     max     β t W (Xt , Xt+1 )                          (16)
                                       {Xt+1 }
                                                 t=0

sistent cycles. Such an example economy is presented in Benhabib and Nishimura [1998]. More generally,
Boldrin and Montrucchio [1986] have shown that any differentiable difference equation corresponds to the
policy function of some well-behaved concave dynamic program with a sufficiently large discount rate.
   39
      Note that, in this formulation, W implicitly incorporates any constraints and static-equilibrium out-
comes, so that W (zt , zt+1 ) is the equilibrium period-t return conditional on the current and next-period
state being zt and zt+1 , respectively.
   40
      For a proof and more formal statement of the theorem, see Scheinkman [1976] Theorem 3.



                                                       23
implements the equilibrium of the model in a neighborhood of this steady state.41 If it
turns out that W is concave, then the Turnpike Theorem implies that the model cannot
generate limit-cycle dynamics. The following proposition establishes that in fact W may not
be concave.
Proposition 7. There exists parameter values and functional forms such that, in the neigh-
borhood of an unemployment-regime steady state, W is not concave.
    Intuitively, non-concavity of W can arise as a result of a “bunching” mechanism in the
model: when unemployment risk is low—that is, when other agents are purchasing lots of
goods—it is a good time for an individual agent to purchase goods. Similarly, when other
agents are purchasing few goods, it is a bad time for an individual agent to buy goods. If
sufficiently strong, this bunching mechanism—which arises precisely because of the strate-
gic complementarity in the model—tends to create periods of high durables accumulation
alternating with periods of low durables accumulation.
    The final proposition of this section clarifies the importance of the parameter τ in con-
trolling the strength of this bunching mechanism, and therefore in influencing whether or
not the economy will be able to generate limit-cycle dynamics.
Proposition 8. For τ sufficiently close to zero, the steady state is stable.
   Proposition 8 thus confirms that, if τ is not sufficiently large, the degree of strategic
complementarity is too small to produce an unstable steady state.


3      Estimating a DSGE Model That May Involve Limit
       Cycles
This section presents a quantitative exploration into limit cycles. In particular, we will
estimate an augmented version of the dynamic model discussed above where we also allow
for exogenous disturbances, so as to force limit cycles to compete with exogenous driving
forces in explaining business-cycle properties of the data. Our main goals will be to examine
whether the estimation procedure chooses parameter values that support limit cycles, and
to examine the extent to which the reliance on exogenous driving forces is reduced if a limit
cycle is present. We first present the data properties we aim to match before describing the
extended DSGE model and the estimation results.

3.1     Data
One of the main criticisms of limit cycles as an explanation of macroeconomic fluctuations
relates to the fact that business cycles are quite irregular in length, duration, and depth,
while limit cycles tend to be quite regular. In order to quantify the the degree of irregularity
in a macroeconomic data series, it is helpful to look at its spectrum,42 which offers a simple
  41
    An example of such a W is found in the proof of Proposition 7.
  42
    As is well know, any data series can be written as the sum of orthogonal sine waves of different frequencies.
The spectrum is the function giving the variance of the corresponding sine wave for a particular frequency,
and can thus be viewed as a decomposition of the variance of the series by frequency.

                                                       24
visual way of examining whether the cyclical properties of the series are regular or irregular.
If cycles are very regular, this will show up in the spectrum as one or more large peaks at
particular periodicities. In contrast, if the cycle is very irregular, the spectrum will have
weight across a large range of frequencies.
    In order to review the extent of irregularity in business cycles, we start by looking at
the behavior of hours worked (per capita) in the economy. This is a useful macroeconomic
variable to examine for our purposes since it is not too far from being stationary. Nonetheless,
because of demographic changes and changes in female labor market attachment, hours
worked per capita does exhibit some low-frequency movements that are unrelated to business
cycles. To eliminate these low-frequency movements, we use a band-pass filter to remove
fluctuations associated with periods longer than 20 years (80 quarters).43 Panel (a) of Figure
6 displays the resulting times series for US hours over the period 1960-2012.44 Several
things emerge from the plot. First, visual inspection reveals that the series corresponds
closely to the standard timing of business cycles, with NBER-dated recessions (shaded areas)
being associated with important falls in hours worked. Second, it is interesting to note
that, with the exception of the during the 1970s, a typical cycle in hours is quite long.
For example, since the beginning of the 1980s, one observes three cycles, each of length
close to 40 quarters, while the principal cycle in the 1960s is of a similar length. This
observation is echoed in panel (b) of Figure 6, where we plot the spectrum of our hours
series.45 As could be expected from inspecting plot (a), the spectrum does not put all of its
mass at a few periodicities—which would have been a sign of near-perfect regularity—but
it does place substantial weight at periodicities between 30 and 50 quarters, with a peak
at around 40 quarters. This is interesting, since business cycles are commonly defined as
fluctuations between 8 and 32 quarters (shown as the light gray zone superimposed on the
figure). However, to the extent that we believe it reflects business cycle forces, the behavior of
this filtered hours series suggests that periodicities relevant for business cycle analysis should
to be extended to include slightly lower-frequency movements corresponding to fluctuations
from 32 to 60 quarters (shown as the dark gray zone superimposed on the figure).46
    The hours series presented in panel (a) of Figure 6 will be the target series we seek
to explain with our model. In particular, we will estimate the model parameters so as to
replicate the spectrum for hours as shown in panel (b). Using the estimated model, we
can then evaluate how well the model matches the data in other dimensions. Of particular
interest to us will be to see how well it simultaneously explains the spectrum of output and
the coherence between output and hours. In panel (c) of Figure 6 we report the spectrum
for output after applying the same band-pass filter used to de-trend hours. As can be seen,
the spectrum for output resembles that for hours, with substantial weight being placed on
frequencies that are lower than traditionally associated with business cycles. Finally, panel
(d) of the figure reports the coherence between output and hours, which provides information
  43
     Note however that we do not remove any of the high-frequency fluctuations in the data.
  44
     Details about the hours series we use are provided at the bottom of the figure.
  45
     The figure displays the spectral density of hours for periodicities between 4 and 80 quarters in length,
after first using the band-pass filter that removes cycles with periods longer than 80 quarters.
  46
     See Comin and Gertler [2006] and Pancrazi [2015] for similar observations. Note also that these basic
properties of the hours spectrum are robust to changes in the upper limit of the band-pass filter from 80
quarters to anywhere from 80 to 150 quarters.


                                                     25
about how co-movements between output and hours behave at different frequencies.47 The
result displayed in panel (d) of Figure 6 shows that hours and output are highly correlated
at all periods between 8 and 80 quarters.

3.2     The Extended DSGE Model
The dynamic model with unemployment risk presented in Section 2 was constructed with an
eye toward analytical tractability. As a result, that model lacks features that are known to
be helpful in quantitatively matching the data, and includes several others that, while not
central to the key mechanisms, turn out to be overly restrictive in a quantitative setting.
Since the main purpose of the exercise in this section is quantitative in nature, we make
adjustments to the model designed to increase flexibility in that regard.
    First, as mentioned earlier, dynamic systems with a single state variable often have
difficulty producing deterministic fluctuations with the basic qualitative properties that we
observe in macroeconomic aggregates. In particular, such fluctuations tend to be erratic, with
the system often jumping back and forth from one side of the steady state to the other every
few periods or less. Thus, if the unemployment-risk model is to have a reasonable chance of
replicating key features of the data, it will require the addition of at least one other state
variable. Further, as experience with the reduced-form model of Section 1 suggests, this state
variable should be capable of inducing some degree of sluggishness.48 To this end, we will
assume that the household exhibits internal habit-formation in consumption of the morning
good, ct ,49 so that its period utility for morning consumption is now given by

                                               U (ct − hct−1 ) .

Here, h ∈ [0, 1) is a parameter controlling the degree of habit persistence.
    Second, we relax two simplifying assumptions made earlier; namely, the assumption of a
“min” matching function (introduced in subsection 2.2), and the assumption of homogeneous
firms. With these two assumptions in place, we obtained a simple dichotomy featuring
an unemployment regime in which all output adjustments occur along the extensive labor
margin, and a full-employment regime in which all adjustments occur along the intensive
margin. In order to relax this stark dichotomy, we now return to a more general form for the
matching function, and also allow firms to be somewhat heterogeneous. We model the latter
as heterogeneity in firms’ vacancy-posting costs, so that instead of assuming that all firms
have cost Φ, we assume that the N -th firm has vacancy cost Φ (N ) ≥ 0, where Φ (·) is a non-
decreasing function. These two assumptions together will in general create the possibility of
   47
      Coherence is analogous to a regression R2 , giving the proportion of the variance of one series that can be
linearly predicted by another at each periodicity. A coherence of one would thus indicate that two series are
perfectly correlated at that periodicity, while a coherence of zero would indicate that they are orthogonal.
   48
      Recall that in our reduced-form model, the parameter that controls sluggishness (α2 ), needed to be
sufficiently high for the system to undergo a Hopf bifurcation instead of a flip bifurcation.
   49
      Consumption habit introduces sluggishness into the model while maintaining tractability and keeping
the model as close as possible to the baseline version presented in Section 2. There are nonetheless a number
of alternative means of introducing sluggishness (e.g., adjustment costs in investment or employment) that
could be used instead and that would be capable delivering similar qualitative dynamics.



                                                       26
                           Figure 6: Data, spectral density and coherence


                 (a) Filtered hours                                           (b) Spectrum of hours
 6
                                                                    25

 4
                                                                    20
 2


 0                                                                  15

 -2
                                                                    10

 -4
                                                                     5
 -6


 -8                                                                  0
 1960     1970      1980           1990     2000        2010             4     8   12       20   32 40   60   80
                            Date                                                        Period


           (c) Spectrum of output                                   (d) Coherence between hours and output
 18                                                                 0.9
 16
                                                                    0.8
 14
 12                                                                 0.7
 10
                                                                    0.6
  8
  6                                                                 0.5
  4
                                                                    0.4
  2
  0                                                                 0.3
      4      8      12         20         32 40    60     80              4    8   12       20   32 40   60   80
                           Period                                                       Period



Notes: Hours Worked series is the log of BLS nonfarm hours worked divided by population,
detrended with a BP filter to remove fluctuations with periods greater than 80 quarters. Shaded
areas are NBER-dated recessions. The sample runs from 1960Q1 to 2012Q4. Output is also
first detrended with the same BP filter. Raw spectrum in obtained as the squared modulus
of the discrete Fourier transform of the data series (scaled so that the integral with respect
to angular frequency over the interval [−π, π] equals the variance of the series). Spectrum is
kernel-smoothed raw spectrum. Kernel is a Hamming window with bandwidth parameter 11.
Raw coherence at a periodicity p is given by |sL,x (p)|2 / [sL (p) sx (p)], where sL is the spectrum
of hours, sx is the spectrum of the other series, and sL,x is the cross-spectrum. Coherence was
then kernel-smoothed using a Hamming window with bandwidth parameter 51.



                                                               27
both extensive and intensive labor margin adjustments occurring simultaneously.50
    Third, as discussed earlier and in contrast to what is observed in the data, purely deter-
ministic models of economic fluctuations tend to yield cycles of a constant length. This can
be observed either as a very regular pattern in a plot of time series data generated from the
model, or as one or more large spikes in the spectrum estimated from that data.51 One of the
key contributions of this paper is to allow limit-cycle forces to compete with—and possibly
complement—exogenous disturbances in explaining the data. To this end, we also include
in the model an exogenous random TFP process, θ̃t , which multiplies firms’ production
functions so that output is given by θ̃t F (`t ).52
    In addition to the above, in our initial presentation of the model we made the unconven-
tional assumption of Walrasian bargaining between workers and firms in the labor market,
wherein workers earn their marginal products and supply the privately optimal number of
hours at this wage. This assumption was made purely for expositional purposes, and we
replace it henceforth with the more conventional assumption of Nash bargaining.53

3.3     Functional Forms, Calibration and Estimation
Our choice of functional forms is as follows. Production is assumed to be of the Cobb-Douglas
form
                                          θ̃t F (`) = θ̃t `α .
Utility over consumption net of habit is assumed to be of the form
                                                        b
                                            U (C) = aC − C 2 ,
                                                        2
We choose a quadratic formulation for preferences since this greatly simplifies certain com-
putational issues. The dis-utility of labor in the morning market is taken to be of the form
                                                        ν1 1+ω
                                             ν (`) =       ` .
                                                       1+ω
The matching function is assumed to be of the CES form54
                                                                  − χ1
                                          M (N ) = 1 + N −χ
  50
       Note that the functional forms chosen for the matching and vacancy-cost functions (discussed below)
will nest the baseline cases of “min” matching and constant vacancy cost. Since the parameters of these
functions will be estimated, the data will thus ultimately choose the degree to which the simple dichotomy
relaxed.
    51
       One may show that the spectrum associated with any limit cycle is infinitely high at a countable number
of points (i.e., a countable sum of Dirac delta functions), and zero everywhere else.
    52
       For convenience, in order to retain certain analytical properties that are helpful in a computational
setting, we assume that firms’ vacancy costs and the production of the afternoon good also fluctuate with
this TFP process. Output, vacancy costs, and afternoon-period utility are thus given by θ̃t F (·), θ̃t Φ (·), and
θ̃t−1 V (·), respectively.
    53
       Neither our qualitative nor our quantitative results are sensitive to this assumption. See Beaudry,
Galizia, and Portier [2015] for further discussion of the qualitative results. See Galizia [2014] for quantitative
results under the assumption of Walrasian bargaining.
    54
       This matching function was proposed by den Haan, Ramey, and Watson [2000].

                                                       28
where χ > 0 is a parameter. Note that this function nests the Cobb-Douglas matching
function as χ → 0 and the “min” matching function as χ → ∞. The vacancy cost of the
N -th firm is assumed to be given by
                                                           !
                                         log (N ) − log N̄
                            Φ (N ) = Φ̄G
                                                 σN

where G is the standard normal CDF and N̄ , σN and Φ̄ are parameters. Note that this
function nests the constant function Φ(N ) = Φ̄ as N̄ → 0. Finally, we assume that the TFP
process is given simply by
                                                                   
                                                             σ 2
                     θt ≡ log θ̃t = ρθt−1 + t , t ∼ N 0,             .
                                                              100
    Several of the model parameters are calibrated to common values in the literature. In
particular, we set α = 2/3 so to have a reasonable amount of decreasing returns to hours
worked. The inverse Frisch elasticity is set at the widely used level ω = 1. We set the
depreciation rate and discount factor at standard values of δ = 0.025 and β = 0.99, respec-
tively, and normalize the maximum vacancy cost and marginal dis-utility of afternoon labor
to Φ̄ = 1 and v = 1, respectively. We also calibrate the Nash bargaining share of the worker
to ξ = 0.5.55 Finally, the fraction of purchases entering the durables stock was calibrated
at γ = 0.192, which is the average ratio of durables to total consumption in the National
Income and Product Accounts data.56 The remaining parameters were estimated.
    Solving the model for a particular parameterization was done using the parameterized
expectations (PE) approach.57 Given this solution, a large data set (T = 100, 000 periods
in length) was simulated and, after taking logs of the resulting hours series and detrending
it with the same BP filter as used for the data, the spectrum of log-hours was estimated.
The non-calibrated parameters were then estimated so as to minimize the average squared
difference between the model spectrum and the spectrum estimated from the data. Further
details of the solution and estimation procedure are presented in Appendix C.
    Estimated parameter values are reported in Table 1. Several things can be noted from
the estimation results. The first interesting result is that the estimated TFP process is
close to the process that can be obtained directly from measured productivity data. For
example, using John Fernald’s [2014] measure of business-sector labor productivity growth
over the sample period (1960Q1-2012Q4),58 after cumulating, linearly detrending, and fitting
an AR(1) process, one obtains a persistence estimate of 0.974 and an innovation standard
deviation of 0.713%, yielding an unconditional productivity standard deviation of 3.16%.59
  55
     When also included in the set of estimated parameters, the value of ξ obtained was close to the value
used to initialize the estimation algorithm, suggesting that this parameter is not identified.
  56
     As noted above, we include the conceptually-similar residential investment under the heading of
“durables”. The figure of 0.192 is obtained from NIPA data as the average of (Durable goods + Residential
investment)/(Consumption + Residential investment) over the sample period 1960Q1-2012Q4.
  57
     See, for example, den Haan and Marcet [1990] and Marcet and Marshall [1994]. Details can be found in
Appendix C.
  58
     Available at http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/economists/jfernald/quarterly_tfp.
xls.
  59
     Similar values are obtained when using Fernald’s TFP or utilization-adjusted TFP measures instead of
labor productivity.

                                                   29
The corresponding parameters estimated for the unemployment-risk model, meanwhile, are
ρ = 0.967 and σ = 0.614, respectively, which yields an unconditional standard deviation of
2.42%. The fact that the model only features a single shock, and that the variance of that
shock in the model is, if anything, smaller than its data counterpart is a feature we will
return to.
    The other parameter with a clear comparator in the data or literature is habit persistence,
which is estimated here to be h = 0.75, well within the range of standard estimates obtained
elsewhere. For example, Smets and Wouters [2007] report a 90% confidence interval for habit
of (0.64, 0.78), while Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti [2010] report a 90% confidence
interval of (0.72, 0.84).

                                   Table 1: Parameter Values

 Parameter                Value      Description
 a                        11.857     Marginal utility of consumption, intercept
 b                        2.618      Marginal utility of consumption, slope
 h                        0.753      Habit persistence
 ν1                       12.065     Labor dis-utility scaling factor
 τ                        0.146      Premium on debt
 A                        2.935      Constant productivity factor
 χ                        92.299     Complementarity in matching function
 N̄                       0.892      Mean parameter, fixed cost function
 σN                       0.012      Dispersion parameter, fixed cost function
 ρ                        0.967      Persistence of TFP
 σ                        0.614      100 × s.d. of innnovation to TFP

 Calibrated Parameters
 α                         0.667     Labor share
 ω                           1       Inverse Frisch elasticity
 δ                         0.025     Depreciation of durables
 β                          0.99     Discount factor
 Φ̄                          1       Maximum firm vacancy cost
 γ                         0.192     Fraction of purchases entering durables stock
 ξ                          0.5      Worker share in Nash bargaining

    The remaining parameters in Table 1 are composed mainly of scale parameters, and
parameters for which few if any precedents exist. The parameter τ , which drives the strength
of the household’s desire to reduce spending in response to a rise in unemployment risk,
falls into the latter category. Given its central role in the model, however, it deserves some
comment. If interpreted narrowly as a one-period financial premium on debt vis-à-vis saving,
the estimate of τ = 0.146, or 14.6%, exceeds typical borrowing-lending spreads. However,
we believe this view is overly restrictive, and in particular we interpret the parameter τ as
capturing in a reduced-form way all of the factors that may lead agents to perceive taking


                                              30
on debt as risky.60

3.4     Main Results
To illustrate the deterministic mechanisms, we first report results obtained when shutting
down the TFP shock (i.e., setting σ = 0).61 Panel (a) of Figure 7 plots a simulated 212-
quarter sample62 of log-hours generated from the deterministic version of the model, where
hours are given by Lt = (1 − ut )`t . Two key properties should be noted. First, estimation
of the model has yielded a set of parameters that generate deterministic cyclical behavior,
and these cycles are of a reasonable length (approximately 32 quarters). The difficulty that
some earlier models had in generating cycles of quantitatively reasonable lengths may have
been one of the factors leading to limited interest in using such a framework for understand-
ing business cycles. However, as this exercise demonstrates, reasonable-length endogenous
cycles can be generated in our framework relatively easily precisely because it possesses the
three key features we highlighted in Section 1: diminishing returns to capital accumulation,
sluggishness, and strong local demand complementarities. Second, notwithstanding the rea-
sonable cycle length, it is clear when comparing the simulated data in Figure 7 to the actual
data in Figure 6 that the fluctuations in the deterministic unemployment-risk model are far
too regular when compared to the data.63
    These properties of the deterministic component of our estimated model—i.e., a highly
regular 32-quarter cycle—can also be seen clearly in the frequency domain. Panel (b) of Fig-
ure 7 plots the spectrum for the deterministic model (dashed line), along with the spectrum
for the data (solid line) for comparison.64 Consistent with the pattern in the time domain,
the spectrum exhibits a peak at around 32 quarters. Further, the regularity of the cycle is
manifested as a large spike in the spectrum. In contrast, the spectrum estimated from the
data is much flatter.
    Re-introducing the TFP shock into the model, we see a markedly different picture in
both the time and frequency domains. Panel (a) of Figure 8 plots a 212-quarter arbitrary
  60
     As has been well documented, households appear to exhibit a considerable degree of risk-aversion, well
beyond what can be produced using time-separable preferences with a reasonable degree of intertemporal
substitutability. This has led to the adoption of more flexible preference specifications (e.g., the specification
proposed by Epstein and Zin [1989]) in which risk attitude is parameterized separately from intertemporal
substitutability. The parameter τ in our model can be similarly viewed as a way of directly parameterizing
household attitudes toward the risks associated with taking on debt in the presence of uncertainty about
employment outcomes.
  61
     In particular, we first obtained the PE coefficients from the full stochastic model. The simulation results
for the deterministic model were then generated using these stochastic PE coefficients, but feeding in a
constant value θt = 0 for the TFP process. In other words, agents in the deterministic model implicitly
behave as though they live in the stochastic world. As a result, any differences between the deterministic
and the stochastic results in this section are due exclusively to differences in the realized sequence of TFP
shocks, rather than differences in, say, agents’ beliefs about the underlying data-generating process.
  62
     This is equal to the length of the sample period of the data.
  63
     While successive cycles are close to symmetric in panel (a) of Figure 7, they are clearly not exactly
identical. As discussed in footnote 18, this is an artifact of the discrete-time formulation of the model. In a
continuous-time formulation, each cycle would be exactly identical to the last.
  64
     Note that the model was not re-estimated after shutting down the TFP shock. As such, there may be
alternative parameterizations of the deterministic model that are better able to match the spectrum in the
data.

                                                       31
                                 Figure 7: Deterministic Model

   (a) Sample of Simulated Hours Worked                            (b) Spectrum of Hours Worked
                                                              −3
                                                          x 10
 0.04                                                            Data
                                                  3.5            Deterministic Model
 0.03
                                                      3
 0.02
                                                  2.5
 0.01

                                                      2
    0

                                                  1.5
−0.01

                                                      1
−0.02


−0.03                                             0.5


−0.04                                                 0
     0       50       100         150      200         4            6      8        12     16       24      32   40   80
                      Quarters                                                  Period of component (quarters)




 Notes: Panel (a) shows 212-quarter simulated sample (same size as data set) of BP-filtered
 log(hours worked) (where hours are computed as Lt = (1 − ut )`t ) generated from the deter-
 ministic model. Initial simulated series was 252 quarters long, with first and last 20 quarters
 discarded after BP-filtering. Details for computation of model spectrum in panel (b) can be
 found in Appendix C.




                                                 32
sample of log-hours generated from the stochastic model. While clear cyclical patterns are
evident in the figure, it is immediately obvious that the inclusion of the TFP shock results
in fluctuations that are significantly less regular than those generated in the deterministic
model, appearing qualitatively quite similar to the fluctuations found in Figure 6 for actual
data. This is confirmed by the spectrum, which is plotted in panel (b) of Figure 8 alongside
the data spectrum. Also plotted is a point-wise 90% simulated confidence interval from the
model for data sets of the same length as the data (i.e., 212 quarters).65 The stochastic
model clearly matches the data quite well in this dimension, including possessing a peak
near 40 quarters and, as compared to the deterministic model, lacking any large spike. The
good fit of the model can also be seen by looking at the auto-covariance function (ACF) of
hours, i.e., Cov (Lt , Lt−k ), where k is the lag (in quarters). Panel (a) of Figure 9 plots the
result for the first 40 lags for both the data and model, along with point-wise 90% confidence
intervals. As the figure shows, the curves lie nearly on top of one another, indicating that
the model matches the data very well in this dimension also.66
     To verify that the good fit of the spectrum is not driven by the choice of filter, Figure 10
plots the data and model spectra for hours under four alternative filtering choices.67 Panels
(a)-(c) present results for three alternative band-pass filters with different upper bounds (100,
60, and 40 quarters, respectively), while panel (d) plots spectra using a Hodrick-Prescott
filter with parameter 1600. As the figure shows, the model fits the data very well in all cases.
     Next, it should be emphasized that the exogenous shock process in this model primarily
accelerates and decelerates the endogenous cyclical dynamics, causing significant random
fluctuations in the length of the cycle while only modestly affecting its amplitude. For
example, in the deterministic version of the model the standard deviation of log-hours is
0.024, while in the stochastic model it is 0.033, implying that almost three quarters of the
standard deviation of hours is due to deterministic mechanisms. Further, if this TFP process
were the only shock process operating in, for example, the widely-cited model of Smets and
Wouters [2007], it would generate a standard deviation of log-hours of only 0.006. This again
suggests the more general point that, if one is willing to consider the class of models capable
of generating deterministic fluctuations, then a parsimonious set of shocks with moderate
volatility can potentially yield qualitatively and quantitatively reasonable fluctuations.
     As a final exercise in this section, it is worth further comparing the above results to those
of Smets and Wouters [2007]. Their model has received much attention in the literature for
its ability to fit well a number of key macroeconomic data series. Panel (a) of Figure 11
shows the spectrum for hours worked as generated by the Smets and Wouters [2007] model
at the reported median posterior parameter values. As suggested by the relatively close fit,
their model also matches patterns in the hours data reasonably well.
     More insight into the drivers of fluctuations in the Smets and Wouters [2007] model can
be obtained by looking at a spectral variance decomposition; that is, by decomposing the
total variance at each individual periodicity into the portions that are attributable to each
  65
     That is, if the model were the true data-generating process, then at each periodicity the spectrum
estimated from the data would lie inside the confidence interval 90% of the time.
  66
     Note that the ACF is simply the inverse Fourier transform of the spectrum. Since the spectrum of the
model and data are similar, we would expect the ACF to be similar as well, a property clearly verified in
Figure 9.
  67
     Note that the model spectra were obtained using the baseline model parameters as reported in Table 1.


                                                   33
                                  Figure 8: Stochastic Model

   (a) Sample of Simulated Hours Worked                            (b) Spectrum of Hours Worked
                                                              −3
                                                          x 10
 0.06                                                            Data
                                                                 Stochastic Model
                                                  3.5            90% CI
 0.04
                                                      3

 0.02
                                                  2.5


    0                                                 2


                                                  1.5
−0.02
                                                      1

−0.04
                                                  0.5


−0.06                                                 0
     0       50        100        150      200         4             6     8        12     16       24      32   40   80
                       Quarters                                                 Period of component (quarters)




 Note: Panel (a) shows 212-quarter simulated sample (same size as data set) of BP-filtered
 log(hours worked) (where hours are computed as Lt = (1 − ut )`t ) generated from the stochastic
 model. Initial simulated series was 252 quarters long, with first and last 20 quarters discarded
 after BP-filtering. Details for computation of model spectrum in panel (b) can be found in
 Appendix C. Dotted lines show a pointwise 90% confidence interval for the spectrum that
 would be estimated from a model-generated data set of the same length as the actual data set
 (i.e., 212 quarters).




                                                 34
                   Figure 9: Autocovariance: Hours Worked (L) and Output (y)
          −4         (a) Cov(Lt ,Lt−k )                              −4        (b) Cov(Lt ,yt−k )
       x 10                                                      x 10
                                                            10
  10

                                                             5
   5

                                                             0
   0


  −5                                                        −5

    0              10          20            30   40         0            10          20            30   40
                                k                                                      k
              −4        (c) Cov(yt ,Lt−k )                           −4        (d) Cov(yt ,yt−k )
       x 10                                                      x 10
  10                                                        10


   5                                                         5



   0                                                         0



  −5                                                        −5
    0              10          20            30   40         0            10          20            30   40
                                k                                                      k


Notes: Figure shows autocovariances of BP(2,80)-filtered hours and output in the data and
stochastic model. k is the lag in quarters. Data series for output is the log of nominal
GDP, deflated by population and the GDP deflator. Output in the model is the sum of
wage
   h earnings and Rfirm profits,iwhich is equal to total production net of vacancy costs, i.e.,
                        N
θ̃t (1 − ut )F (`t ) − 0 t Φ (x) dx , where Nt is the number of firm entrants at date t. Dotted
lines show pointwise 90% confidence intervals for the autocovariance functions that would be
estimated from a model-generated data set of the same length as the actual data set (i.e., 212
quarters).




                                                       35
                        Figure 10: Spectrum: Hours Worked (Alternative Filters)
        x 10
               −3         (a) BP(2,100)                         x 10
                                                                    −3          (b) BP(2,60)
    4
                    Data
                    Stochastic Model
                                                           3
    3               90% CI

                                                           2
    2


    1                                                      1


    0                                                      0
     4         6 8 12 16 24 32 40               80          4          6 8 12 16 24 32 40               80
               Period of component (quarters)                          Period of component (quarters)

        x 10
               −3          (c) BP(2,40)                         x 10
                                                                       −3      (d) HP(1600)
                                                          1.5
  2.5

    2
                                                           1
  1.5

    1                                                     0.5
  0.5

    0                                                      0
     4         6 8 12 16 24 32 40               80          4          6 8 12 16 24 32 40               80
               Period of component (quarters)                          Period of component (quarters)


Notes: Each panel plots corresponding data (solid) and model (dashed) spectrum using the re-
ported filter instead of the baseline BP(2,80) filter. Dotted lines show pointwise 90% confidence
intervals for the spectrum that would be estimated from a model-generated data set of the same
length as the actual data set (i.e., 212 quarters).




                                                     36
                                         Figure 11: Hours Worked in Smets-Wouters (SW)

                     (a) Data and SW Spectrum                                                        (b) Decomposition of spectrum (SW)
                                                                                                      −4
           −3                                                                                     x 10
       x 10
                                                                                              7            Mark−up
                Data
                                                                                                           Bond premium
                Smets−Wouters
                                                                                                           Technology
                                                                                                           Monetary policy
  2                                                                                           6            Gov’t spending



                                                                                              5

 1.5

                                                                                              4



  1                                                                                           3




                                                                                              2

 0.5

                                                                                              1




  0                                                                                           0
   4                 6          8   12        16           24        32   40   64   80         4                6            8   12        16           24        32   40   64   80
                                    Period of component (quarters)                                                               Period of component (quarters)




Notes: Data spectrum is as in Figure 6. Spectrum for Smets-Wouters (SW) obtained by
simulating 10,000 data sets of the same size as the actual data series. For each simulation,
the data was de-trended and the spectrum estimated using the same procedures as for the actual
data. A point-wise average was taken across all simulated spectra. Because the hours series
used by SW for their estimation differs somewhat from the series used here, for purposes of
comparability, in panel (a) the SW spectrum was scaled by a constant so that the total variance
is the same as in the data. Panel (b) shows portion of variance at each periodicity attributable
to each of the following shock groupings: “Mark-up” – price and wage mark-up shocks; “Bond
Premium” – bond premium shock; “Technology” – TFP and investment-specific technology
shocks; “Monetary policy” – monetary policy shock; “Gov’t spending” – government spending
shock.




                                                                                         37
of the shocks in that model. Panel (b) of Figure 11 presents such a decomposition. It is clear
from the figure that, in the range of periodicities responsible for the bulk of the variance
of hours, the two mark-up shocks (price and wage) in the Smets and Wouters [2007] model
account for by far the largest portion. In fact, the proportion of the total hours variance
that is explained by the mark-up shocks rises monotonically with periodicity, explaining
around a third of the variance of hours by the 24-quarter periodicity and over half by the
36-quarter periodicity.68 In contrast, the unemployment-risk model presented here is equally
capable of matching the spectrum in hours, but does so with only a reasonably-sized TFP
shock. Thus, in effect, the role played by exogenous mark-up shocks in Smets and Wouters
[2007] is replaced in our model by an endogenous demand cycle that emerges naturally in
our environment as a result of a sufficiently strong incentive (because of a positive feedback
mechanism from demand to unemployment risk) for agents to coordinate their purchase
decisions.

3.5     Additional Results
To this point, we have focused on the fit of the model with respect to the target series,
hours worked. In this subsection, we evaluate how well the model performs in several other
dimensions that were not directly targeted.
    Panel (a) of Figure 12 compares the spectrum of output for the data and the stochastic
model. As shown in the figure, the model spectrum matches the data reasonably well,
though it is somewhat too large (indicating too much output variance in the model), and the
average periodicity is somewhat too low. Panel (d) of Figure 9, meanwhile, plots the ACF
for output, which confirms the first observation: the variance of output in the model (i.e.,
the autocovariance at lag k = 0) is slightly larger than in the data. Notwithstanding this,
however, the spectrum and ACF for output in the data lies well within a 90% confidence
interval for the model, suggesting a relatively good overall fit.
    Next, panel (b) of Figure 12 plots the coherence between hours and output for the data
and for the stochastic model. In the data (solid line in the figure), we see that at the lowest
periodicities hours and output are modestly correlated, with coherence around 0.4-0.5. As
the periodicity rises, the coherence initially increases relatively rapidly, reaching a peak of
0.87 at around 13 quarters. Over this range, as indicated by the dashed line in the figure the
model coherence matches the data very well. Beyond the 13-quarter periodicity, however,
the data and model begin to diverge somewhat. The data coherence largely flattens out,
with a gradual downward slope, reaching 0.82 at the 80-quarter periodicity. The model
coherence, meanwhile, rises somewhat over this range. Notwithstanding this discrepancy,
the basic qualitative properties of the relationship between hours and output in the data—
namely, moderate correlation at higher frequencies but significant correlation at medium-to-
low frequencies (including the range of frequencies in which the bulk of variation occurs)—are
well-captured by the model.
    While coherence measures the strength of the relationship between two series at a given
periodicity, it provides no information about the sign of this relationship or whether one
  68
     The importance of the mark-up shocks is not exclusive to hours within the Smets and Wouters [2007]
model. For example, as reported in that paper, at a 40-quarter horizon the mark-up shocks together account
for over half of the forecast-error variance (FEV) of output and over 80% of the FEV of inflation.

                                                   38
                    Figure 12: Spectrum: Output (Data and Stochastic Model)
        x 10
            −3       (a) Output Spectrum                               (b) Hours−Output Coherence
                                                            1
                 Data
    3            Stochastic Model
                 90% CI                                    0.8
  2.5

    2                                                      0.6

  1.5
                                                           0.4
    1
                                                                                        Data
                                                           0.2
  0.5                                                                                   Stochastic Model
                                                                                        90% CI
    0                                                       0
     4         6 8      12 16 24 32 40           80          4       6 8      12 16 24 32 40               80
                Period of component (quarters)                        Period of component (quarters)


        x 10
            −3   (c) Empl., Hrs./Worker Spec.
    2


  1.5


    1

                                                                 Employment Rate (Data)
  0.5                                                            Employment Rate (Stochastic Model)
                                                                 Hours−per−Worker (Data)
                                                                 Hours−per−Worker (Stochastic Model)
    0
     4         6 8      12 16 24 32 40           80
                Period of component (quarters)


Notes: Data series for output is the log of nominal GDP, deflated by population and the
GDP deflator. Data series for the employment rate is the log of the BLS’s index of nonfarm
business employment divided by population. Data series for hours-per-worker is the log of
nonfarm business hours divided by nonfarm business employment. All series were detrended
using a BP(2,80) filter using the same procedure as with hours worked. Output in the model
is the sum of hwage earnings and firm profits,  i which is equal to total production net of vacancy
                                   R Nt
costs, i.e., θ̃t (1 − ut )F (`t ) − 0 Φ (x) dx , where Nt is the number of firm entrants at date
t. Spectrum for data and model computed as with hours. Raw coherence at a periodicity p
is given by |sL,y (p)|2 / [sL (p) sy (p)], where sL is the spectrum of hours, sy is the spectrum of
output, and sL,y is the cross-spectrum. Coherence was then kernel-smoothed using a Hamming
window with bandwidth parameter 51. In panels (a) and (b), dotted lines show pointwise 90%
confidence intervals for the spectrum and coherence, respectively, that would be estimated from
a model-generated data set of the same length as the actual data set (i.e., 212 quarters).




                                                      39
series tends to lead the other. To address how well the model fits in these dimensions, panels
(b) and (c) of Figure 9 plot the cross-covariance function (CCF) for hours and output. Two
things should be noted from these plots. First, hours and output are positively correlated
in both the model and data. Second, in the model hours and output are in phase (i.e., the
peak of the CCF occurs at a lag of k = 0), while in the data the peak occurs at the point
where output leads hours by one quarter. Nonetheless, the CCF is close to flat in the data
between its peak and k = 0,69 suggesting that any lead of output is weak at best. Further,
as suggested by the reported 90% confidence intervals, over all the cross-covariance between
output and hours is well-captured by the model.
    Finally, while we have established that the model does a good job of matching patterns in
total hours, consider the model’s implications for its two component parts, the employment
rate, 1 − ut , and hours-per-worker, `t . Panel (c) of Figure 12 shows spectra for the data
and stochastic model for these two series.70 From the figure, we see that the spectrum of
the employment rate from the model matches fairly well the one from the data, and in
particular the employment rate exhibits an overall level of volatility that is close to the
volatility in the data. Thus, this model addresses one of the frequent criticisms of many
models of unemployment in the literature, which is that they generate too little employment
volatility.71 On the other hand, the model does a relatively poor job of matching behavior
in hours-per-worker. In particular, while the basic pattern of the model spectrum is close
to that in the data, the model spectrum is in most places too small, especially beyond the
lowest periodicities. This suggests that the model features too little in the way of movements
along the intensive labor margin.72


Conclusion
Business cycle analysis is currently dominated by the pure impulse-propagation framework,
whereby macroeconomic fluctuations are entirely explained as the results of exogenous shocks
perturbing an otherwise stable system. In this paper we have presented theory and evidence
that give support to a broader perspective which includes limit cycles forces as an element
inherent to fluctuations. In particular, according to this alternative view, business cycles
should be thought as arising from the interplay of two different class of forces. On the
one hand, there are endogenous cyclical forces driven by complementarities that favor the
bunching of economic activity, which causes the economy to be naturally unstable so that
it would undergo boom and bust cycles even in the absence of any disturbances. On the
other hand, there are exogenous forces that interact with the natural cycle of the economy
  69
      The peak of the data CCF is only 0.28% greater than it is at k = 0.
  70
      Data series for the employment rate is the log of the BLS’s index of nonfarm business employment
divided by population. Data series for hours-per-worker is the log of nonfarm business hours divided by
nonfarm business employment. Both series were de-trended using a BP(2,80) filter using the same procedure
as with hours worked.
   71
      See for example Shimer [2005].
   72
      As Figure 12 shows, extensive-margin fluctuations are an order of magnitude larger than intensive-margin
fluctuations in both the model and the data. As a result, even though the model does not capture well the
intensive-margin fluctuations, this has little impact on the fit of total hours, which is driven primarily by
extensive-margin fluctuations.


                                                     40
to create irregularity in the business cycle, whereby each cycle is different from the preceding
one. In this framework, endogenous cyclical forces do not live in a vacuum but are instead
constantly being upset by exogenous disturbances. The exogenous forces continue to play
an important role in generating business cycles, but there role is slightly changed. Instead
of explaining the totality of business cycle fluctuations, much of the effects of exogenous
disturbances is to accelerate or postpone the equilibrium tendency of the economy to cycle.
    We have proceeded in two steps to make our case in support of incorporating limit cycle
ideas into mainstream business cycle analysis. First, we presented a simple reduced-form
model with accumulation, sluggishness and agent interaction. Using this framework, we
showed how the presence of strategic complementarities can give rise to a Hopf bifurcation
not as a knife-edge case, but quite generically when demand complementarities are present
locally. In addition, we showed that the strength of strategic complementarities that is
needed to produce a limit cycle is less than what is needed to generate multiple equilibrium.
Second, we presented a fully specified stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model. In this
structural model, unemployment risk and precautionary savings interact to create a demand
complementarity that is operative near the economy’s steady state. Agents’ decisions to
purchase goods are strategic complements in the model because when other are purchasing
goods it is less risky to buy on credit, since the risk of unemployment is low. We allowed
fluctuations in the model to be driven by both exogenous disturbances and an endogenous
limit cycle. We then estimated the model to fit the spectral density of hours worked. Based on
the estimated parameters, we found that the system would exhibit a limit cycle in the absence
of any shocks. However, we also found that exogenous shocks played an important role in
making observed fluctuations in the model sufficiently irregular to match the properties of
the data. In this sense, our empirical analysis suggest that macroeconomic fluctuations
may be understood as the result of both forces, which limit cycles playing a central role.
One of the attractive features of the model is that, as we show, it can replicate the business
cycle phenomena with only one moderately volatile shock precisely because of the underlying
presence of a limit cycle.




                                              41
References
Alan, S., T. Crossley, and H. Low (2012): “Saving on a rainy day, borrowing for a
 rainy day,” IFS Working Papers W12/11, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Azariadis, C., and B. Smith (1998): “Financial Intermediation and Regime Switching
 in Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 88(3), 516–536.
Beaudry, P., D. Galizia, and F. Portier (2015): “Reconciling Hayek’s and Keynes’
 Views of Recessions,” Working Paper.
Benhabib, J., and K. Nishimura (1979): “The Hopf Bifurcation and the Existence and
 Stability of Closed Orbits in Multisector Models of Optimal Economic Growth,” Journal
 of Economic Theory, 21(3), 421–444.
        (1985): “Competitive Equilibrium Cycles,” Journal of Economic Theory, 35(2),
  284–306.
          (1989): “Stochastic Equilibrium Oscillations,” International Economic Review,
  30(1), 85–102.
        (1998): “Indeterminacy and Sunspots with Constant Returns,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 81(1), 58–96.
Benhabib, J., and A. Rustichini (1990): “Equilibrium cycling with small discounting,”
 Journal of Economic Theory, 52(2), 423–432.
Boldrin, M., N. Kiyotaki, and R. Wright (1993): “A dynamic equilibrium model of
 search, production, and exchange,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5),
 723–758.
Boldrin, M., and L. Montrucchio (1986): “On the Indeterminacy of Capital Accumu-
 lation Paths,” Journal of Economic Theory, 40(1), 26–39.
Boldrin, M., and M. Woodford (1990): “Equilibrium models displaying endogenous
 fluctuations and chaos,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 25(2), 189–222.
Brock, W., and J. Scheinkman (1976): “Global asymptotic stability of optimal control
 systems with applications to the theory of economic growth,” Journal of Economic Theory,
 12, 164–190.
Carroll, C., and W. Dunn (1997): “Unemployment Expectations, Jumping (S,s) Trig-
 gers, and Household Balance Sheets,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume
 12, NBER Chapters, pp. 165–230. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Carroll, C., M. Sommer, and J. Slacalek (2012): “Dissecting Saving Dynamics:
 Measuring Wealth, Precautionary, and Credit Effects,” IMF Working Papers 12/219, In-
 ternational Monetary Fund.
Carroll, C. D. (1992): “The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evi-
 dence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 23(2), 61–156.
Challe, E., and X. Ragot (2013): “Precautionary Saving over the Business Cycle,” PSE
 Working Papers hal-00843150, HAL.


                                           42
Coles, M. G., and R. Wright (1998): “A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of Search, Bar-
 gaining, and Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 78(1), 32–54.
Comin, D., and M. Gertler (2006): “Medium-Term Business Cycles,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 96(3), 523–551.
Cooper, R., and A. John (1988): “Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
 Models,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(3), 441–463.
Day, R. H. (1982): “Irregular Growth Cycles,” The American Economic Review, 72(3),
 406–414.
        (1983): “The Emergence of Chaos from Classical Economic Growth,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 98(2), 201–213.
Day, R. H., and W. Shafer (1987): “Ergodic Fluctuations in Deterministic Economic
 Models,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 8(3), 339–361.
den Haan, W. J., and A. Marcet (1990): “Solving the Stochastic Growth Model by
  Parameterizing Expectations,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 8(1), 31–34.
den Haan, W. J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000): “Job Destruction and Propagation
  of Shocks,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 482–498.
den Haan, W. J., P. Rendahl, and M. Riegler (2014): “Unemployment (Fears),
  Precautionary Savings, and Aggregate Demand,” Working Paper.
Diamond, P., and D. Fudenberg (1989): “Rational expectations business cycles in search
  equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(3), 606–619.
Diamond, P. A. (1982): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 90(5), 881–94.
Epstein, L. G., and S. E. Zin (1989): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
  Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica,
  57(4), 937–969.
Fernald, J. (2014): “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productiv-
  ity,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19.
Galizia, D. (2014): “Can a Limit-Cycle Model Explain Business Cycle Fluctuations?,”
 Working Paper.
Goodwin, R. (1951): “The Nonlinear Accelerator and the Persistence of Bisiness Cycles,”
 Econometrica, 19(1), 1–17.
Grandmont, J.-M. (1985): “On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles,” Economet-
 rica, 53(5), 995–1045.
Hammour, M. L. (1989): “Endogenous Business Cycles: Some Theory and Evidence,”
 PhD Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Heathcote, J., and F. Perri (2012): “Wealth and Volatility,” Meeting Papers 914,
 Society for Economic Dynamics.
Hicks, J. (1950): A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle. Clarendon Press, Oxford.


                                            43
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment shocks and
  business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132–145.
Kaldor, N. (1940): “A Model of the Trade Cycle,” The Economic Journal, 50(197), 78–92.
Kalecki, M. (1937): “A Theory of the Business Cycle,” The Review of Economic Studies,
 4(2), 77–97.
Kaplan, G., and G. Menzio (2014): “Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unem-
 ployment Fluctuations,” Working Paper.
Kuznetsov, Y. A. (1998): Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory, vol. 112 of Applied
 Mathematical Sciences. Springer, New-York, 2 edn.
Lagos, R., and R. Wright (2005): “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and
  Policy Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3), 463–484.
Le Corbeiller, P. (1933): “Les systemes autoentretenus et les oscillations de relaxation,”
  Econometrica, 1(3), 328–332.
Lucas, R. J., and E. C. Prescott (1974): “Equilibrium search and unemployment,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 7(2), 188–209.
Marcet, A., and D. A. Marshall (1994): “Solving Nonlinear Rational Expectations
 Models by Parameterized Expectations: Convergence to Stationary Solutions,” Federal
 Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Discussion Paper 91.
Matsuyama, K. (1999): “Growing Through Cycles,” Econometrica, 67(2), 335–347.
         (2007): “Credit Traps and Credit Cycles,” American Economic Review, 97(1),
  503–516.
         (2013): “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: An inquiry into the causes and nature
  of credit cycles,” Theoretical Economics, 8(3), 623–651.
McKenzie, L. (1976): “Turnpike Theory,” Econometrica, 5, 841–65.
Myerson, R. B. (2012): “A Model of Moral-Hazard Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 120(5), 847–878.
Pancrazi, R. (2015): “The heterogeneous Great Moderation,” European Economic Review,
  74, 207–228.
Ravn, M., and V. Sterk (2012): “Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions,” Discussion
 paper, University College of London.
Rocheteau, G., and R. Wright (2005): “Money in Search Equilibrium, in Competitive
 Equilibrium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 73(1), 175–202.
Samuelson, P. (1939): “Interaction Between the Multiplier Analysis and the Principle of
  Acceleration,” The Review of Economic Studies, 21(2), 75–78.
Scheinkman, J. (1976): “On Optimal Steady States of n-Sector Growth Models when
  Utility is Discounted,” Journal of Economic Theory, 12(1), 11–30.
         (1990): “Nonlinearities in Economic Dynamics,” The Economic Journal, 100(400),
  33–48, Conference Papers.


                                           44
Shimer, R. (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,”
  The American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.
Shleifer, A. (1986): “Implementation Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 94(6), 1163–
  1190.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE Approach,” The American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.
Wan, Y.-H. (1978): “Computations of the stability condition for the Hopf bifurcation of
 diffeomorphisms on R2 ,” SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 34(167-175).
Wikan, A. (2013): Discrete Dynamical Systems with an Introduction to Discrete Optimiza-
 tion Problems. Bookboon.com, London, U.K.




                                          45
Appendix
A       Proofs of Section 1
A.1     Proposition 1
The two eigenvalues of matrix ML are the solution the equation
                                  Q(λ) = λ2 − T λ + D = 0,                               (A.1)
where T is the trace of the ML matrix (and also the sum of its eigenvalues) and D is the
determinant of the ML matrix (and also the product of its eigenvalues). The two eigenvalues
are therefore given by                      s 
                                                   2
                                       T       T
                               λ, λ = ±              −D                                 (6)
                                       2        2
where
                                    T = α2 − α1 + (1 − δ)                                (A.2)
and
                                        D = α2 (1 − δ).                                  (A.3)
From (A.3), we have that λλ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, if the eigenvalues are complex, then their
modulus is between zero and one, and thus they are both inside the unit circle. If the two
eigenvalues are real, then they have the same sign and at least one of them is less than one
in absolute value. From (A.2), we have that λ + λ ∈ (−1, 2). Therefore, if the eigenvalues
are both negative, then they are both inside the unit circle. If they are both positive, let λ
be the larger eigenvalue, and suppose λ ≥ 1. Given that λλ < 1, we have λ < λ1 and thus
λ + λ = T < 2 implies that λ + λ1 < 2, which in turn implies (1 − λ)2 < 0. This is not possible
and hence we must have λ < 1. Since λ is the largest of two real positive eigenvalues, both
eigenvalues must lie inside the unit circle.

A.2     Proposition 2
With demand complementarities, the trace and determinant of matrix M are given by
                                         α2 − α1
                                  T =                  + (1 − δ)                         (A.4)
                                        1 − F 0 (I s )
and
                                             α2 (1 − δ)
                                        D=                  .                            (A.5)
                                             1 − F 0 (I s )
From equations (A.4) and (A.5), we have the following relationship between T and D:
                                     α2 (1 − δ)    α2 (1 − δ)2
                               D=               T−             .                         (A.6)
                                      α2 − α1       α2 − α1
Therefore, when F 0 (I s ) varies, T and D move along the line (A.6) in the plane (T, D).
We have shown that when F 0 (I s ) = 0, (T, D) belongs to the triangle ABC,
                                                                       [ meaning that

                                               46
both eigenvalues of M are inside the unit circle. This corresponds to point E or point E 0
(depending of the configuration of parameters) in Figure 2.
    When F 0 (I s ) → −∞, we have D → 0 and T → 1 − δ, which corresponds to point E1
in Figure 2. As this point is inside the triangle ABC,
                                                  [ both eigenvalues are inside the unit
circle. When F (I ) goes from 0 to −∞, (T, D) moves along the segment [E, E1 ] or [E 0 , E1 ].
                 0 s

Because both belong to ABC
                        [ and because the interior of triangle ABC
                                                                 [ is a convex set, both
                                                          0 s
eigenvalues of matrix M stay inside the unit circle when F (I ) goes from 0 to −∞.

A.3     Proposition 3
A flip bifurcation occurs with the appearance of an eigenvalue equal to -1, and a Hopf
bifurcation with the appearance of two complex conjugate eigenvalues of modulus 1. From
(A.5) and (A.4), we see that when F 0 (I s ) tends to 1 from below, D tends to +∞ and T
tends to ±∞ depending on the sign of α2 − α1 . Therefore, starting either from point E or
E 0 (for which F 0 (I s ) = 0), (T, D) will eventually exit the triangle ABC.
                                                                         [ At the point where
the half-line along (A.6) starting from E (or E 0 ) crosses ABC,  [ at least on eigenvalue will
have a modulus one.
     Consider first the case α2 < α1 . In this case, the line (A.6) has a negative slope, and
will cross either segment AB ((a) in the figure) or segment BC ((b) in the figure). In case
(a), we will have a flip bifurcation since the eigenvalues will be real and one of them equal
to -1 when crossing the triangle ABC. [ In case (b), we will have a Hopf bifurcation since the
eigenvalues will be complex and will both have modulus 1 when crossing ABC.       [ We will be
                                                               0 s
in case (b) when D = 1 and T > −2. D = 1 implies F (I ) = 1 − α2 (1 − δ). Plugging this
                                                                             −α1
into the expression for T , the condition T > −2 becomes 1 − δ + αα22(1−δ)        > −2 which can
                              α1                          α1
be simplified to α2 > (2−δ)2 . Therefore, if α2 < (2−δ)2 , we have a flip bifurcation, while if
                 α1
α1 > α2 > (2−δ)     2 , we have a Hopf bifurcation.

     Consider next the case α2 > α1 . In this case, the line (A.6) has a positive slope, and
could potentially cross either segment AC or segment BC . If it crosses the segment BC,
the eigenvalues will be complex with modulus 1 when crossing ABC,       [ so that we will have
a Hopf bifurcation. We will be in this case when D = 1 and T < 2. D = 1 implies
F 0 (I s ) = 1 − α2 (1 − δ). Plugging this into the expression of T , the condition T < 2 becomes
               −α1
1 − δ + αα22(1−δ)   < 2 which can be simplified to α2 < αδ21 . Therefore, if α1 < α2 < αδ21 , we will
have a Hopf bifurcation. If α2 > αδ21 , then as we increase F 0 we would cross the segment AC.
However, this possibility is ruled out by our assumption that α2 > αδ1 , which was imposed
to guarantee a unique steady state.
     Finally, in the case α1 = α2 , we always have T = 1 − δ, so that D increases with
F 0 (I s ) along a vertical line that necessarily crosses the segment BC, so that we have a Hopf
bifurcation. Putting all of these results together gives the conditions stated in Proposition
3.

A.4     Proposition 4
For this proposition, we make use of Wan’s [1978] theorem and of the formulation given by
Wikan [2013] (See Kuznetsov [1998] for a comprehensive exposition of bifurcation theory).

                                                 47
For symmetric allocations, our non-linear dynamical system is given by
                                                            
                  It − F (It )    α2 − α1 −α1 (1 − δ)     It−1       α0
                               =                                 +      .                        (A.7)
                      Xt              1       1−δ         Xt−1       0
To study the stability of the limit cycle in case this system goes through a Hopf bifurcation,
we need to write the system in the following “standard form”
                                                                       
                     y1t       cos θ − sin θ     y1t−1      f (y2t−1 , y2t−1 )
                          =                              +                      ,       (A.8)
                     y2t       sin θ cos θ       y2t−1      g(y1t−1 , y2t−1 )
where y1 and y2 are (invertible) functions of I and X. Let µ be the bifurcation parameter
(µ = F 0 (I s ) in our case) and µ0 the value for which the Hopf bifurcation occurs. Define
                                                      d|λ(µ0 )|
                                                 d=
                                                         dµ
and
                                             2
                                                      !
                                  (1 − 2λ)λ                1
                      a = −Re               ξ11 ξ20       − |ξ11 |2 − |ξ02 |2 + Re(λξ21 ),
                                     1−λ                   2
where
                        1
                ξ20 ≡      [(f11 − f22 + 2g12 ) + i(g11 − g22 − 2f12 )] ,
                        8
                        1
                ξ11   ≡ [(f11 + f22 ) + i(g11 + g22 )] ,
                        4
                        1
                ξ02   ≡ [(f11 − f22 − 2g12 ) + i(g11 − g22 + 2f12 )] ,
                        8
                         1
                ξ21   ≡      [(f111 + f122 + g112 + g222 ) + i(g111 + g122 − f112 − f222 )] .
                        16
According to Wan [1978], the Hopf bifurcation is supercritical if d > 0 and a < 0.
   We first write (A.7) in the standard form (A.8). Denoting it = It − I s and xt = Xt − X s
and Fb(it ) = F (it + I s ), and recalling that F (I s ) = Fb(0) = 0, we can rewrite (A.7) as
                                                                        
                            it − Fb(it )     α2 − α1 −α1 (1 − δ)        it−1
                                          =                                    .              (A.9)
                                xt              1           1−δ        xt−1

Define H(it ) = it − Fb(it ). Under the restriction F 0 (·) < 1, H is a strictly increasing function,
and is therefore invertible. Denote G(·) ≡ H −1 (·). Adding and subtracting to the right-hand
side of the first equation of (A.9) a first order approximation of G around zero, we obtain
                                                              !
                               α2 −α1         α1 (1−δ)                               
             it − Fb(it )       1−F 0 (I s )
                                              − 1−F  0 (I s )
                                                                 it−1     m(it−1 , xt−1 )
                           =                                           +                   ,  (A.10)
                 xt                 1           1−δ             xt−1           0
                              |              {z               }
                                            M

with
                                                           α1 (1 − δ)         α2 − α1
      m(it−1 , xt−1 ) ≡ G α1 (1 − δ)xt−1 + (α2 − α1 )it−1 +       0
                                                                       xt−1 −                it−1 .
                                                                     s
                                                            1 − F (I )        1 − F 0 (I s )

                                                      48
The eigenvalues of M are the solution of the equation

                                      Q(λ) = λ2 − T λ + D = 0,
                                                                                  α2 −α1
where T is the trace of the M matrix and D its determinant, with T =             1−F 0 (I s )
                                                                                                + (1 − δ) and
       α2 (1−δ)
D=            At the Hopf bifurcation, D = 1 and the two eigenvalues are λ = cos θ ± i sin θ,
       1−F 0 (I s )
                    .
                                            p             
where θ is the angle between the vector T /2, D − (T /2)2 and the positive x-axis. Let λ
be the eigenvalue with positive imaginary part and λ its conjugate, and let Λ and C be the
two matrices                                    
                                             λ 0
                                       Λ≡
                                             0 λ
and                                                      
                                            cos θ − sin θ
                                        C≡                  .
                                             sin θ cos θ
By construction, λ and λ are the eigenvalues of C. We introduce matrices
                                                        
                                          sin θ    sin θ
                                 VC ≡
                                        −i sin θ i sin θ

and                                                      
                                               λ+δ−1 λ+δ−1
                                   VM ≡
                                                 1     1
whose columns are eigenvectors of C and M , respectively, and are thus such that C =
VC ΛVC−1 and M = VM ΛVM−1 . We therefore have C = VC ΛVC−1 = VC VM−1 M VM VC−1 = BM B −1
with                                                       
                                  −1      0        sin θ
                        B ≡ VC VM =                           .
                                          −1 cos θ − (1 − δ)
Let us make the change of variables (y1t , y2t )0 = B × (it , xt )0 to obtain the “standard form”
of (A.7)                                                                 
                  y1t       cos θ − sin θ         y1t−1       f (y2t−1 , y2t−1 )
                       =                                 +                        ,          (A.8)
                  y2t       sin θ cos θ           y2t−1       g(y1t−1 , y2t−1 )
with

        f (y2t−1 , y2t−1 ) = 0,
                                 γ                          1          γ                     
                                    1                                       1
         g(y1t−1 , y2t−1 ) = −G        y1t−1 − γ2 y2t−1 +                      y1t−1 − γ2 y2t−1
                                 sin θ                    1 − F 0 (I s ) sin θ

and γ1 ≡ −α2 (1 − δ) + (α2 − α1 ) cos θ, γ2 ≡ α2 − α1 .

   We can now check the conditions for the Hopf bifurcation to be supercritical, namely

                                                d|λ(µ0 )|
                                           d=             >0
                                                   dµ


                                                   49
and
                                      2
                                               !
                           (1 − 2λ)λ                1
               a = −Re               ξ11 ξ20       − |ξ11 |2 − |ξ02 |2 + Re(λξ21 ) < 0.
                              1−λ                   2
                                                                                 α2 (1−δ)
With µ ≡ F 0 (I s ) as the bifurcation parameter, we have |λ| = det(M ) =          1−µ
                                                                                          ,   so that

                                   d|λ|   (1 − µ) + α2 (1 − δ)
                              d=        =                      > 0,
                                   dµ          (1 − µ)2

as µ = F 0 (I s ) < 1.
   Consider now the expression for a. As G(I) is the reciprocal function of I − F (I), we
have
                                 F 000 (1 − F 0 )2 + 2F 002 (1 − F 0 )
                          G000 =                                       ,
                                             (1 − F 0 )4
with F 0 < 1. This shows that G000 is an increasing function of F 000 . When F 000 becomes large
                                                     000
in absolute  terms and  negative, so does G . In the expression for a, the first three terms,
             2
−Re (1−2λ)λ
         1−λ
                ξ11 ξ20 − 21 |ξ11 |2 − |ξ02 |2 , are not functions of F 000 , while the last term is

                                                              γ12
                                                                       
                                        α2 (1 − δ)
                            Re(λξ21 ) =                            + γ2 G000
                                                                      2
                                             16             sin2 θ
                                            000
                                      = κG ,

with κ > 0. If F 000 is sufficiently negative, then so will be G000 , and therefore Re(λξ21 ) and a.

  Therefore, d > 0 and under the condition F 000 << 0, we have a < 0, in which case by
Wan’s [1978] theorem the limit cycle is supercritical.


B      Proofs of Section 2
B.1     Proposition 5
Recall that Xt+1 = (1 − δ) (Xt + et ). Since et ≥ 0, if lim supt→∞ |Xt | = ∞ then we must
have lim supt→∞ Xt = ∞. Suppose then that

                                          lim sup Xt = ∞.
                                           t→∞

Since δ ∈ (0, 1], this necessarily implies that lim supt→∞ et = ∞. But et is bounded above by
the level of output, the maximum feasible                                                ¯
                                            level of which occurs when φt = 1 and `t = `, in
which case total output is given by F `¯ < ∞. Thus we clearly cannot have lim supt→∞ et =
∞, and thus we cannot have lim supt→∞ |Xt | = ∞.




                                                   50
B.2     Proposition 6
The proof proceeds by example, showing that, for the case where γ = 1 and U (c) = ac − 2b c2 ,
there exists parameter values and functional forms such that for β close enough to one the
steady state is unstable.
    With γ = 1 and U (c) = ac − 2b c2 , we may characterize the evolution of this system by
the conditions

       a − b (Xt + et ) = vp (et ) [1 + τ u (et )] − β (1 − δ) vp (et+1 ) [1 + τ u (et+1 )] ,   (B.11)

                                      Xt+1 = (1 − δ) (Xt + et ) ,                               (B.12)
where p (·) and u (·) are defined in the main text. For a given state Xt and a given anticipated
level of et+1 , a sufficient condition to ensure that (B.11) has a unique solution is given by
                                                      τ
                                            b > vp∗      ≡ b0 ,                                 (B.13)
                                                      e∗
where e∗ is output per firm (net of vacancy costs) when the economy is in the unemployment
regime and p∗ is the price in the unemployment regime, as described in section 2.2 (see
footnote 33 regarding p∗ ). We henceforth assume that (B.13) holds.
    Next, the steady-state level of e is given by the solution ē to
                               b
                            a − ē = [1 − β (1 − δ)] vp (ē) [1 + τ u (ē)] ,
                               δ
with the steady-state level of X then given by
                                                     1−δ
                                              X̄ =       ē.
                                                      δ
Note that a sufficient condition for the steady state to be unique is given by

                                        b > δ [1 − β (1 − δ)] b0 ,

which is clearly implied by (B.13).
   Next, note that, for any e ∈ (0, e∗ ) (i.e., in the unemployment regime), the level of a that
implements ē = e is given by
                              b                                  e
                                e + [1 − β (1 − δ)] vp∗ 1 + τ − τ ∗ .
                              δ                                  e
Note also that ē is continuous in β. Thus, choose some ē1 ∈ (0, e∗ ), and let a = a1 , where a1
is the value of a that would implement ē = ē1 when β = 1, i.e.,
                                       b         ∗
                                                          ē1 
                                   a1 ≡ ē1 + δvp 1 + τ − τ ∗
                                       δ                   e
Thus, if β = 1 the steady state is in the unemployment regime by construction, and by
continuity of ē in β the steady state is also necessarily in the unemployment regime for β
sufficiently close to one. This implies the existence of a β < 1 such that the steady state is

                                                     51
                                                                            
in the unemployment regime when β > β. Assume henceforth that β ∈ β, 1 and note that
this implies that p0 (ē) = 0 and φ0 (ē) = 1/e∗ .
    Next, linearizing equations (B.12)-(B.13) around this steady state and solving, we may
obtain in matrix form
                                                             
                       X̂t+1         1−δ           1−δ     X̂t     X̂t
                               =          b         b−b0       ≡A       .
                        êt+1     − β(1−δ)b0 − β(1−δ)b0    êt     êt
Thus, the steady state is locally stable if and only if at least one of the two eigenvalues of A
lies inside the complex unit circle. These eigenvalues are given by
                        h                 i rh                     i               2
                                     b−b0                                 b−b0
                           1−δ−    β(1−δ)b0
                                               ±        1−δ−            β(1−δ)b0
                                                                                       − 4β −1
                   λi =                                                                          .
                                                        2
Note that λ1 λ2 = β −1 > 1, so that if the eigenvalues are complex then both must lie outside
the unit circle. Suppose
                                    b = 1 + q (1 − δ)2 b0
                                                       
                                                                                       (B.14)
for some q > 0, and note that as long as δ < 1, which I henceforth assume, such a value of b
satisfies (B.13). One may then show that the eigenvalues are complex as long as
                                     (1 − δ)2 (β − q)2 < 4β.
Clearly, for β close enough to q this condition necessarily holds, and thus, if q is close enough
to one (e.g., if q = 1), then for β arbitrarily close to one the eigenvalues are complex and
therefore outside the unit circle, in which case the steady state is unstable.

B.3     Proposition 7
Let
                                                                                 1 e2t
                                                                                      
                                                            ∗
                     V (et ; Xt ) ≡ U (Xt + et ) − vp               (1 + τ ) et − τ ∗ ,
                                                                                 2 e
where e∗ is output per firm (net of vacancy costs) when the economy is in the unemployment
regime and p∗ is the price in the unemployment regime, as described in section 2.2 (see
footnote 33 regarding p∗ ). It can be verified that maximizing
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                               β t V (et ; Xt )
                                         t=0

subject to (11) implements the de-centralized equilibrium outcome in the neighborhood of
an unemployment-regime steady state. Thus, using
                                                                   
                                               1           1
                      W (Xt , Xt+1 ) ≡ V             Xt+1 − Xt ; Xt
                                           γ (1 − δ)       γ
in problem (16) satisfies the desired properties. Next, we may obtain
                                     (1 − γ)2 00           1 vp∗ τ
                          W11 X̄, X̄ =        U   X̄ + ē  +         .
                                         γ2                  γ 2 e∗

                                                   52
                
Thus, W11 X̄, X̄ > 0 if
                              vp∗ τ             2 00         
                                    >  − (1 − γ) U   X̄ + ē   .
                                e∗
This condition can clearly hold for certain parameter values (e.g., for γ sufficiently close to
one), in which case W is not concave.


C      Solution and Estimation
C.1     Solution
To solve the model for a given parameterization, letting ẽt ≡ et /θ̃t equilibrium in the economy
is characterized by the following equations:
                                                   ν1
    a − b Xt + θ̃t ẽt − hct−1 + (1 − δ) γλt = θ̃t−1    [` (ẽt )]ω+1−α [1 + τ u (ẽt )] + µt , (C.15)
                                                     αA
                                n h                                   io
                         µt = Et βh a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct          ,                   (C.16)
                  n h                                                          io
          λt = Et β a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct + (1 − δ) λt+1 − µt+1 ,                      (C.17)

                                          ct = Xt + θ̃t ẽt ,                                 (C.18)
                                                                
                                  Xt+1   = (1 − δ) Xt + γ θ̃t ẽt .                           (C.19)
Here, u (ẽ) and ` (ẽ) are the equlibrium levels of the unemployment rate and hours-per-worker
conditional on total purchases ẽ, and are given by
                                                   q                
                                         1               2         ẽ
                                  
                                  
                                   1 −  2
                                              n 0 +    n 0  + 4η  ẽ∗
                                                                            if 0 < ẽ ≤ ē,
                        u (ẽ) ≡ 1 − ẽ∗                                    if ē < ẽ < e∗ ,
                                        ẽ
                                                                            if ẽ ≥ e∗ ,
                                  
                                  0
                                                             α1
                                                  2ẽ
                                     αAn0 +√n20 +4η ẽ∗              if 0 < ẽ ≤ ē,
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                                           ẽ
                           ` (ẽ) ≡     e∗ α
                                            1
                                    
                                       αA
                                                                        if ē < ẽ < e∗ ,
                                     ẽ  α1
                                    
                                                                        if ẽ ≥ e∗ ,
                                    
                                        αA

where e∗ ≡ 1−αα
                 Φ̄ and ē ≡ (n0 + η) e∗ . Meanwhile, µt and λt are the Lagrange multipliers on
the definition of consumption and the durables accumulation equations ((C.18) and (C.19)),
respectively.
    Conditional on the state variables Xt , ct−1 and θt , and on values of the Lagrange multipli-
ers µt and λt , equation (C.15) can be solved for ẽt . To obtain values of µt and λt , we employ
                                                                                           0
the method of parameterized expectations as follows. Let Yt ≡ Xt − X̄, ct−1 − c̄, θt denote
the vector of state variables (expressed as deviations from steady state). The expectations
in equations (C.16) and (C.17) are assumed to be functions only of Yt , i.e.,
                          n h                               io
                      Et βh a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct        = gµ (Yt ) ,

                                                 53
              n h                                                  io
            Et β a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct + (1 − δ) λt+1 − µt+1 = gλ (Yt ) .

We parameterize the functions gj (·) by assuming that they are well-approximated by N -
                                                                                            (N )
th-degree multivariate polynomials in the state variables. In particular, let Yt                  denote the
vector whose first element is 1 and whose remaining elements are obtained by collecting all
multivariate polynomial terms in Yt (e.g., Xt , ct−1 , θt , Xt2 , Xt ct−1 , Xt θt , c2t , ct θt , etc.) up to
degree N . We assume that
                                                      (N )
                                     gj (Yt ) = Θ0j Yt ,
where Θj is a vector of coefficients on the polynomial terms. Thus, given Θµ , Θλ and the
state Yt , µt and λt are obtained as
                                                   (N )
                                        µt = Θ0j Yt ,
                                                             (N )
                                                 λt = Θ0j Yt        .
These values and values for the state variables can be plugged into (C.15) to yield a solution
for ẽt , which can then be replaced in (C.18) and (C.19) to obtain values for the subsequent
period’s state. In practice, we use N = 2.73
     To obtain Θµ and Θλ , we proceed iteratively as follows. Begin with some initial guesses
Θµ,0 and Θλ,0 ,74 and generate a sample of length T = 100, 000 of the exogenous process
                                                                (N )
θt . Next, given Θµ,i and Θλ,i , assume that gj (Yt ) = Θ0j,i Yt     and simulate the path of the
economy for T periods. Given this simulated path, let Y(N ) denote the matrix whose t-th
                     (N )0
row is given by Yt , and construct T -vectors g̃µ and g̃λ , the t-th elements of which are
given respectively by             h                              i
                               βh a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct
and                    h                                                  i
                      β a − b Xt+1 + θ̃t+1 ẽt+1 − hct + (1 − δ) λt+1 − µt+1 ,

i.e., the terms inside the conditional-expectation operators in equations (C.16) and (C.17).
Then update the guesses of Θj via
                                                               −1
                                     Θj,i+1 = Y(N )0 Y(N )              Y(N )0 g̃j

and iterate until convergence.

C.2      Estimation
As discussed in section 3.3, estimation was done by searching for parameters to minimize
S 2 , the average squared difference between the model spectrum and the spectrum estimated
from the data.
  73
     We experimented with larger values of N and found that it resulted in a substantial increase in compu-
tational time without significantly affecting the results.
  74
     In practice, I set the first elements of Θµ,0 and Θλ,0 to the steady-state values µ̄ and λ̄, respectively, and
the remaining elements to zero. This corresponds to an initial belief that the gj ’s are constant and equal to
their steady-state levels.




                                                        54
   To obtain S 2 given a solution to the model for a parameterization, T = 100, 000 periods
of data were simulated. This simulated sample was then subdivided into Nsim = 1, 000
overlapping subsamples. For each subsample, the log of hours was BP-filtered, after which
20 quarters from either end of the subsample were removed, leaving a series of the same
length as the actual data sample. The spectrum was then estimated on each individual
subsample in the same way as for the actual data, and the results then averaged across all
subsamples to yield the spectrum for the model.




                                            55
