NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANCESTRY, LANGUAGE AND CULTURE
Enrico Spolaore
Romain Wacziarg
Working Paper 21242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21242

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

This paper was prepared for the Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language, Victor Ginsburgh
and Shlomo Weber, eds. We thank Shekhar Mittal for excellent research assistance, and Klaus Desmet,
Victor Ginsburgh, Paola Giuliano and Shlomo Weber for helpful comments. All errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Ancestry, Language and Culture
Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 21242
June 2015
JEL No. F14,O11,O33,O47,O57,Z1
ABSTRACT
We explore the interrelationships between various measures of cultural distance. We first discuss measures
of genetic distance, used in the recent economics literature to capture the degree of relatedness between
countries. We next describe several classes of measures of linguistic, religious, and cultural distances.
We introduce new measures of cultural distance based on differences in average answers to questions
from the World Values Survey. Using a simple theoretical model we hypothesize that ancestral distance,
measured by genetic distance, is positively correlated with linguistic, religious, and cultural distance.
An empirical exploration of these correlations shows this to be the case. This empirical evidence is
consistent with the view that genetic distance is a summary statistic for a wide array of cultural traits
transmitted intergenerationally.

Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Populations that share a more recent common ancestry exchange goods, capital, innovations and
technologies more intensively, but they also tend to …ght more with each other.1 Why does ancestral
distance matter for these outcomes? In this paper, we argue that when populations split apart and
diverge over the long span of history, their cultural traits also diverge. These cultural traits include
language and religion but also a broader set of norms, values and attitudes that are transmitted
intergenerationally and therefore display persistence over long stretches of time. In turn, these
traits introduce barriers to interactions and communication between societies, in proportion to how
far they have drifted from each other.
While the rate at which languages, religions and values diverged from each other over time varies
across speci…c traits, we hypothesize and document a signi…cant positive relationship between
long-term relatedness between populations, measured by genetic distance, and a wide array of
measures of cultural di¤erences. In doing so, we provide support for the argument that the e¤ect
of genealogical relatedness on economic and political outcomes captures at least in part the e¤ects
of cultural distance. In sum, genetic relatedness is a summary statistic for a wide array of cultural
traits transmitted vertically across generations. These di¤erences in vertically transmitted traits
introduce horizontal barriers to human interactions.
We begin our paper with a general discussion of measures of ancestral distance. We focus
on genetic distance, a measure that has been used in a recent emerging literature on the deep
roots of economic development. This measure captures how distant human societies are in terms
of the frequency of neutral genes among them. It constitutes a molecular clock that allows us
to characterize the degree of relatedness between human populations in terms of the number of
generations that separate them from a common ancestor population. We next turn to measures
of cultural di¤erences. We consider three classes of such measures. The …rst is linguistic distance.
Since these measures are described in great detail elsewhere, we keep our discussion brief.2 The
second class of measures is religious distance. We adopt an approach based on religious trees to
1

For recent references on technological transmission, see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009, 2012, 2013). On interstate

wars, see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2015). On trade and …nancial ‡ows, the literature documenting links with linguistic
and cultural distance is vast. Salient references include Melitz (2008), Melitz and Toubal (2012), Guiso, Sapienza
and Zingales (2009) and Egger and Toubal (2015).
2

For instance, see Ginsburgh and Weber (2015).

1

characterize the distance between major world religions, and use these distances to calculate the
religious distance between countries. Third, in the newest part of this paper, we de…ne and compute
a series of measures of di¤erences in values, norms and attitudes between countries, based on the
World Values Survey. We show that these classes of measures are positively correlated between
each other, yet the correlations among them are not large. This motivates the quest for a summary
measure of cultural di¤erences.
We next argue that genetic distance is such a summary measure. We start with a simple model
linking genetic distance to cultural distance, providing a conceptual foundation for studying the
relationship between relatedness and cultural distance. The model shows that if cultural traits
are transmitted from parents to children with variation, then a greater ancestral distance between
populations should on average be related with greater cultural distance. This relationship holds
in expectations and not necessarily in each speci…c case (it is possible for two genealogically distant populations to end up with similar cultural traits), but our framework predicts a positive
relationship between genetic distance and cultural distance. We next investigate empirically the
links between genetic distance and the aforementioned metrics of cultural distance, shedding some
light on their complex interrelationships. We …nd that genetic distance is positively correlated with
linguistic and religious distance as well as with di¤erences in values and attitudes across countries,
and is therefore a plausible measure of the average distance between countries along these various
dimensions jointly.
This paper contributes to a growing empirical literature on the relationships between ancestry,
language, and culture over time and space. This literature has expanded in recent years to include
not only work by anthropologists, linguists, and population geneticists (such as, for instance, the
classic contribution by Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and Piazza, 1994), but also those of economists
and other social scientists interested in the e¤ects of such long-term variables on current economic,
political and social outcomes (for general discussions, see for example Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013,
and chapters 3 and 4 in Ginsburgh and Weber, 2011). Economic studies using measures of genetic
and cultural distances between populations to shed light on economic and political outcomes include
our own work on the di¤usion of development and innovations (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009, 2012,
2013), international wars (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2015) and the fertility transition (Spolaore and
Wacziarg, 2014). Other studies using related approaches include Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales’s
(2009) investigation of cultural barriers to trade between European countries, Bai and Kung’s

2

(2011) study of Chinese relatedness, cross-strait relations and income di¤erences, Gorodnichenko
and Roland’s (2011) investigation of the relation between culture and institutions, and Desmet et
al.’s (2011) analysis of the relations between genetic and cultural distances and the stability of
political borders in Europe.
This paper is especially close to a section in the article by Desmet et al. (2011), where these
authors provide an empirical analysis of the relationship between genetic distance and measures
of cultural distance, using the World Values Survey. In particular, Desmet et al. (2011) …nd
that European populations that are genetically closer give more similar answers to a broad set of
430 questions about norms, values and cultural characteristics included in the 2005 World Values
Survey (WVS) sections on perceptions of life, family, religion and morals. They also …nd that
the correlation between genetic distance and di¤erences in cultural values remains positive and
signi…cant after controlling for linguistic and geographic distances. Our results here are consistent
with their …ndings, but we use di¤erent empirical methods, a broader set of questions from all
waves of the WVS, additional distances in linguistic and religious space, and a worldwide rather
than European sample.
More broadly, this paper is also connected to the evolutionary literature on cultural transmission
of traits and preferences and the coevolution of genes and culture (e.g., Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman,
1981; Boyd and Richerson, 1985; Richerson and Boyd, 2004; Bell, Richerson and McElreath, 2009;
and in economics Bisin and Verdier, 2000, 2001, 2010; Seabright, 2010; and Bowles and Gintis,
2011), and to the growing empirical literature on the e¤ects of speci…c genetic traits, measured at
the molecular level, on economic, cultural and social outcomes.3 However, as already mentioned, in
our analysis we do not focus on the direct e¤ects of intergenerationally transmitted traits subject
to selection, but on general measures of ancestry based on neutral genes, which tend to change
randomly over time, and capture long-term relatedness across populations. Finally, our work is
connected to a di¤erent but related set of contributions focusing on the economic and political e¤ects
of genetic and cultural diversity not between populations, but within populations and societies
(Ashraf and Galor, 2013a, 2013b; Arbatli, Ashraf and Galor, 2013, Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and
Wacziarg, 2014).
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 addresses the measurement of ancestry using
genetic distance. Section 3 discusses the constructions of each of our three classes of distances:
3

For overviews and critical discussions, see for instance Beauchamp et al. (2011) and Benjamin et al. (2012).

3

linguistic, religious and values / norms / attitudes distances. Section 4 presents a simple theoretical
framework linking genetic distance and distance in cultural traits. Section 5 reports patterns of
correlations, both simple and partial, between genetic distance and cultural distance. Section 6
concludes.

2

Ancestry

2.1

Ancestry, relatedness, and genetic markers

Who is related to whom? The biological foundation of relatedness is ancestry: two individuals are
biologically related when one is the ancestor of the other, or both have common ancestors. Siblings
are more closely related than …rst cousins because they have more recent common ancestors: their
parents, rather than their grandparents. It is well known that genetic information can shed light
on relatedness and common ancestry at the individual level. People inherit their DNA from their
parents, and contemporary DNA testing can assess paternity and maternity with great accuracy.
By the same token, genetic information can help reconstruct the relations between individuals and
groups who share common ancestors much farther in the past.
From a long-term perspective, all humans are relatively close cousins, as we all descend from a
small number of members of the species Homo sapiens, originating in Africa over 100,000 years ago.
As humans moved to di¤erent regions and continents, they separated into di¤erent populations.
Genetic information about current populations allows us to infer the relations among them and
the overall history of humankind. Typically, people all over the world tend to share the same set
of gene variants (alleles), but with di¤erent frequencies across di¤erent populations. Historically,
this was …rst noticed with respect to blood groups. The four main blood groups are A, B, AB and
O, and are the same across di¤erent populations. These observable groups (phenotypes) are the
outcome of genetic transmission, involving three di¤erent variants (alleles) of the same gene: A, B,
and O. Each individual receives one allele from each parent. For instance, A-group people may be
so because they have received two copies of allele A (homozygotes) or because they have received
a copy of allele A and one of allele O (heterozygotes). In contrast, O-group people can only be
homozygotes (two O alleles), and AB-group can only have an A from a parent and a B from the
other parent.
By observing ABO blood groups, it is possible to infer the distribution of di¤erent alleles (A,

4

B and O) in a given population. The frequencies of such alleles vary across populations. For
example, one of the earliest studies of blood group di¤erences across ethnic groups, conducted
at the beginning of the 20th century and cited in Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and Piazza (1994, p.
18) found that the proportions of A and B alleles among the English were 46:4 percent and 10:2
percent respectively, were 45:6 percent and 14:2 percent among the French, while these proportions
were 44:6 percent and 25:2 percent among the Turks and 30:7 percent and 28:2 percent among the
Malagasy. It is reasonably to assume that these gene frequencies have varied mostly randomly over
time, as an e¤ect of genetic drift, the random changes in allele frequency from one generation to the
next due to the …nite sampling of which speci…c individuals and alleles end up contributing to the
next generation. Under random drift, it is unlikely that the French and the English have ended up
with similar distributions of those alleles just out of chance, and more likely that their distributions
are similar because they share recent common ancestors. That is, they used to be part of the same
population in relatively recent times. In contrast, the English and the Turks are likely to share
common ancestors farther in the past, and the English and the Malagasys even farther down the
generations.
Genetic information about ABO blood groups alone would be insu¢ cient to determine the
relationships among di¤erent populations. More information can be obtained by considering a
larger range of genetic markers, that is, genes that change across individuals, and are therefore
useful to study their ancestry and relatedness. Blood groups belong to a larger set of classic genetic
markers, which also include other blood-group systems (such as the RH and MN blood groups),
variants of immunoglobulin (GM, KM, AM, etc.), variants of human lymphocyte antigens (HLA)
and so on.
By considering a large number of classic genetic markers, pioneers in this area of human genetics, such as Cavalli-Sforza and his collaborators (e.g., see Cavalli-Sforza and Edwards, 1964;
Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and Piazza, 1994) were able to measure global genetic di¤erences across
populations, and to use such measures to infer how di¤erent populations have separated from each
other over time and space. More recently, the great advances in DNA sequencing have allowed the
direct study of polymorphisms (that is, genetic information that di¤ers across individuals) at the
molecular level. In particular, human genetic di¤erences can now be studied directly by looking
at instances of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism or SNP (pronounced snip), a sequence variation
in which a single DNA nucleotide – A, T, C or G – in the genome di¤ers across individuals (for

5

example, Rosenberg et al., 2002; Seldin et. al., 2006; Tian et al., 2009; Ralph and Coop, 2013).4

2.2
2.2.1

Genetic distance between human populations
De…nition of FST

In order to capture global di¤erences in gene frequencies between populations, geneticists have
devised summary measures, called genetic distances. One of the most widely used measures of
genetic distance, …rst suggested by Sewall Wright (1951), is called FST : In general, it can be
de…ned as:
FST =

Vp
p(1 p)

(1)

where Vp is the variance between gene frequencies across populations, and p their average gene
frequencies.
For example, consider two populations (a and b) of equal size, and one biallelic gene - i.e., a gene
that can take only two forms: allele 1 and allele 2. Let pa and qa = 1

pa be the gene frequency

of allele 1 and allele 2, respectively, in population a.5 By the same token, pb and qb = 1

pb are

the gene frequency of allele 1 and allele 2, respectively, in population b. Without loss of generality,
assume pa

where

pb and de…ne:
pa

p+

(2)

pb

p

(3)

0: Then, we have:
FST =

In general, 0

FST

Vp
(pa
=
p(1 p)

p)2 + (pb
2p(1 p)

p)2

2

=

p(1

p)

(4)

1. In particular, FST = 0 when the frequencies of the alleles are identical

across populations ( = 0), and FST = 1 when one population has only one allele and the other
4

A haplogroup is a group of similar haplotypes (collection of speci…c alleles) that share a common ancestor having

the same SNP mutation. Among the most commonly studied human haplogroups are those passed only down the
matrilineal line in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and those passed only in the patrilineal line in the Y-chromosome.
While the analysis of the distribution of these speci…c haplogroups across populations is extremely informative to
study the history of human evolution and human migrations, measures of overall genetic distance and relatedness
between populations require the study of the whole genome. The measures of genetic distance that we discuss and
use in the rest of this paper capture this more comprehensive notion of relatedness between populations.
5

Note that since pa + qa = 1 we also have (pa + qa )2 = p2a + qa2 + 2pa qa = 1:

6

population has only the other allele - that is, when

= p: In that case, we say that the gene has

reached …xation in each of the two populations - that is, there is no heterozygosity within each
population.
In fact, FST is part of a broader class of measures called …xation indices, and can be reinterpreted
in terms of a comparison between heterozygosity within each population and heterozygosity in the
sum of the two populations.6 The probability that two randomly selected alleles at the given locus
are identical within the population (homozygosity) is p2a + qa2 , and the probability that they are
di¤erent (heterozygosity) is:
ha = 1

p2a + qa2 = 2pa qa

(5)

By the same token, heterozygosity in population b is:
hb = 1

p2b + qb2 = 2pb qb

(6)

The average gene frequencies of allele 1 and 2 in the two populations are, respectively:
p=

pa + pb
2

(7)

and:
q=

qa + qb
=1
2

p

(8)

Heterozygosity in the sum of the two populations is:
h=1

p2 + q 2 = 2pq

(9)

Average heterozygosity is measured by:
hm =

ha + hb
2

(10)

FST measures the variation in the gene frequencies of populations by comparing h and hm :
FST = 1

hm
=1
h

pa qa + pb qb
1 (pa pb )2
=
=
2pq
4 p(1 p)
p(1

2

p)

(11)

In sum, if the two populations have identical allele frequencies (pa = pb ), FST is zero. On the other
hand, if the two populations are completely di¤erent at the given locus (pa = 1 and pb = 0; or
6

More generally, the study of genetic distance between populations is part of the broader study of human genetic

variation and diversity between and within populations. Interesting discussions of the economic e¤ects of genetic
diversity within populations and of the relationship between genetic and cultural diversity and fragmentation are
provided in Ashraf and Galor (2013a, 2013b).

7

pa = 0 and pb = 1), FST takes value 1. In general, the higher the variation in the allele frequencies
across the two populations, the higher is their FST distance. The formula can be extended to
account for L alleles, S populations, di¤erent population sizes, and to adjust for sampling bias.
The details of these generalizations are provided in Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and Piazza (1994, pp.
26-27).
2.2.2

Genetic distance and separation time

FST genetic distance has a very useful interpretation in terms of separation time, de…ned as the
time since two populations shared their last common ancestors - that is, since they were the
same population. Consider two populations whose ancestors were part of the same population t
generations ago: t is the separation time between the two populations. Assume, for simplicity, that
both populations have the same e¤ective population size N .7 . Assume also that allele frequencies
change over time only as the result of random genetic drift. Then it can be shown that:8
FST = 1
For a small FST , we can approximate it with

t
e 2N

ln(1

FST '

(12)

FST ), which implies that:

t
2N

(13)

This means that the genetic distance between two cousin populations is roughly proportional to
the time since the ancestors of the two populations split and formed separate populations. In this
respect, we can therefore interpret genetic distance as a measure of the time since two populations
shared a common ancestry.
2.2.3

Empirical estimates of genetic distance

In their landmark study The History and Geography of Human Genes, Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi and
Piazza (1994) provide some of the most detailed and comprehensive estimates of genetic distances
between human populations, within and across continents. Their initial database contains 76; 676
7

E¤ective population size only includes active breeders, and is generally smaller than actual census size. More

precisely, e¤ective population size is the number of breeding individuals that would produce the actual sampling
variance, or rate of inbreeding, if they bred in a way consistent with a series of idealized benchmark assumptions
(e.g., see Falconer and Mackay, 1996, chapter 4, or Hamilton, 2009, chapter 3).
8

See Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994, p. 30 and references).

8

gene frequencies, corresponding to 6; 633 samples in di¤erent locations. By culling and pooling such
samples, they restrict their analysis to 491 populations. They focus on ‘aboriginal populations that
were at their present location at the end of the …fteenth century when the great European migrations
began’ (Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994, p. 24). When studying genetic di¤erence at the world level,
the number is reduced to 42 representative populations, aggregating subpopulations characterized
by a high level of genetic similarity. For these 42 populations, Cavalli-Sforza and coauthors report
bilateral distances computed from 120 alleles.
Among this set of 42 world populations, the greatest genetic distance observed is between Mbuti
Pygmies and Papua New-Guineans, where the FST distance is 0:4573; while the smallest genetic
distance (0:0021) is between the Danish and the English. When considering more disaggregated
data for 26 European populations, the smallest genetic distance (0:0009) is between the Dutch and
the Danes, and the largest (0:0667) is between the Lapps and the Sardinians. The mean genetic
distance among the 861 available pairs in the world population is 0:1338. Figure 1, reproduced
from Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994, Figure 2.3.2B, p. 78), is a phylogenetic tree, constructed from
genetic distance data, that visually shows how di¤erent human populations have split apart over
time. The phylogenetic tree is constructed to maximize the correlation between Euclidian distances
to common nodes (measured along the branches) and FST genetic distance computed from allele
frequencies. Hence, the tree is a simpli…ed summary of (but not a substitute for) the matrix of
FST genetic distances between populations. Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) also calculated estimates
of Nei’s distance, which is a di¤erent measure of genetic distance between populations. While FST
and Nei’s distance have di¤erent analytical de…nitions and theoretical properties, they capture the
same basic relationships, and their correlation is 93:9 percent. Therefore, in the rest of this paper
we only use FST measures.
Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) provide genetic distance data at the population level, not at the
country level. Therefore, economists and other social scientists interested in studying countrylevel data need to match populations to countries. In Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), we did so
using ethnic composition data by country from Alesina et al. (2003), who list 1; 120 countryethnic group categories. We matched ethnic group labels with population labels in Appendices
2 and 3 from Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994). For instance, according to Alesina et al. (2003),
India is composed of 72 percent of “Indo-Aryans”and 25 percent “Dravidians.”These groups were
matched, respectively, to “Indians” and “Dravidhans” (S.E. Indians) from Cavalli-Sforza et al.

9

(1994). Another example is Italy, where the ethnic groups labelled “Italians” and “Rhaetians”
(95:4 percent of Italy’s population) in Alesina et al. (2003) were matched to the genetic category
“Italian” in Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994), and the “Sardinians” ethnic group (2:7 percent of Italy’s
population) was matched to the “Sardinian” genetic group.
Using these matching rules, we constructed two measures of FST genetic distance between
countries.9 The …rst was the distance between the plurality ethnic groups of each country in a pair,
i.e. the groups with the largest shares of each country’s population. For instance, the plurality
genetic distance between India and Italy is the genetic distance between the Indian genetic group
and the Italian genetic group (FST = 0:026). This resulted in a dataset of 21; 321 pairs of countries
(207 underlying countries and dependencies) with available genetic distance data.10 The second
was a measure of weighted genetic distance. Many countries, such as the United States or Australia,
are made up of sub-populations that are genetically distant, and for which both genetic distance
data and data on the shares of each genetic group are available. Assume that country 1 contains
populations i = 1; :::; I and country 2 contains populations j = 1; :::; J, denote by s1i the share of
population i in country 1 (similarly for country 2) and dij the genetic distance between populations
i and j. The weighted FST genetic distance between countries 1 and 2 is then:
W
FST

=

I X
J
X

(s1i

s2j

dij )

(14)

i=1 j=1

The interpretation of this measure is straightforward: it represents the expected genetic distance
between two randomly selected individuals, one from each country.11 Weighted genetic distance
9

We also constructed genetic distance for populations as they were in 1500, based again on data from Cavalli-Sforza

et al. (1994). For this variable, for instance, the United States is matched to the North Amerindian population. This
measure of genetic distance in 1500 can either be used as an instrument for contemporary genetic distance (Spolaore
and Wacziarg, 2009), or as an independent variable in applications that seek to explain pre-Industrial economic
outcomes (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013). However we do not make use of this variable in this paper, since we focus
on the contemporary relationship between ancestry and culture.
10

For 27 countries, the data on group shares was missing from Alesina et al.’s (2003) database, but a match to

genetic groups based on plurality groups was possible through information from Encyclopedia Britannica. Thus, our
weighted measure of genetic distance covers 16; 110 pairs, or 180 countries, whereas for the plurality match we have
data on 21; 321 pairs from 207 countries.
11

Therefore, the weighted measure is not to be interpreted as FST genetic distance between the whole population

of a country (say, all Australians) and the whole population of another country (say, all Americans), as if each
country were formed by one randomly-mating population (a deme). Instead, to each pair of individuals in each

10

is very highly correlated with genetic distance based on dominant groups: the correlation is 93
percent. In the rest of this paper we will mostly use weighted FST distance, which is a more precise
measure of expected genetic distance between countries. Table 1 presents summary statistics for
W.
FST and FST

3

Culture

To capture cultural distance we adopt a three-pronged approach. We …rst focus on a salient dimension of culture, language, likely to be strongly related with genetic distance because language, like
genes, is transmitted from parents to children within populations, and because linguistic di¤erentiation, like genetic di¤erentiation, results over time from horizontal separation between populations.
Religion is another salient characteristic of human societies, also transmitted intergenerationally
with variations. Finally, in the most novel part of this paper we use answers to the World Values Survey to construct broader metrics of distance in values, norms and attitudes. Jointly, these
three classes of measures are referred to as memetic distance, by analogy with genetic distance, using a distinction between culturally transmitted traits (memes) and genetically transmitted traits
(genes) that goes back to Dawkins (1976). We describe in turn the methods by which each of
these measures were constructed, and provide descriptions of these variables, before turning to
their interrelationships.

3.1

Linguistic distance

To capture linguistic distance, we employ two methods, one based on language trees, and the other
based on lexicostatistics. These are arguably the most widely used in the social sciences, but there
exist other types of measures of linguistic distance, discussed in Ginsburgh and Weber (2015).
The classi…cation of languages into trees is based on a methodology borrowed from cladistics.
Linguists group languages into families based on perceived similarities between them.12 For instance, in one commonly used classi…cation of languages, from Ethnologue, French is classi…ed as
country is assigned their respective ancestrally inherited distance – that is, the distance corresponding to their
respective ancestral groups –which may vary across individuals within each country when these countries are formed
of di¤erent genetic groups.
12

For a further discussion of linguistic trees, see Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg (2015) and Ginsburgh and

Weber (2015).

11

“Indo-European - Italic - Romance - Italo-Western - Western - Gallo-Iberian - Gallo-Romance Gallo-Rhaetian - Oil - Français.”Similarly, Italian is classi…ed as “Indo-European - Italic - Romance
- Italo-Western - Italo-Dalmatian.”This can serve as the basis for characterizing the linguistic distance between French and Italian, because Italian shares 4 nodes with French. Variation in the
number of common nodes corresponds to variation in linguistic distance. French and Italian, for
instance, share no common nodes with non Indo-European languages, and are therefore at a higher
linguistic distance from them than they are with each other.
We use data from Fearon (2003), who assembled data on the prevalence of di¤erent languages for
a large set of countries in the world from a variety of sources, and used the linguistic trees provided
in Ethnologue to capture the distance between these languages. As we did with genetic distance, we
compute two di¤erent measures: the number of common nodes between the two plurality languages
of each country in a pair, CN , and the expected or weighted number of common nodes, CN W . The
latter exploits the fact that countries can be linguistically heterogeneous, and consists of computing
the expected number of common linguistic nodes between two randomly chosen individuals, one
from each country. More formally, for each country in a pair:
CN W =

I X
J
X

(s1i

s2j

cij )

(15)

i=1 j=1

where ski is the share of linguistic group i in country k and cij is the number of common nodes
between languages i and j.13 Both CN and CN W range from 0 to 15. From the two measures of
linguistic proximity, following Fearon (2003) we use the following transformation to obtain corresponding measures of linguistic distance ranging from 0 to 1:
r
15 CN
T LD =
15

(16)

Here T LD refers to tree-based linguistic distance and we similarly de…ne the weighted measures
T LDW by replacing CN with CN W in equation (16). The main advantage of this approach is that
distances can be computed for a wide range of countries: we have 12; 246 observations for T LD
and T LDW , from 157 underlying countries (Table 1 provides summary statistics). The drawback
of tree-based measures is that linguistic distance is calculated on a discrete number of common
nodes, which could be an imperfect measure of separation times between languages. A single split
13

CN W is, in fact, the B-index of Greenberg (1956), applied here to measuring the expected distance between two

individuals chosen from each country in a pair, rather from within a single society. See Ginsburgh and Weber (2015)
for further details on Greenberg’s B-index.

12

between two languages that occurred a long time ago would result in the same measure of distance
than a more recent single split, but the languages in the …rst case may in fact be more distant than
in the second. Similarly, numerous recent splits may result in two languages sharing few nodes,
while a smaller number of very distant linguistic subdivisions could make distant languages seem
close. This drawback justi…es looking at an alternative measure.
This second measure of linguistic distance is based on lexicostatistics, the branch of quantitative linguistics classifying language groups based on whether words used to convey some common
meanings –such as “mother”or “table”–are cognate, i.e. stem from the same ancestor word. Two
languages with many cognate words are linguistically closer than those with non-cognate words.
For instance, the words “tavola”in Italian and “table”in French both stem from the common Latin
term “tabula”. They are therefore cognate. Replicating this over a large number of meanings, the
percentage of cognate words is a measure of linguistic proximity. We rely on data from Dyen et al.
(1992), who use 200 underlying meanings. In the same way as before, we compute two measures of
the percentage of cognate words: the percentage of cognate words between the plurality languages
spoken in each country in a pair, CLD, and the weighted percentage, CLDW , which represents the
expected percentage of cognate words between two individuals randomly chosen from each country
in a pair.14 Once again, Table 1 provides summary statistics, showing that CLD and CLDW vary
between 0 and 0:92, with the sample mean equal to roughly 0:6.
The big advantage of the lexicostatistical approach is that it approximates linguistic di¤erences
in a more continuous way than the cladistic approach.15 The most widely used source of lexicostatistical distance data in the social sciences is Dyen et al. (1992), which we use here. This
particular source only covers Indo-European languages, and therefore metrics of linguistic distance
are only available for country pairs where these languages are spoken. However, new data from
the Automated Similarity Judgment Program (ASJP), combining lexicostatistical methods with
14

In cases of pairs composed of countries, like India, where Indo-European languages are spoken by a plurality, but

non-Indo-European languages are spoken by a large minority, CLD may be available but not CLDW . Indeed we
have 63 underlying countries (1; 953 pairs) for CLDW and 85 countries (3; 570 pairs) for CLD.
15

Under the assumption that linguistic drift is constant across languages, i.e. that the rate of linguistic innovation

over time is similar across languages, lexicostatistical distance can be argued to be correlated with separation times
between languages. This insight gave rise to the …eld of glottochronology, the attempt to back out the dates of
separation of population based on linguistic similarities between them. The assumption of common linguistic drift
has been heavily debated.

13

measures of phonological, grammatical and lexical similarity between languages, covers a wider set
of languages (Ginsburgh and Weber, 2015, provide further references and details on this recent
database). While we do not use this data here, its recent development opens new avenues to study
the e¤ect of linguistic distance on socioeconomic outcomes since it consists of continuous metrics
of linguistic similarity available for a broad set of languages.
The tree-based and cognate-based measures of linguistic distance, in the limited sample of
Indo-European speaking countries for which the two sets of measures are available, are relatively
highly correlated. The correlation between the two weighted measures is 0:82, while the correlation
between the plurality measures is 0:78.

3.2

Religious distance

To capture religious distance between countries, we adopt an approach analogous to the tree-based
linguistic distance. We consider trees that describe the relationship between world religions. One
such tree is from Mecham, Fearon and Laitin (2006), displayed in Figure 2, and another is from the
World Christian Database (2007, henceforth WCD), displayed in Figure 3. We make use of both
in the empirical work that follows.
The trees consist of grouping religions into broad categories. For instance, “Near-Eastern
Monotheistic Religions”is one broad category common to both trees we use. These broad categories
are further divided into …ner classi…cations. For instance Near Eastern monotheistic religions are
subdivided into Christianity, Islam and Judaism. These are further re…ned into yet greater levels
of disaggregation. The number of common nodes between religions is a metric of religious proximity. For instance Lutherans are closer in religious space to Baptists than they are to the Greek
Orthodox.
In the Mecham, Fearon and Laitin dataset there can be up to 5 common nodes between religions, while the WCD data is less …nely disaggregated, so there can be up to 3 common nodes
only.16 Each source provides data on the frequency of each religion in each country, so distances
between religions can be mapped to religious distance between countries. As before, we calculate
the number of common nodes between the plurality religions of each country in a pair, as well as
the expected number of common nodes (following a formula analogous to equation 15). Finally, to
16

Due to its …ner level of disaggregation the Fearon, Mecham and Laitin classi…cation and data is preferred. However

for the sake of completeness we present results pertaining to both datasets below.

14

obtain measures of religious distance, we implement a transformation analogous to that in equation
(16). Summary statistics for the 4 resulting metrics are displayed in Table 1.

3.3

Cultural distance based on the World Values Survey

Answers to questions from social surveys can be used as indicators of a respondent’s cultural norms,
values and attitudes. By analogy with genetics, questions correspond to gene loci while the speci…c
answers given are the alleles. Di¤erences across populations in the answer shares to a speci…c
question can be used to calculate the cultural distance between countries on that speci…c question.
Finally, aggregating over questions allows the computation of indices of cultural distance in values,
norms and attitudes space.
There are three major challenges when computing these indices. The …rst challenge is the
choice of questions. Rather than choosing questions arbitrarily, which would be open to criticism,
we consider the set of all values-related questions appearing in the World Values Survey 19812010 Integrated Questionnaire, i.e. those listed by the WVS as categories A through G.17 All 740
questions can be considered when computing distances question by question. When calculating
summary indices of cultural distance that aggregate across questions, however, it is important to
have a sample that is balanced across country pairs, i.e. to have the same number of questions
for each pair. Some of the questions were only asked in a subset of countries, sometimes a small
subset. There is a trade-o¤ between maintaining a large set of questions, in which case the number
of country pairs shrinks, or maintaining a broad sample of country pairs, in which case the set of
questions is reduced. In what follows we chose to do the latter, to maximize the representativeness
of the sample of countries. This led to keeping 98 questions out of the original set. Data availability
is the only concern that governs which questions remain. Yet since the remaining questions are
those that were asked in the broadest set of countries, they constitute the core questions of the
WVS. Focusing on these questions, that were asked in at least one wave of the WVS in 74 countries,
we are left with distances computed for 2; 701 pairs.18
17

These categories are as follows: Category A: Perceptions of Life. Category B: Environment. Category C: Work.

Category D: Family. Category E: Politics and Society. Category F: Religion and Morale. Category G: National
Identity. Additional categories, S, X and Y are not considered here since they relate either to the demographic
characteristics of the respondent or characteristics of the survey (wave, year, etc).
18

We also implemented di¤erent choices in terms of the mix of country pairs and questions, increasing the number

of questions at the cost of losing some country pairs, leading to no appreciable change in the results. These results

15

The second challenge is the choice of a functional form for computing distances for each question.
There are many possible choices, but we focus on the simplest one, which is to calculate the
Euclidian distance. In further empirical work that is available in the online appendix, we used
Manhattan and FST cultural distances instead of Euclidian distance, …nding results that are very
similar to those reported here.19 Consider countries 1 and 2 and question i from the WVS, which
admits answers j = 1; :::; J. Some questions are binary (J = 2) and others admit more than two
answers (J > 2).20 Let scij denote the share of respondents in country c 2 f1; 2g giving answer j to
question i. Then for binary questions, cultural distance CDi12 between countries 1 and 2 is simply:
CDi12 = s1i1
while for non-binary questions:
CDi12

=

s

J
P

j=1

s1ij

s2i1

s2ij

(17)

2

(18)

The third challenge is to aggregate question-speci…c distances in order to obtain summary measures
of cultural distance. To create summary indices we …rst standardize the question-speci…c distances
to have a mean of zero and a standard error equal to one. This ensures equal weighing of questions
in every summary index. We next simply sum the question speci…c indices, to compute several
indices of cultural distance. We …rst sum across all 98 questions, to obtain an overall index. Next,
we sum question-speci…c distances for each of the six categories of questions, as speci…ed by the
WVS.21 Finally, we created an index for the whole group of binary questions and another one for
the whole group of non-binary questions.
are available in an online appendix at:
http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty_pages/romain.wacziarg/downloads/ancestry_appendix.pdf
19

Desmet et al. (2011) used the FST functional form to calculate cultural distance based on answers from the

World Values Survey for a sample of European countries, and explored the relationship between the resulting matrix
of cultural distance and FST genetic distance in Europe, …nding like we do a strong association between the two.
20

We call these non-binary. Non-binary questions are further divided into those that admit an ordering on a scale

(e.g. happiness on a scale from 1 to 10), and those that do not (e.g. do you prefer option 1, option 2 or option 3). This
distinction is not relevant here. For an in-depth discussion of question types in the WVS, see Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín
and Wacziarg (2014).
21

Category B, questions relating to the environment, is dropped as no question from this category was asked in

all of the 74 countries. Category A features 32 questions, category C features 14 questions, category D features 7
questions, category E features 30 questions, category F features 12 questions and category G features 3 questions.
There were 35 binary questions, and 63 non-binary questions.

16

Summary statistics for these 9 indices appear at the bottom of Table 1. By construction each
index has mean zero, and is available for all 2; 701 pairs.22

4

Ancestry and culture: A simple conceptual framework

As we discussed in Section 2, genetic distance measures relatedness between populations and is
roughly proportional to time since two populations shared the same ancestors, that is, since they
were the same population. Over time, ancestors transmit a large number of traits to their descendants, not only biologically (through DNA), but also culturally. This transmission takes place with
variation and change over time. Therefore, on average, populations that are more closely related
will have had less time to diverge from each other on a large set of culturally transmitted traits,
such as language, religion, traditions, habits, and values. This process establishes a close connection between ancestry, measured by genetic distance, and culturally transmitted traits: genetic
distance and memetic distance should be positively correlated. A stylized formal model, adapted
from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009, 2012), can illustrate this relationship in a simpli…ed and concise
way.
For simplicity, we consider three populations, i = 1; 2; 3, living at the present time. Population
1 and population 2 descend from the same last common ancestor population, which lived one period
ago. In contrast, population 3 only shares common ancestors with populations 1 and 2 going further
in time, back to two periods ago. That is, population 3 is less closely related with populations 1
and 2 than these are with each other. Using the analogy discussed in Section 2, we can say that
populations 1 and 2 are like siblings, while population 3 is a more distant cousin. The phylogenetic
tree of the three populations is illustrated in Figure 4.
Building on the results described in Section 2.2.2, we can approximate the genetic distance
dg (i; j) between population i and population j as the time since they were one population. Therefore, genetic distance dg (1; 2) between population 1 and population 2 is smaller than genetic distance
between population 1 and population 3, and also smaller than genetic distance between population
2 and population 3:
dg (1; 2) = F < dg (1; 3) = dg (2; 3) = F 0
22

(19)

However one country, Puerto Rico, drops out in our regression analysis due to missing data on genetic distance,

leaving us with 2; 628 observations in the regressions of Section 5.

17

How far in cultural traits are these populations from each other? While, in general, their cultural
divergence may depend on complex processes of transmission across generations of a large set of
cultural traits, it is useful to focus on the simplest possible mechanism of cultural transmission
with variation, whereby culture is captured by just one trait (or meme), which we assume can be
represented as a point on the real line. In each period t, a population i has cultural traits ci (t) that
are inherited with variation from its ancestor population, which had traits ci (t
ci (t) = ci (t

1), according to:

1) + "i (t)

where "i (t) measures random variation between time t

(20)

1 and time t. We assume the simplest

possible mechanism for variation: cultural change as a random walk. That is, "i (t) = " > 0 with
probability 1=2 and "i (t) =

" < 0 with probability 1=2. In addition, we assume that such shocks

are independent across di¤erent populations ("i (t) is independent of "j (t) for j 6= i).
Let dc (i; j)

jcj

ci j denote the distance in cultural traits between population i and population

j. The expected memetic distance between population 1 and population 2, which share their last
common ancestors only one period ago, is denoted by E[dc (1; 2)], and given by:23
E[dc (1; 2)] = "

(21)

All variation between populations 1 and 2 is given by cultural change that took place between one
period ago and now. In contrast, expected memetic distance between population 1 and population
3, and between population 2 and population 3, comes from shocks that took place both between
one period ago and now, and between two periods ago and one period ago. On average, such shocks
are associated with a larger distance in culturally transmitted traits:24
E[dc (1; 3)] = E[dc (2; 3)] =

3"
> " = E[dc (1; 2)]
2

(22)

Therefore, on average a larger genetic distance is associated with greater distance in cultural traits.
This relation is not deterministic. Some pairs of populations that are more distant cousins may end
up with more similar cultural traits than two more closely related populations, but that outcome is
less likely to be observed than the opposite. Therefore, genetic distance and distance in culturally
transmitted traits, such as language, religion, and values, are expected to be positively correlated.
23

For the derivation, see the Appendix.

24

The derivation of this result, and of a generalization, are provided in the Appendix.

18

5

Ancestry and culture: Empirical evidence

In this section we conduct an empirical exploration of the relationship between genetic distance
and our various measures of memetic distance, to test the hypothesis that longer separation times
are in fact positively related with di¤erences in language, religion and norms, values and attitudes.

5.1

Genetic distance and linguistic distance

Measures of linguistic and genetic distances should be positively correlated. Cavalli-Sforza et al.
(1994, pp. 98-105) observed that there is usually little genetic admixture between linguistic groups.
Languages are generally transmitted intergenerationally. Thus, phylogenetic trees and linguistic
trees tend to resemble each other. At the same time, we should not expect a perfect relationship,
for several reasons. Firstly, as already mentioned, linguistic data based on trees feature a discrete
number of nodes, whereas genetic distance based on a large number of alleles, as we use, is a
continuous measure of separation times. Second, the functional forms for measures of genetic
distance (FST ) and linguistic distance (a nonlinear transformation of the number of di¤erent nodes,
or the percentage of non-cognate words, depending on the measure) are di¤erent. Third, successful
groups conquering the territories of distinct linguistic groups can impose their language without
necessarily imposing their genes. Such was the case, for instance, with the Magyar conquest of
Hungary: the resulting language was of the Uralic family, but the Magyar genetic admixture was so
limited that the Hungarians are genetically very close to other Slavic populations, such as the Poles.
An even more stark example comes from the population movements that followed the discovery of
the New World, in particular the slave trade: the current descendants of former slaves do not speak
the original West African languages of their ancestors. Similarly, current inhabitants of the United
States predominantly speak English, whereas their ancestors came from a diverse set of linguistic
groups. Thus, modern migrations served to break the link between genetic and linguistic distance.
Table 2, Panel A explores the basic correlations. We …nd that our various measures of linguistic
distance are highly correlated among themselves. For instance, the correlation between weighted
T LD and weighted CLD is 0:82. Weighted T LD is also positively correlated with weighted genetic
distance, with a correlation equal to 0:22. However, CLD is not strongly correlated with genetic
distance, in all likelihood because the sample is limited to Indo-European speaking countries, which
tend to also be genetically close: there is not enough variation in the data to detect a signi…cant
correlation.

19

Table 3 presents regressions of our various measures of linguistic distance on genetic distance,
with or without controls for a wide range of measures of geographic separation - including geodesic
distance, the absolute di¤erence in longitudes and latitudes, etc. Indeed one concern is that genetic
distance merely re‡ects geographic proximity, and that genetic and linguistic distance are positively
correlated simply because the relationship goes through geographic distance. We …nd that this is
not the case, and that genetic distance is signi…cantly related to tree-based measures of linguistic
distance (T LD). In fact, the standardized beta coe¢ cient on FST genetic distance, reported in the
last line of Table 2, suggests that a one standard deviation increase in genetic distance is associated
with a 0:15

0:22 standard deviation increase in linguistic distance, depending on the measure

and speci…cation.25 For the cognate-based measures (CLD), the relationship is negative, but not
robustly signi…cant statistically.
As mentioned already, the population movements that followed the discovery of the New World
were important factors breaking the link between genetic and linguistic distance. To investigate
this issue, Table 4 isolates the sample consisting of Old World countries. This excludes any country
pair containing a country from the Americas or Oceania. We …nd much larger correlations than in
Table 3. For instance, the standardized betas on weighted T LD now range between 0:29 and 0:41.
Moreover, the correlations between genetic distance and CLD turn positive, and signi…cant in the
univariate cases. These results show there exists a strong correlation between genetic and linguistic
distance for country pairs least likely to have experienced language replacement over the course of
the last 500 years.

5.2

Genetic distance and religious distance

Like language, religious beliefs tend to be transmitted intergenerationally, leading us to expect a
positive correlation between religious distance and genetic distance. However, several factors may
limit the extent to which religious distance correlates with genealogical distance. First, while they
may …nd their sources in ancient religious beliefs, several major world religions appeared relatively
recently. For instance, one of the oldest monotheistic religions, Judaism, appeared only 3; 500 years
ago. Second, in line with the …rst observation, the rate of drift of religious beliefs is likely to be much
faster than that of genes, so that populations that are genetically similar often espouse di¤erent
25

It is well-known that the standardized beta is equal to the correlation coe¢ cient for the univariate case. This can

be veri…ed by comparing the standardized betas in columns (1) and (3) to the corresponding ones in Table 2 Panel
A.

20

religious beliefs. In fact, two recent religious innovations, Christianity and Islam, occurred among
closely related populations in the Middle East. Third, religious beliefs are transmitted horizontally
through conquests and conversions, perhaps to a faster extent than even languages, as it is easier
to change one’s religion than one’s language. Thus, the emergence and horizontal di¤usion of new
religions is likely to weaken the link between religious distance and genetic distance perhaps to a
greater extent than for linguistic distance. Fourth, the aforementioned functional form di¤erences
between metrics of linguistic and genetic distance apply with the same force to measures of religious
distance.
Despite these caveats, we do …nd that religious distance is positively correlated with genetic
distance. The …rst piece of evidence in presented in Panel B of Table 2. There we see, for instance,
that weighted religious distance based on the Mecham, Fearon and Laitin religious tree (F

RD)

bears a 0:18 correlation with weighted genetic distance. Correlations are smaller using measures
based on the World Christian Database tree (W CD

RD), which are less …nely disaggregated.

We also …nd substantial positive correlations among our various measures of religious distance, but
these correlations are not su¢ ciently high to justify looking at only one measure.
Tables 5 and 6 present regression evidence, again with or without controls for geographic distance for each of the 4 measures of religious distance. In all but one of the speci…cations, genetic
distance comes out with a positive statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient. The standardized magnitude
of the e¤ect of genetic distance is generally smaller than for linguistic distance, in line with the
observation above. Yet, in particular for F

RD, we …nd standardized e¤ects comprised between

8:3 percent and 18:1 percent, again consistent with our model of cultural drift. Moreover, unlike
for language, we do not …nd a particular tendency for the e¤ect to be more pronounced among Old
World countries (Table 6).

5.3

Genetic distance and cultural distance

Our …nal exploration concerns the relationship between genetic distance and distance in norms,
values and attitudes. We start with an analysis of the relationship between genetic distance and
question-speci…c distances, for all available questions from the WVS. Under the null hypothesis of
no relationship between genetic and cultural distances we would expect 5 percent of the correlations
to be signi…cant (2:5 percent positive and signi…cant), and the distribution of correlations to be
centered around zero. Figure 5 presents a histogram of sample correlations between bilateral

21

distance for each question, and weighted genetic distance, for the full set of 740 questions.26 The
mode of the distribution is well to the right of zero, with a mean of about 10 percent. 71:6 percent
of the correlations were positive. In 53:1 percent of the cases the correlation with genetic distance
is both positive and signi…cant, far in excess of what we would expect under the null. A substantial
subset of the questions feature correlations that are quite large - for 22:4 percent of the questions,
the correlations are in excess of 0:20 and statistically signi…cant at the 5 percent level.27
These simple correlations could confound the e¤ects of geographic distance with those of genetic
distance. To address this issue, we ran regressions, for each question, of WVS distance on genetic
and geodesic distance. Figure 6 presents a histogram of the standardized beta coe¢ cient on genetic
distance, representing the e¤ect of a one standard deviation change in genetic distance as a share of
a standard deviation in the dependent variable. 66:9 percent of the standardized betas are positive,
and 47:2 percent are both positive and signi…cant at the 5 percent level. We also …nd a number of
large e¤ects, with 20 percent of the standardized betas greater than 0:20.28 Controlling for geodesic
distance does not modify the conclusion reached earlier.
While these results are informative, they con‡ate questions on very di¤erent subjects, and of
di¤erent types (binary versus non-binary). So we now turn to the relationship between our 9 indices
of cultural distance, and genetic distance. The analysis is now limited to the 98 questions available
for 74 countries. Table 7 presents simple correlations. Genetic distance bears a correlation of
0:27 with our summary measure of cultural distance. The last line of the table shows that genetic
distance is positively and signi…cantly correlated with 8 of our 9 measures of cultural distance based
on the WVS. The only category for which this is not the case is category D, pertaining to questions
about family. Among the other categories, the correlation with genetic distance varies between 7:4
percent (questions on work) and 29:9 percent (questions on politics and society).
In Tables 8 and 9 we turn to regression analysis, following the same format as earlier: for
each index we present a univariate regression and one that controls for geographic barriers. Table
8 focuses on the aggregate index covering all 98 questions, and then the indices for binary and
26

The underlying sample varies across questions, which could introduce some bias. However, the results are no

di¤erent when we focus on the set of 98 questions for which we have a balanced sample of 2; 701 country pairs.
27

For the restricted set of 98 questions covering a balanced set of countries, 63:3 percent of the correlations were

positive and signi…cant, and 75:5 percent of them were positive.
28

For the restricted set of 98 questions, 67:3 percent of the standardized beta coe¢ cients on genetic distance were

positive, and 53:1 percent of the e¤ects were positive and signi…cant at the 5 percent level.

22

non-binary questions. We …nd a large, statistically signi…cant positive relationship between genetic
distance and cultural distance. In the speci…cation with controls (column 2), the standardized e¤ect
of genetic distance is 25:5 percent. While the e¤ect remains positive and signi…cant for both binary
and non-binary questions, it is largest for the latter - with a standardized e¤ect of 30:2 percent.
Interestingly, the inclusion of geographic distance controls serves to weaken the e¤ect of genetic
distance only a little bit.
Table 9, …nally, breaks things down by question category. In the bottom panel, with geographic
controls, we see positive and signi…cant e¤ects of genetic distance on cultural distance for all but
category D (Family). The largest e¤ects, quantitatively, are for categories A (Perceptions of Life),
E (Politics and Society) and F (Religion and Morale). Future work should seek to delve more
deeply into the characteristics of questions most closely associated with ancestral distance.

6

Conclusion

What does genetic distance measure? In this paper we argued that genetic distance is a summary
statistic for di¤erences in a wide range of intergenerationally transmitted human traits. We focused
on language, religion and values, …nding empirical evidence of a positive correlation between genetic
distance and linguistic, religious and cultural distances. It is important to note that genetic distance
is not strongly correlated with only a small and speci…c subset of di¤erences in cultural traits. On
the contrary, genetic distance tends to be broadly and signi…cantly correlated with a vast range
of di¤erences in cultural traits. Thus, while speci…c correlations with individual sets of traits
are typically moderate in magnitude, there is an overall relation between ancestry and culture,
consistent with a conceptual framework in which a broad range of cultural traits are transmitted
with variation across generations over time. Genetic distance is a useful summary statistic capturing
di¤erences in this broad range of cultural traits.
Future research should seek to improve on this evidence. Recent progress in the measurement of
linguistic di¤erences, using systematic quantitative methods, will allow for a more precise evaluation
of the e¤ects of linguistic distance on political economy outcomes. Similarly, improvements in the
gathering of genetic data should lead to improvements in our ability to detect e¤ects of ancestral
distance on cultural distance and in turn on political economy outcomes. As more genetic data
on more …nely de…ned populations become available, more granular analyses of the relationship
between genetic and cultural distance will become possible. Third, alternative data sets on values,
23

norms and attitudes also exist, either regionally or worldwide, and could be used to complement
our analysis.
Research seeking to quantify human barriers to socioeconomic interactions across populations
is in its infancy. With this paper we have sought to clarify what observable traits are captured by
ancestral distance, but much remains to be done.

References
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013a) ‘The ‘Out of Africa’Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity, and
Comparative Economic Development’, American Economic Review, 103(1), 1–46.
Ashraf, Q., and O. Galor (2013b) ‘Genetic Diversity and the Origins of Cultural Fragmentation’,
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 528–33.
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003) ‘Fractionalization’,
Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 55–194.
Arbatli, E., Q. Ashraf and O. Galor (2013) ‘The Nature of Civil Con‡ict’, working paper, Brown
University.
Bai, Y. B. and J. K. Kung (2011) ‘Genetic Distance and Income Di¤erence: Evidence from Changes
in China’s Cross-Strait Relations.’Economics Letters, 110(3), 255–258.
Beauchamp, J. P., D. Cesarini, M. Johannesson, M. J. H. M. van der Loos, P. D. Koellinger, P. J.
F. Groenen, J. H. Fowler, J. N. Rosenquist, A. R. Thurik, and N. A. Christakis (2011) ‘Molecular
Genetics and Economics’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), 57–82.
Bell, A. V., P. J. Richerson, and R. McElreath (2009) ‘Culture Rather than Genes Provides Greater
Scope for the Evolution of Large-Scale Human Prosociality’, Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States, October, 106(42), 17671–17674.
Benjamin, D. J., D. Cesarini, M. J. H. M. van der Loos, C. T. Dawes, P. D. Koellinger, P. K. E.
Magnusson, C. F. Chabris, D. Conley, D. Laibson, M. Johannesson and P. M. Vissche (2012) ‘The
Genetic Architecture of Economic and Political Preferences’, Proceedings of National Academy of
Sciences of the United States, 109(21) May 22, 8026–8031.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000) ‘Beyond The Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and
the Evolution of Ethnic And Religious Traits’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 955–988.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001) ‘The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Evolution of
Preferences’, Journal of Economic Theory, 97(2), 298–319.
24

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2010) ‘The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization’, NBER
Working Paper #16512.
Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (2011) A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its Evolution
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary Process (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press).
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and A. W. F. Edwards (1964) Analysis of Human Evolution, Proc. 11th
International Congress Genetics, 2, 923–933.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. and M. W. Feldman (1981) Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi and A. Piazza (1994) The History and Geography of Human Genes
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Dawkins, R. (1976) The Sel…sh Gene (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín and R. Wacziarg (2014) ‘Culture, Ethnicity and Diversity’, working
paper, UCLA, May.
Desmet, K., I. Ortuño-Ortín and R. Wacziarg (2015) ‘Linguistic Cleavages and Economic Development’, forthcoming in Victor Ginsburgh and Shlomo Weber, eds., The Palgrave Handbook of
Economics and Language, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Desmet, K., M. Le Breton, I. Ortuño-Ortín and S. Weber (2011) ‘The Stability and Breakup of
Nations: A Quantitative Analysis’, Journal of Economic Growth, 16(3), 183–213
Dyen, I., J. B. Kruskal, and P. Black (1992) ‘An Indoeuropean Classi…cation: A Lexicostatistical
Experiment’, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 82, 1–132.
Egger, P. and F. Toubal (2015) ‘Common Spoken Language and International Trade’, forthcoming
in Victor Ginsburgh and Shlomo Weber, eds., The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language,
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Falconer, D. S. and T. F.C. Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics (Harlow: Pearson
Education Limited).
Fearon, J. (2003) ‘Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country’, Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2),
195–222.
Ginsburgh, V. and S. Weber (2011) How Many Languages Do We Need? The Economics of Linguistic Diversity. Princeton: Princeton University Press
Ginsburgh, V. and S. Weber (2015) ‘Linguistic Distances and Their Use in Economics’, forthcoming
25

in Victor Ginsburgh and Shlomo Weber, eds., The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language,
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland (2011) ‘Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations’, working
paper, UC Berkeley.
Greenberg, J. (1956) ‘The measurement of linguistic diversity’, Language, 32, 109–115.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2009) ‘Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1095–1131.
Hamilton, M. B. (2009) Population Genetics (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell).
Mecham, R. Q., J. Fearon, and D. Laitin (2006) ‘Religious Classi…cation and Data on Shares of
Major World Religions’, unpublished, Stanford University.
Melitz, J. and F. Toubal (2012) ‘Native Language, Spoken Language, Translation and Trade’,
CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP8994.
Melitz, J. (2008) ‘Language and Foreign Trade’, European Economic Review, 52(4), 667–699.
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd (2004) Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human
Evolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Rosenberg, N. A., Pritchard J. K., Weber J. L., Cann H. M., Kidd K. K., Zhivotovsky L. A.,
Feldman M. W. (2002) ‘Genetic Structure of Human Populations’, Science, December 20; 298
(5602), 2381–2385.
Seabright, P. (2010) The Company of Strangers: A Natural History of Economic Life (Princeton:
Princeton University Press).
Seldin, M. F., R. Shigeta, P. Villoslada, C. Selmi, J. Tuomilehto, G. Silva, J. W. Belmont, L.
Klareskog, and P. K. Gregersen (2006) ‘European Population Substructure: Clustering of Northern
and Southern Populations’, PLoS Genet. September, 2(9).
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009) ‘The Di¤usion of Development’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 469–529.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2012) ‘Long-Term Barriers to the International Di¤usion of Innovations’, in Je¤rey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar on
Macroeconomics 2011, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) Chapter 1, 11–46.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2013) ‘How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?’Journal
of Economic Literature, 51(2), 325–369.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2014) ‘Fertility and Modernity’, working paper, UCLA and Tufts
University.
26

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2015) ‘War and Relatedness’, working paper, UCLA and Tufts
University.
Ralph, P. and G. Coop (2013) ‘The Geography of Recent Genetic Ancestry Across Europe’, PLOS
Biology, May 7, 11(5).
Tian, C., R. Kosoy, R. Nassir, A. Lee, P. Villoslada, L. Klareskog, L. Hammarström, H.-J. Garchon,
A. E. Pulver, M. Ransom, P. K. Gregersen, and M. F. Seldin (2009) ‘European Population Genetic
Substructure: Further De…nition of Ancestry Informative Markers for Distinguishing among Diverse
European Ethnic Groups’, Molecular Medicine, November, 15(11), 371–383.
World Christian Database (2007) http://www.worldchristiandatabase.org/wcd/
Wright, S. (1951) ‘The Genetical Structure of Populations’, Annals of Eugenics, 15, 323–354.

27

Appendix: Derivations of the results in Section 4
First, we show that E[dc (1; 2)] = ". The result is immediate. With probability 1=4 both
populations experience a positive shock ", and with probability 1=4 both populations experience a
negative shock

": Hence, with probability 1=2, their vertical distance is zero. With probability

1=2 one population experiences a positive shock " and the other a negative shock
cultural distance equal to j"

", implying a

( ")j = 2": On average, the expected cultural distance is
1
1
E[dc (1; 2)] = 0 + 2" = "
2
2

(23)

Second, we show that
E[dc (1; 3)] = E[dc (2; 3)] =

3"
> " = E[dc (1; 2)]
2

(24)

In fact, this is a special instance of the more general case in which the shock between today and a
period ago is given by " > 0 with probability 1=2 and

" with probability 1=2, while the shock to

cultural traits between two periods ago and one period ago is "0 > 0 with probability 1=2 and "0
with probability 1=2. In Section 4, we show the result for the special case " = "0 .
In general, with probability 1=4 population 1’s ancestor populations and population 2’s ancestor
populations experienced identical shocks both between two periods ago and one period ago, and
between one period ago and now. That is, with probability 1=4 we have dv (1; 3) = 0. By the
same token, with probability 1=4 the two populations experienced identical shocks between two
periods ago and one period ago, but di¤erent shocks between one period ago and now, implying
dc (1; 3) = 2", and with probability 1=4 identical shocks between one period ago and now, but
di¤erent shocks between two periods ago and one period ago, implying dc (1; 3) = 2"0 . With
probability 1=8, one population lineage has experienced two positive shocks ("0 + ") while the other
has experienced two negative shocks ( "0

"), therefore leading to a distance equal to 2"0 + 2".

Finally, with probability 1=8 one population lineage has experienced a positive shock "0 and a
negative shock

" while the other population lineage has experienced

case, we have dc (1; 3) = j2"

2"0 j. In sum, expected cultural distance is given by

1
1
1
1
E[dc (1; 3)] = 2"0 + 2" + (2"0 + 2") + j2"
4
4
8
8
which is equal to " +

"0
if "
2

"0 and ". In this latest

"0 and equal to "0 +

"
if "
2

E[dc (1; 3)] = maxf
28

2"0 j

"0 , or, equivalently

"0
"
+ "; "0 + g
2
2

(25)

The same expected cultural distance holds between populations 2 and 3.
In the special case " = "0 , condition (25) simpli…es to E[dc (1; 3)] = E[dc (2; 3)] = 3"=2, the result
shown in Section 4.

29

12,246
12,246
19,306
19,306

Religious distance, weighted, Fearon
Religious distance, plurality, Fearon
Religious distance, weighted, WCD
Religious distance, plurality, WCD
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701
2,701

12,246
12,246
1,953
3,570

Tree-based linguistic distance, weighted
Tree-based linguistic distance, plurality
Cognate-based linguistic distance, weighted
Cognate-based linguistic distance, plurality

Overall cultural distance measure
Category A – Perceptions of Life
Category C – Work
Category D – Family
Category E – Politics and Society
Category F – Religion and Morale
Category G – National Identity
All binary questions
All non-binary questions

16,110
21,321

# pairs

FST distance, weighted
FST distance, plurality

Variable

30

Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Genetic Distance
180
0.115
0.070
0.000
207
0.117
0.081
0.000
Linguistic Distance
157
0.970
0.100
0.000
157
0.965
0.137
0.000
63
0.599
0.268
0.000
85
0.636
0.284
0.000
Religious Distance
157
0.853
0.144
0.089
157
0.786
0.313
0.000
197
0.747
0.163
0.127
197
0.628
0.358
0.000
Cultural Distance based on the World Values Survey
74
0.000
33.015
-89.818
74
0.000
12.110
-35.146
74
0.000
7.460
-14.102
74
0.000
3.436
-7.749
74
0.000
11.872
-28.001
74
0.000
6.962
-13.140
74
0.000
1.967
-4.544
74
0.000
14.049
-36.103
74
0.000
21.911
-58.630

# countries

Table 1. Simple Summary Statistics for Measures of Ancestral, Linguistics and Cultural Distances

118.294
46.542
37.550
18.479
45.561
26.975
7.345
57.345
62.481

1.000
1.000
0.997
1.000

1.000
1.000
0.918
0.920

0.355
0.338

Max

Plurality TLD

31

Weighted
Plurality
Weighted
F-RD
F-RD
WCD-RD
Plurality F-RD
0.839*
1
(12,246)
(12,246)
Weighted WCD-RD
0.784*
0.622*
1
(11,325)
(11,325)
(19,306)
Plurality WCD-RD
0.698*
0.640*
0.819*
(11,325)
(11,325)
(19,306)
Weighted FST
0.181*
0.121*
0.091*
(11,476)
(11,476)
(15,400)
Plurality FST
0.168*
0.114*
0.056*
(12,246)
(12,246)
(19,306)
(Number of observations in parentheses; * denotes 5% significance)

Panel B - Religious Distance

1
(1,953)
0.979*
(1,953)
-0.034
(1,378)
0.011
(1,953)

Weighted
CLD

0.926*
1
(12,246)
(12,246)
Weighted CLD
0.817*
0.798*
(1,035)
(1,035)
Plurality CLD
0.740*
0.776*
(2,145)
(2,145)
Weighted FST
0.220*
0.195*
(11,476)
(11,476)
Plurality FST
0.232*
0.210*
(12,246)
(12,246)
(Number of observations in parentheses; * denotes 5% significance)

Plurality TLD

Weighted TLD

Panel A - Linguistic Distance

1
(19,306)
0.064*
(15,400)
0.034*
(19,306)

Plurality
WCD-RD

1
(3570)
-0.058*
(2,701)
-0.031
(3,570)

Plurality CLD

1
(16,110)
0.939*
(16,110)

Weighted
FST

1
(16,110)
0.939*
(16,110)

Weighted FST

Table 2 - Simple Correlations between Linguistic, Religious and Genetic Distances

32

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Weighed
Plurality
Plurality
Weighted
Weighted
Plurality
TLD
TLD
TLD
CLD
CLD
CLD
Weighted Fst
0.242
0.385
0.284
-0.173
-0.260
-0.325
Genetic Distance
(16.54)***
(21.24)***
(14.14)***
(1.27)
(1.65)*
(3.03)***
Geodesic Distance
-0.001
-0.002
-0.018
(1000s of km)
(2.03)**
(1.73)*
(2.56)**
Absolute difference
0.030
0.037
0.214
in longitudes
(5.09)***
(4.59)***
(3.87)***
Absolute difference
0.001
0.000
-0.012
in latitudes
(0.23)
(0.03)
(0.19)
1 for contiguity
-0.087
-0.122
-0.131
(14.15)***
(14.44)***
(3.14)***
=1 if either country
0.011
0.013
0.047
is landlocked
(5.60)***
(4.88)***
(2.54)**
=1 if either country
0.010
0.010
0.052
is an island
(4.12)***
(3.06)***
(3.08)***
=1 if pair shares at
-0.059
-0.071
-0.176
least one sea or ocean
(18.07)***
(15.85)***
(9.61)***
Constant
0.935
0.937
0.922
0.925
0.624
0.646
0.672
(536.89)*** (371.07)*** (388.29)*** (267.22)*** (48.97)*** (34.36)*** (68.14)***
Adjusted R2
0.05
0.12
0.04
0.10
0.00
0.14
0.00
11,476
11,476
11,476
11,476
1,378
1,378
2,701
N
Standardized beta
0.220
0.166
0.195
0.143
-0.034
-0.051
-0.058
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
Key: TLD = Tree-based linguistic distance. CLD = %Cognate-based linguistic distance (Indo-European languages only).

(1)
Weighed
TLD
0.320
(24.12)***

Table 3 - Linguistic Distance and Contemporary Genetic Distance, Full Sample
(OLS Regressions, dependent variable displayed in the second row)
(8)
Plurality
CLD
-0.643
(5.73)***
-0.010
(2.72)***
0.197
(6.70)***
-0.059
(1.68)*
-0.215
(7.10)***
0.046
(3.94)***
0.071
(6.04)***
-0.160
(10.59)***
0.648
(45.15)***
0.17
2,701
-0.115

33

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Weighed
Plurality
Plurality
Weighted
Weighted
TLD
TLD
TLD
CLD
CLD
Weighted Fst
0.255
0.344
0.300
0.771
0.399
Genetic Distance
(24.25)***
(30.44)***
(18.51)***
(2.59)**
(1.05)
Geodesic Distance
-0.004
-0.006
-0.011
(1000s of km)
(7.23)***
(6.41)***
(0.45)
Absolute difference
0.037
0.050
0.232
in longitudes
(9.26)***
(8.12)***
(1.40)
Absolute difference
0.038
0.049
0.241
in latitudes
(7.73)***
(6.56)***
(1.02)
1 for contiguity
-0.073
-0.097
-0.173
(22.77)***
(19.77)***
(4.74)***
=1 if either country
-0.005
-0.003
0.006
is landlocked
(4.77)***
(1.85)*
(0.30)
=1 if either country
0.004
0.004
-0.116
is an island
(2.68)***
(1.78)*
(3.24)***
=1 if pair shares at
-0.021
-0.020
-0.035
least one sea or ocean
(9.95)***
(6.14)***
(1.21)
Constant
0.948
0.955
0.941
0.948
0.681
0.667
(957.57)*** (650.87)*** (628.54)*** (419.09)***
(52.95)***
(32.85)***
Adjusted R2
0.17
0.26
0.11
0.18
0.02
0.16
7,626
7,626
7,626
7,626
351
351
N
Standardized beta
0.410
0.357
0.329
0.288
0.137
0.071
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
Key: TLD = Tree-based linguistic distance. CLD = %Cognate-based linguistic distance (Indo-European languages only).

(1)
Weighed
TLD
0.293
(39.25)***

Table 4 - Linguistic Distance and Contemporary Genetic Distance, Old World
(OLS Regressions, dependent variable displayed in the second row)

0.694
(65.49)***
0.03
780
0.190

(7)
Plurality
CLD
1.334
(5.39)***

(8)
Plurality
CLD
0.423
(1.48)
0.036
(5.09)***
-0.031
(0.73)
-0.278
(3.27)***
-0.203
(7.27)***
-0.012
(0.87)
-0.009
(0.44)
-0.051
(2.15)**
0.687
(45.66)***
0.20
780
0.060

34

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Weighed
Plurality
Plurality
Weighted
Weighted
FRD
FRD
FRD
WCD-RD
WCD-RD
Weighted Fst
0.307
0.542
0.373
0.208
0.085
Genetic Distance
(14.38)***
(13.10)***
(8.01)***
(11.29)***
(4.14)***
Geodesic Distance
-0.002
-0.003
-0.002
(1000s of km)
(1.85)*
(1.24)
(2.43)**
Absolute difference in
0.042
0.072
0.077
longitudes
(4.85)***
(3.85)***
(9.33)***
Absolute difference in
-0.024
0.009
-0.023
latitudes
(2.54)**
(0.44)
(2.75)***
1 for contiguity
-0.081
-0.208
-0.095
(8.87)***
(10.41)***
(9.60)***
=1 if either country is
0.002
-0.025
0.014
landlocked
(0.83)
(3.96)***
(5.00)***
=1 if either country is
0.038
0.075
-0.016
an island
(10.56)***
(9.52)***
(5.43)***
=1 if pair shares at least
-0.069
-0.120
-0.052
one sea or ocean
(14.37)***
(11.53)***
(11.93)***
Constant
0.809
0.813
0.725
0.732
0.735
0.730
(318.81)*** (217.33)***
(131.71)***
(89.83)***
(294.46)***
(195.12)***
Adjusted R2
0.03
0.09
0.01
0.06
0.01
0.07
Number of pairs
11,476
11,476
11,476
11,476
15,400
15,225
Standardized effect
0.181
0.148
0.121
0.083
0.091
0.037
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
Key: FRD = Fearon, Meecham and Laitin religious distance. WCD-RD = World Christian Database religious distance.

(1)
Weighed
FRD
0.376
(19.70)***

Table 5 - Religious Distance and Genetic Distance, Full Sample
(OLS Regressions, dependent variable displayed in the second row)

0.604
(107.71)***
0.00
15,400
0.064

(7)
Plurality
WCD-RD
0.329
(7.95)***

(8)
Plurality
WCD-RD
0.010
(0.21)
0.008
(3.48)***
0.033
(1.76)*
-0.100
(5.19)***
-0.203
(9.03)***
-0.017
(2.67)***
0.016
(2.42)**
-0.102
(10.44)***
0.601
(70.93)***
0.04
15,225
0.002

35

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Weighed
Plurality
Plurality
Weighted
Weighted
FRD
FRD
FRD
WCD-RD
WCD-RD
Weighted Fst
0.058
0.525
0.005
0.360
-0.018
Genetic Distance
(2.13)**
(11.93)***
(0.08)
(16.44)***
(0.59)
Geodesic Distance
-0.003
-0.008
-0.003
(1000s of km)
(2.14)**
(2.41)**
(1.71)*
Absolute difference in
0.112
0.180
0.197
longitudes
(10.81)***
(7.34)***
(16.63)***
Absolute difference in
0.135
0.289
0.104
latitudes
(10.96)***
(9.90)***
(7.52)***
1 for contiguity
-0.052
-0.184
-0.066
(6.25)***
(9.24)***
(6.46)***
=1 if either country is
0.000
-0.031
0.022
landlocked
(0.04)
(4.37)***
(6.39)***
=1 if either country is
0.020
0.058
0.002
an island
(4.92)***
(5.98)***
(0.62)
=1 if pair shares at least
-0.031
-0.044
0.008
one sea or ocean
(5.50)***
(3.37)***
(1.21)
Constant
0.830
0.800
0.758
0.726
0.743
0.681
(326.57)*** (210.25)*** (127.48)*** (80.43)*** (251.17)*** (155.53)***
Adjusted R2
0.05
0.13
0.02
0.08
0.03
0.16
7,626
7,626
7,626
7,626
8,778
8,646
Number of pairs
Standardized beta
0.216
0.034
0.135
0.001
0.173
-0.009
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
Key: FRD = Fearon, Meecham and Laitin religious distance. WCD-RD = World Christian Database religious distance.

(1)
Weighed
FRD
0.363
(19.29)***

Table 6 - Religious Distance and Genetic Distance, Old World
(OLS Regressions, dependent variable displayed in the second row)

0.620
(90.64)***
0.01
8,778
0.104

(7)
Plurality
WCD-RD
0.494
(9.76)***

(8)
Plurality
WCD-RD
-0.293
(4.02)***
0.006
(1.59)
0.219
(7.75)***
0.190
(5.78)***
-0.171
(7.05)***
0.001
(0.12)
0.060
(6.18)***
0.015
(0.98)
0.522
(49.88)***
0.08
8,646
-0.061

CD,
cat. A

CD,
cat. C

CD,
cat. D

CD,
cat. E

CD,
cat. F

CD,
cat. G

CD,
binary
questions

CD,
nonbinary
questions

36

CD, category A
0.879*
1
CD, category C
0.644*
0.481*
1
CD, category D
0.619*
0.528*
0.373*
1
CD, category E
0.802*
0.598*
0.284*
0.392*
1
CD, category F
0.728*
0.544*
0.394*
0.398*
0.476*
1
CD, category G
0.431*
0.315*
0.306*
0.203*
0.298*
0.275*
1
CD, binary questions
0.870*
0.837*
0.816*
0.584*
0.515*
0.544*
0.305*
1
CD, non-binary questions
0.949*
0.787*
0.448*
0.559*
0.878*
0.749*
0.453*
0.670*
1
Weighted FST gen. dist.
0.269*
0.245*
0.074*
0.028
0.299*
0.216*
0.130*
0.147*
0.312*
(Correlations based on 2,628 observations; * denotes 5% significance).
Key for WVS question categories: Category A: Perceptions of Life. Category C: Work. Category D: Family. Category E: Politics and Society.
Category F: Religion and Morale. Category G: National Identity.

CD, all
questions

Table 7 - Correlations between Genetic Distance and Cultural Distance measures

37

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Total
Binary
Binary
Non-binary
FST genetic distance,
138.547
33.291
29.873
110.600
weighted, current match
(12.24)***
(7.60)***
(6.02)***
(16.82)***
Geodesic Distance,
-1.088
-0.334
1000s of km
(2.18)**
(1.52)
Absolute difference
0.072
0.019
in longitudes
(2.00)**
(1.21)
Absolute difference
0.108
0.037
in latitudes
(2.16)**
(1.67)*
1 for contiguity
-34.347
-13.900
(9.92)***
(9.16)***
Number of landlocked
-8.833
-4.027
countries in the pair
(7.35)***
(7.65)***
Number of island
-3.325
-2.704
countries in the pair
(2.12)**
(3.93)***
1 if pair shares at least
-12.034
-2.999
one sea or ocean
(5.23)***
(2.98)***
Constant
-10.570
-3.688
-2.368
0.702
-8.202
(10.88)***
(2.50)**
(5.58)***
(1.09)
(12.88)***
Adjusted R2
0.07
0.14
0.02
0.08
0.10
# observations
2,628
2,513
2,628
2,513
2,628
Standardized beta
0.269
0.255
0.147
0.130
0.312
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
The sample includes 73 countries (2,628 country pairs) and the total index of cultural distance is based on 98 WVS questions.

(1)
Total
143.891
(14.33)***

Table 8 - Cultural Distance and Genetic Distance
(Dependent variable: Cultural Distance, based on Euclidian distance metric)
(6)
Non-binary
108.675
(14.65)***
-0.754
(2.30)**
0.053
(2.24)**
0.071
(2.17)**
-20.447
(9.00)***
-4.806
(6.10)***
-0.622
(0.60)
-9.034
(5.99)***
-4.390
(4.54)***
0.16
2,513
0.302

47.613
(12.92)***
0.06
0.244

8.947
(3.82)***
0.01
0.074

(2)
Category C

(4)
Category E

57.536
(16.06)***
0.09
0.299

Multivariate specification a

1.555
(1.43)
0.00
0.028

Univariate Specification

(3)
Category D

24.133
(11.32)***
0.05
0.216

(5)
Category F

4.106
(6.71)***
0.02
0.130

(6)
Category G

38

FST genetic distance,
47.591
7.010
1.468
55.279
24.836
2.363
Weighted
(11.55)***
(2.62)***
(1.20)
(13.59)***
(10.09)***
(3.39)***
Adjusted R-squared
0.14
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.08
0.04
Standardized beta
0.241
0.058
0.026
0.284
0.218
0.075
(t-statistics in parentheses; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%)
The univariate specification is based on 2,628 observations (country pairs). The multivariate specification is based on 2,513 observations.
All specifications include an intercept.
Key for WVS question categories: Category A: Perceptions of Life. Category C: Work. Category D: Family. Category E: Politics and Society.
Category F: Religion and Morale. Category G: National Identity.
a
: The multivariate specification includes the following geographic controls: Geodesic distance, absolute difference in longitudes, absolute
difference in latitudes, dummy for contiguity, number of landlocked countries in the pair, number of island countries in the pair, dummy=1 if pair
shares at least one sea or ocean.

FST genetic distance,
weighted
R-squared
Standardized beta

(1)
Category A

Table 9 - Cultural Distance and Genetic Distance, by question category

Figure 1 - Genetic distance among 42 populations.
Source: Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994.

39

Figure 2 – Mecham, Fearon and Laitin Religious Tree
1.0

2.0

3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0

Asia-born Religion
1.1 South Asian Religions
1.11
Hinduism
1.2 Far Eastern Religions
1.21
Taoism
1.22
Buddhism
1.221 Therevada
1.222 Cao Dai
1.223 Hoa Hao
Near Eastern Monotheistic Religion
2.1 Christianity
2.11 Western Catholicism
2.111 Roman Catholic
2.112 Protestant
2.1121 Anglican
2.1122 Lutheran
2.1123 Presbyterian
2.1124 Methodist
2.1125 Baptist
2.1126 Calvinist
2.1127 Kimbanguist
2.1128 Church of Ireland
2.12 Eastern Orthodox
2.121 Greek Orthodox
2.122 Russian Orthodox
2.1221 Old Believers
2.123 Ukranian Orthodox
2.1231 Russian Patriarchy
2.1232 Kiev Patriarchy
2.124 Albanian Orthodox
2.125 Armenian Orthodox
2.126 Bulgarian Orthodox
2.127 Georgian Orthodox
2.128 Macedonian Orthodox
2.129 Romanian Orthodox
2.2 Islam
2.21 Sunni Islam
2.211 Shaf’i Sunni
2.22 Shi’I Islam
2.221 Ibadi Shi’i
2.222 Alevi Shi’i
2.223 Zaydi Shi’i
2.23 Druze
2.3 Judaism
Traditional
Other
Assorted
None

40

Figure 3 - World Christian Database Religious Tree
1.0

2.0

3.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
6.0
7.0

Asia-born Religion
1.1 South Asian Religions
1.11
Jains
1.12
Hindus
1.13
Sikhs
1.14
Zoroastrians
1.2 Far Eastern Religions
1.21
Confucianists
1.22
Shintoists
1.23
Taoists
1.24
Buddhists
1.25
Chinese Universists
Near Eastern Monotheistic Religion
2.1 Christians
2.11
Anglicans
2.12
Independents
2.13
Marginals
2.14
Orthodox
2.15
Protestants
2.16
Roman Catholics
2.17
Disaffiliated/Unaffiliated Christians
2.18
Doubly-Affiliated Christians
2.2 Muslims
2.3 Jews
Ethnoreligionists
Spiritists
Bha’is
Doubly Professing
Other Religionists
Nonreligionists/Atheist
7.1 Nonreligionists
7.2 Atheist

41

-2

-1

42

Figure 4 - Population Tree

0

3

2

1

time

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Figure 5 - Distribution of Correlations between Cultural and
Genetic Distances (740 questions)

‐0.223
‐0.187
‐0.151
‐0.116
‐0.080
‐0.044
‐0.008
0.028
0.063
0.099
0.135
0.171
0.206
0.242
0.278
0.314
0.350
0.385
0.421
0.457
0.493
0.528
0.564
0.600
0.636
0.672
0.707
More

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 6 - Distribution of Beta Coefficients on Genetic
Distance (740 questions, with geodesic distance control)

‐0.370
‐0.331
‐0.292
‐0.253
‐0.214
‐0.175
‐0.136
‐0.097
‐0.058
‐0.019
0.020
0.059
0.098
0.137
0.176
0.215
0.254
0.293
0.332
0.371
0.410
0.449
0.488
0.527
0.566
0.606
0.645
More

