NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MENTAL HEALTH STIGMA
Prashant Bharadwaj
Mallesh M. Pai
Agne Suziedelyte
Working Paper 21240
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21240
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
This research is funded by an ARC Discovery Project Grant (DP110100729). It was completed using
data collected through the 45 and Up Study (www.saxinstitute.org.au). The 45 and Up Study is managed
by the Sax Institute in collaboration with major partner Cancer Council NSW; and partners: the National
Heart Foundation of Australia (NSW Division); NSW Ministry of Health; beyondblue ; NSW Government
Family & Community Services Carers, Ageing and Disability Inclusion; and the Australian Red Cross
Blood Service. We thank the many thousands of people participating in the 45 and Up Study. This
project was undertaken by the University of Technology Sydney and utilized Pharmaceutical
Benefit Schedule (PBS) and Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) data supplied by the Commonwealth
Department of Human Services (DHS) and linked to the 45 and Up Study by the Sax Institute using
a unique identifier that was provided to the DHS. The 45 and Up Study has the approval of
the University of NSW Health Research Ethics Committee; this project has ethics approval from
the NSW Population and Health Services Research Ethics Committee and the Department of Health
Departmental Ethics Committee. The study's findings are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Department of Health, or the Department of Human Services. Mallesh Pai
gratefully acknowledges support from NSF Grant CCF-1101389. We have benefited from discussions
with Kate Antonovics, Victoria Baranov, Jeff Clemens, Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Mitch Downey,
Matthew Gibson, David Johnston, Hanming Fang, Anu Sansi, and Charlie Sprenger. Dr. Akshta Pai
and Jing Jing Li patiently answered questions regarding drug prescription protocols. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Prashant Bharadwaj, Mallesh M. Pai, and Agne Suziedelyte. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mental Health Stigma
Prashant Bharadwaj, Mallesh M. Pai, and Agne Suziedelyte
NBER Working Paper No. 21240
June 2015
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
Comparing self-reports to administrative data records on diagnosis and prescription drug use, we find
that survey respondents under-report mental health conditions 36% of the time when asked about diagnosis
and about 20% of the time when asked about prescription drug use. Survey respondents are significantly
less likely to under-report other conditions such as diabetes or hypertension. This behavior is consistent
with a model in which mental health illnesses are stigmatized and agents have incentives to hide such
traits from others. We show that differential under-reporting of depression is correlated with age, gender,
and ethnicity and that these characteristics also predict a lower probability of mental health treatment,
suggesting that stigma can play an important role in determining health-seeking behavior.
Prashant Bharadwaj
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu
Mallesh M. Pai
3713 Locust Walk
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mallesh@sas.upenn.edu

Agne Suziedelyte
Monash University
Centre for Health Economics,
15 Innovation Road,
Clayton VIC 3800, Australia
agne.suziedelyte@monash.edu

1

Introduction

The fear of being stigmatized or socially sanctioned and disgraced governs many aspects of
human behavior. In many cases, the fear of stigma does not result in actual behavior change
but rather leads individuals to simply hide certain behaviors or actions (for example, smoking
in secrecy). This is in line with the definition of stigma in the seminal work on the topic
by Goffman (1963): i.e., that stigma results in a “spoiled identity,” which is the result of a
deviance from social norms, and therefore leads an individual to be discredited by society. In
this instance, “the social label of deviance compels stigmatized individuals to view themselves
and others to view the stigmatized as discredited or undesirable” (Mahajan, Sayles, Patel,
Remien, Ortiz, Szekeres, and Coates, 2008). Because fear of stigma leads individuals to hide
their behaviors or characteristics, empirically quantifying the existence of stigma poses a
challenge. Despite the centrality and importance of stigma in influencing human behavior,
formal treatments of it in economics have been limited.1 However, it is commonly agreed
that stigma exists and influences behavior in many spheres.
We show the existence and consequences of stigma in an important area of public health concern: mental health. In 2012, 18.6 percent of all U.S. adults had a recent mental illness;2 the
prevalence of mental illness is similar in other developed countries. Studies show that public
knowledge about mental health illnesses has recently increased, but considerable stigmatization of individuals with mental health illnesses remains; for example, mental illness is ranked
near the bottom of other illnesses in terms of public acceptance (Hinshaw, 2007). As a result,
the negative effects of stigma have been hypothesized to be as harmful as the direct effect of
mental disorder (Hinshaw, 2007). According to the U.S. Surgeon General report, stigma is
the main barrier to mental health care: “It deters the public from seeking, and wanting to
pay for, care” (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999). Hence, stigma could
prevent individuals from seeking care, leading to more intense (and perhaps less successful)
and expensive treatment options later (Kupfer, Frank, and Perel, 1989).

1

The papers that do examine stigma have largely concentrated on explaining low program take-up in
cases where there are obvious benefits to individuals like welfare and food stamps (Moffitt, 1983; Besley and
Coate, 1992; Blumkin, Margalioth, and Sadka, 2014). Despite the large literature in this area, it is difficult
to formally test the stigma hypothesis as there are competing explanations for low program take-up, such as
transaction costs or information constraints (see Currie (2004) for an excellent review). A small theoretical
literature has examined the role of stigma in shaping individual behavior in issues such as crime and divorce
(Furuya, 2002; Blume, 2002; Ishida, 2003).
2
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/prevalence/ any-mental-illness-ami-among-adults.shtml

2

In line with Goffman’s definition of stigma, we build a simple model in which agents that have
traits that are stigmatized by society want to hide these traits from others.3 In particular,
agents face costs if traits that are stigmatized are revealed publicly, but they also face
costs for not reporting truthfully. However, in each situation where the agent is asked
about whether she has a certain stigmatized condition (an example is a survey), she is
unable to determine whether her answer will be made public (i.e., privacy concerns). Hence,
coarse perception regarding the cost of truthful reporting can generate relatively greater
misreporting for traits that are stigmatized, even on surveys where anonymity is assured.4 We
show evidence of this “hiding” behavior for mental health problems by comparing survey selfreports on diagnoses and mental health drug use to administrative data on prescription drug
use. While there could be various drivers for the differences between survey self-reports and
administrative data, our leading explanation is that if mental illnesses were not stigmatized,
the difference between self-reported survey responses and objective administrative records
should be statistically similar to other diseases. Our operational definition of stigma is
quite broad, and aggregates causes such as shame, guilt, self image, and concerns for social
discrimination, but we are able to specifically separate out labor market discrimination
concerns.
We find that approximately 36% of individuals whom we observe with a diagnosis of depression self-report as not having a mental disorder. The degree of misreporting is lower
when individuals self-report prescription drug use for depression (20%). In contrast, people
under-report other diagnoses, such as cardiovascular diseases and diabetes, about 17% of the
time (14% in the case of self-reported prescription drug use). These differences are statistically significant. Our sample is unique in that about 25% of the population are migrants to
Australia. When examining the degree of under-reporting by country of origin, our results
suggest that individuals from Asia and the Middle East are more likely to under-report relative to individuals from Northern Europe or the Americas. There is also a steep age gradient
in misreporting, with older people more likely to misreport than younger people. Males are
more likely to misreport compared to females.

3

Our model is adapted to the survey setting, but is comparable to the public good contribution model
of Benabou and Tirole (2011).
4
Our results are also evidence of stigma if we alternatively assume that agents are fully aware of the
costless nature of the survey (that no one will ever re-identify the agent’s responses to the survey). In this
case, misreporting on a survey is driven by self-image issues, which ultimately are generated by a notion of
stigma (see, for example, Bénabou and Tirole (2011) on self-signaling and self-image). Under this assumption,
we are unable to distinguish between self-image and stigma because our data does not allow us to assess
individual perceptions over the costliness of the surveys. We develop this idea more formally in Section 2.

3

We provide suggestive evidence that stigma is likely to play a role in the decision to seek
treatment by examining the characteristics of people who self-report as having mental health
issues according to a commonly used measure (the Kessler Psychological Distress scale),
but do not seek mental health treatment in the subsequent 12 months. The overlap of
socioeconomic and demographic characteristics that predict both under-reporting conditional
on seeking care and not seeking care conditional on a high probability of having mental health
problems, is suggestive of the role that stigma plays in preventing health care seeking.
We recognize that not all forms of hiding behavior or trait concealment are the result of
stigma. For example, individuals might lie on a survey given by an employer by showing
extra years of experience or misreporting other information, including mental health history,
to get a higher wage or a promotion. This sort of strategic reporting could be motivated by
an individual’s concern of stigma as well as labor market discrimination (if persons with a
mental health disorder are indeed less productive on the job). Our results are interpretable
as evidence of stigma in mental health if we assume that the labor market discrimination
motive in misreporting is similar across various diseases, such as diabetes or hypertension;
hence, the relative excess misreporting in mental health is evidence of stigma. Importantly,
our sample consists of a large number of nonemployed individuals, mainly retirees, for whom
we can plausibly claim that the labor market discrimination motive is weak; hence, for this
subsample, our reliance on the homogeneity of the labor market discrimination motive is
mitigated.
There could also be a general concern about survey reporting error that is driven by inattention, recall, lack of clear communication between doctors and patients etc. (see Bound,
Brown, and Mathiowetz (2001) for a comprehensive list). Such general explanations for differences in survey and administrative data records leads us to test a few observations. First,
these general explanations might result in all diseases and conditions being under-reported
to a similar extent. This is contradicted by the data. Second, differential misreporting
remains when we change the recall window over which we compare survey reports to administrative data, suggesting that simple recall issues are not driving our results. Third,
our results are robust to analysis that is akin to a fixed-effect model: an individual who is
treated for both cardiovascular disease and depression, for example, is much more likely to
under-report his mental health condition relative to his heart condition. Fourth, doctor fixed
effects regressions leave the results largely unchanged; hence, doctor-specific communication
strategies are not driving our results. Finally, while some anti-depressants might be used for
conditions other than depression, institutional insurance reasons and other robustness tests
that we pursue suggest that this is extremely unlikely to be driving our results.

4

Our work complements a recent set of papers in economics that focus on stigma in the
case of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) (Thornton, 2008; Derksen, Muula, and van
Oosterhout, 2014; Hoffmann, Fooks, and Messer, 2014; Ngatia, 2011).5 Using randomized
control trials, these papers highlight the role of incentives, information, and social networks
in understanding and mitigating the negative consequences of HIV-related stigma. We add
to the economic literature on health-related stigma by showing the existence of stigma in
mental health using administrative data and by directly showing “hiding” behavior, which is
one of the consequences of stigmatized traits. Our results on heterogeneity in hiding (underreporting) and how stigma might affect health-seeking behavior are additional contributions
in this space.
Our paper is also related to other papers that match self-reported health measures to administrative health records. An excellent example of such work is Baker, Stabile, and Deri
(2004) where self-reports of specific ailments are compared to administrative medical records
in Canada to better understand the use of self-reported “global wellbeing” measures. However, the data they use does not contain information on mental health, nor do they have
self-reported data on prescription drug use, both of which are central to our analysis. More
recently, work by Johnston, Propper, and Shields (2009) shows misreporting in hypertension
using data from England. However, it is unclear in their study whether there is any strategic
or stigma-driven misreporting; because the objective measures of hypertension are gathered
after self-reports of hypertension have been collected, individuals may not be aware of hypertension, as it is often asymptomatic (Johnston, Propper, and Shields, 2009). In a review
of papers comparing self-reports to medical data, Harlow and Linet (1989) find that most
papers focus on reproductive health; no examples of such comparisons in the mental health
space are cited.
Finally, our paper is also related to the literature examining the degree of misreporting in
other government programs and in surveys in general.6 In a general review of measurement
error in surveys, Bound, Brown, and Mathiowetz (2001) discuss the possibility of “social
desirability” influencing how data could be misreported. Thus, our paper adds evidence
to this literature on measurement error in surveys by providing evidence on misreporting
along an important variable of public health concern; by contrasting with other diseases, we
5

There is certainly a broader, multidisciplinary set of papers on the issue of stigma in HIV. See Mahajan,
Sayles, Patel, Remien, Ortiz, Szekeres, and Coates (2008) for an excellent review.
6
Almada, McCarthy, and Tchernis (2015) provide some excellent examples of such work in the case of
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). For example, Marquis and Moore (2010) show the
extent of under-reporting of SNAP receipt in the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) by
comparing self-reports to administrative records. See also Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2009) for measures of
under-reports in other transfer programs in the United States.

5

also posit a possible mechanism (stigma) for systematic excess under-reporting for socially
undesirable traits. In that sense, this paper is related to the literature seeking to document
and understand social desirability bias using other methods in different settings (Coffman,
Coffman, and Ericson, 2013).

2

Misreporting due to stigma

We construct a simple model of stigma and choices in the face of stigma. Each individual i
privately observes whether he has a designated condition. We denote bi = 0 if individual i
does not have the condition, and bi = 1 if he has the condition.
The individual is faced with one of multiple situations (surveys) in which he is queried about
his status with respect to this condition. We denote the set of possible situations by S, and a
specific situation by sj . The cardinality of S, denoted |S|, is at least 2. We assume that any
one of these situations is equally likely—i.e., each of these situations occurs with probability
1 7
.
|S|
The individual is free to misreport his status. Denote the response of the individual by b̂i .
This response may either be publicly revealed, or not. If the individual is in situation sj ,
his response b̂i is publicly revealed if a variable rj that he does not observe equals 1, and
is not revealed if this variable equals 0. There is a true probability πj ∈ [0, 1] that rj = 1.
This probability is a composite assessment of the probability of several possibilities that the
individual must consider: the probability that the report in the situation is explicitly made
public (for example, an answer to a question in a public forum is overheard), the possibility
that even an anonymous response is later re-identified, etc.8
The individual’s ex-post payoff is a function of his private type bi , his reported type b̂i , and
whether his report is revealed; i.e., rj —formally, we denote his ex-post payoff by ui (b̂i , bi , rj ).
Because the individual does know the realization of rj at the time he makes his report, and
instead only knows the situation he is in, we denote by Ui (b̂i , bi , sj ) his assessment of his
options in situation sj , given the fact that his true status is bi .
We make three assumptions about the agent’s payoffs. The first two assumptions structure
how the agent evaluates ex-post outcomes (ui ), while the final assumption concerns how he
aggregates these ex-ante (Ui ).

7
8

It is straightforward to generalize this to cover other distributions.
See the survey by Heffetz and Ligett (2014) for several famous instances of the latter.

6

Firstly, we assume that having the condition is “stigmatic.” In other words, we assume that
if the individual reports having the condition (b̂i = 1) and this report is revealed publicly
(rj = 1), then the individual suffers some cost ci > 0. This cost is a reduced form assessment
of the individual’s perception of harm that he will suffer if his report of having this condition
is revealed.
We posit two sources of cost—the first, cdi , is his assessment of the cost of labor market
discrimination he would suffer—e.g., reduced/lost wages, forgone employment opportunities
etc. The second, csi , is stigma—e.g., psychological cost (embarrassment, lost prestige, etc.)
or social (the fact that the individual suffers this condition becomes a part of his identity,
causing losses during interactions with other individuals, as outlined in Akerlof and Kranton
(2000)). To this end we can decompose
ci = cdi + csi .

(1)

Secondly, we assume that lying is costly to the individual. In other words, if the individual
reports b̂i 6= bi , he suffers a cost di . This cost in turn can be interpreted in two ways. The
first is that this cost is purely psychological—i.e., it is a cost of the cognitive dissonance
that results from misreporting one’s true status.9 The second is akin to ci —i.e., just as ci is
the individual’s assessment of the cost when he has the condition, di is the social cost that
will accrue to him were it revealed that he had misreported his condition status. We are
agnostic here as to the source of this cost—though, as we show below, it is important for
our interpretation that di > 0.
Note that these two assumptions amount to
ui (b̂i , bi , rj ) = −ci χ{bˆi =rj =1} − di χ{b̂i 6=bi } ,
Finally, we assume that the agent is an expected utility maximizer. However, we assume
that assessing the probability of the information being revealed in any individual situation
is not possible for this agent. Instead, we assume that he uses a composite probability of
revelation, π̄ in his assessments:
π̄ =

1 X
πj .
|S| s ∈S
j

9

For a classic reference see Festinger and Carlsmith (1959).

7

In other words, the individual averages out the probability of disclosure across situations.
We posit this is an artifact of the individual’s inability to assess the exact probability of
disclosure that he is facing in his specific situation. This may be a result of insufficient data
known to the agent about past disclosures in each of these situations, which causes him to
“coarsen” and use the aggregate probability as a more reliable summary statistic (Al-Najjar
and Pai, 2014). Alternately, it may be a result of cognitive shortcomings (Mullainathan
(2002), Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Shleifer (2008), Schwartzstein (2014)) that cause
him to be unable to discern the exact situation he is in and to therefore average over some
class of situations.
This assumption implies that:
Ui (b̂i , bi , sj ) = Eπ̄ [ui (b̂i , bi , sj )].
Given our assumptions on the payoff of the individual, some simple observations follow:
Observation 1. Any individual i who does not have the condition (i.e., bi = 0) reports his
status truthfully, regardless of the situation he is in (b̂i = 0).
This is straightforward: note that lying comes at a cost (di ), but if the agent does not have
the condition, then lying confers no benefit. However, while someone without the condition
always reports his status truthfully, someone with the condition may choose to hide his
condition.
Observation 2. An individual i with the condition (i.e. bi = 1) misreports his status
(b̂i = 0) whenever
ci π̄ > di ,

(2)

i.e., only if the (dissonance) cost of lying (di ) is less than the expected loss from revealing
the condition.
A couple of comparative statics drop out fairly immediately from (2). First, the magnitude of misreporting costs di matters—in the absence of any misreporting costs, individuals
always misreport their condition status, even if the cost ci or probability of disclosure is
infinitesimally small. Second, the coarse perception of the agent may cause misreporting in
situations that have a “low” probability of disclosure.

8

Observation 3. Suppose an individual i is faced with a situation sj such that the πj < πj 0
for any sj 0 ∈ S. Then, for an appropriate level of dissonance cost di , it can be the case that:
ci π̄ > di > ci πj .
In other words, there are settings where (counterfactually) an agent who is able to discern
the situation he is in would not choose to hide his conditions, as he assesses the probability
of disclosure as too low to be worth the dissonance cost. However, his coarse perception
causes him to overestimate the probability of disclosure and hence misreport his condition.
Finally, note that an agent with higher costs ci will misreport whenever an agent with lower
costs does, ceteris paribus. For example, fixing the cost from labor market discrimination,
cdi , and increasing the stigma csi will result in more misreporting. To see this, combine (1)
and (2) to observe that an agent with the condition misreports whenever
(cdi + csi )π̄ > di .
To summarize, this theory provides simple predictions about the nature of reporting in the
face of stigma that are borne out in our data: Firstly, coarse perception of the risk of
disclosure leads individuals to misreport their status even in anonymous surveys where the
risk is “low.” Secondly, while individuals who have the condition may choose to hide it (i.e.,
under-report), agents who do not have the condition will not choose to misreport that they
suffer from the condition (i.e., they will not over-report). Finally, fixing the labor market
discrimination cost faced by an individual, higher stigma costs lead to more misreporting.

3

Data and methods

For the empirical analysis, we use a unique data set from Australia constructed by linking
the Sax Institute’s 45 and Up Study data to the individual medical records. The 45 and Up
Study is a survey of more than 250,000 individuals 45 years of age or older residing in New
South Wales (NSW), the most populous state of Australia. The sample is drawn from the
database of Australia’s public health insurance program, Medicare, which covers all citizens
and permanent residents of Australia. People 80 years of age or older and residents of rural
and remote areas are oversampled. Information from the 45 and Up Study participants was
collected via mail questionnaires in stages from 2006 to 2009. Most of the questionnaires
(78%) were completed in 2008. Close to 18% of the sent-out questionnaires were returned,
9

resulting in the sample of 267,153 individuals (about 11% of the NSW population aged 45
years and over). The 45 and Up sample is broadly representative of the populations of NSW
and Australia in terms of most demographic and socioeconomic characteristics (age, gender,
marital status, and employment), but there is positive selection on household income (Johar,
Jones, and Savage, 2012).
For the analysis, we use the data covering the period of 2007-2010 (233,081 observations),
because the questions on mental health were not asked in 2006. After excluding a small
number of invalid observations (volunteers and individuals younger than 45) and observations
with missing values of key variables, the sample contains 215,618 individuals. Panel A of
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics of demographic and socioeconomic variables in
our analysis sample. The sample individuals are on average 63 years old. Males constitute
46% of the sample. Almost three quarters of the sample have European ancestry, and only
half identify themselves as Australians. Close to 25% of the individuals have a university
degree. Because our sample is older, a large proportion of the sample (38%) are retired.
The sample individuals live in relatively well-off areas, as measured by the SEIFA Index of
Relative Socioeconomic Advantage and Disadvantage (SEIFA): close to 30% of observations
are in the top SEIFA quintile, and less than 10% are in the bottom SEIFA quintile.
The 45 and Up Study, with the consent of all the participants, is linked to the individuals’
administrative health records, including the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) databases. At least five years of administrative records
are available for all individuals in the sample, starting September 2005 and ending August
2010. For the analysis of misreporting of mental health, we mainly use the linkage of the 45
and Up Study to the PBS database.
The PBS database includes all filled drug prescriptions covered by Medicare, with an exception of the drugs that cost less than the co-payment paid by the patient. For the general
public, the co-payment varies from A$30.70 to A$32.90 during our analysis period. For the
individuals who hold a health care concession card, the co-payment is substantially lower
(from A$4.90 to A$5.20). Once the total amount spent on prescription drugs reaches a set
amount (Safety Net threshold10 ), individuals without a concession card are also eligible for
the lower co-payment for the rest of the calendar year. Most of the drug purchases recorded
in the PBS data are made using a health care concession card (83% of all drugs and 77% of
mental health drugs). The eligibility for a health care concession card is linked to welfare
benefit receipt, veteran status, low income, and/or senior age. Thus, if there is hetero-

10

The Safety Net threshold varies from A$1,059 to A$1,265 during the analysis period.

10

geneity in stigma-related misreporting of mental illness, our results are more informative of
misreporting in the sub-population that is older and less advantaged.

3.1

Measuring under-reporting

In the first part of our analysis, we investigate the extent of under-reporting of mental
illness by matching self-reported mental health information in the 45 and Up Study to the
administrative records of filled prescriptions for mental health disorders. We use two types
of self-reported measures of mental health from the 45 and Up study.
First, individuals are asked whether a doctor has ever told them that they have a list of health
conditions, including mental disorders (see Appendix Figure B.1). In the administrative
records, we can observe whether an individual has filled any prescriptions for depression
drugs from the start date of the administrative records until the survey date. The drugs for
depression are identified using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) codes, listed
in Appendix A.1. To evaluate the extent of under-reporting of mental illness, we calculate
the proportion of individuals whom we observe filling prescriptions for depression drugs do
not report that they have been diagnosed with depression or anxiety.11 We also compute
the under-reporting rates of other health conditions: cardiovascular diseases (hypertension,
heart disease, and stroke) and diabetes12 (Appendix A.1 lists ATC codes used to identify
these conditions in the administrative data).
Second, in the 45 and Up Study, individuals are asked about their use of selected prescription
drugs in the past four weeks (see Appendix Figure B.2 for the precise survey questions). The
survey question includes three drugs most commonly used for the treatment of depression.13
These drugs account for more than half of the total depression drug sales in Australia (Mant,
Rendle, Hall, Mitchell, Montgomery, McManus, and Hickie, 2004). Almost half of all prescriptions for depression drugs in the PBS data were for one of these drugs. We create an
indicator variable that takes the value one if an individual reports taking any of the three
depression drugs in the past four weeks and the value zero otherwise. We use the administrative records to determine whether an individual filled a prescription for any of the three
depression drugs in the past month. The drugs are identified in the administrative records
using a drug-specific ATC code (more details provided in Appendix A.1). We then calculate
11

Anxiety disorders are often treated with depression drugs (AMH, 2015).
Using the same data from Australia (The Sax Institute’s 45 and Up Study), Comino, Tran, Haas, Flack,
Jalaludin, Jorm, and Harris (2013) find that individuals self-report their diabetes diagnosis fairly consistently
with the administrative health records.
13
Zoloft (sertaline), Cipramil (citaloprim), and Efexor (venlafaxine).
12

11

the under-reporting rate of depression drugs as a proportion of the individuals observed filling a prescription for any of the three depression drugs who do not report using any of these
drugs in the survey.
We also estimate the under-reporting rates of drugs used for treatment of the following other
conditions: cardiovascular and blood diseases (hypertension, congestive heart failure, high
blood cholesterol, and thrombosis), diabetes, and other diseases (heartburn, gout, and thyroid disease). As in the case of depression drugs, the other drugs included in the survey
question are the drugs that are commonly used to treat these conditions. For example,
around half of all prescriptions for hypertension and diabetes drugs were for the drugs included in the survey question. This proportion was higher for cholesterol (81%), heartburn
(73%), gout(85%), and thyroid (94%) drugs. The higher “market share” of the latter drugs
compared to depression drugs may raise a concern that individuals may be more familiar
with these drugs and therefore report their use more accurately. To address this concern, we
have re-estimated the average under-reporting rate of the other drugs, excluding cholesterol,
heartburn, gout, and thyroid drugs, and found consistent results.
Comparing the two self-reported measures of mental health, we expect individuals to be
more likely to under-report mental illness diagnosis, because the survey questions directly
asks whether they have been diagnosed with a mental disorder. Individuals may be less likely
to under-report depression drug use because the question on prescription drug use does not
specify that these are depression drugs. Another reason why the under-reporting rate of
depression drug use may be lower is that the question about prescription drug use is more
specific than the question about diagnoses.

4

Results

Table 2 presents the estimated under-reporting rates of mental disorders and other conditions. Panel A of Table 2 shows that 36.5% of people observed using depression drugs in
the administrative data do not report that they have been diagnosed with either depression
or anxiety. The average under-reporting rate of all other diagnoses is substantially lower at
17%. Diabetes has the lowest under-reporting rate (11%). Panel B of Table 2 reports the
under-reporting rates of prescription drugs. The under-reporting rate of depression drugs is
equal to 20%. The under-reporting rates of the other drugs are lower (13%-14%) and significantly different from the under-reporting rate of depression drugs at the 1% significance
level. Overall, the results presented in Table 2 suggest that the stigma of mental illness can
lead to substantial under-reporting of mental disorders in the survey data.
12

Table 2 shows that for both mental illness and other conditions, under-reporting is lower
when individuals are asked about their drug use rather than about their diagnoses. The
under-reporting rate of mental health drugs is lower by almost a half compared to the
under-reporting rate of mental illness diagnosis. For the other conditions, the differences are
smaller than for mental illness. A likely explanation for the lower degree of misreporting of
drugs compared to diagnoses is the substantially shorter time frame (past four weeks versus
lifetime). Moreover, the specificity of the question about prescription drug use might prompt
some survey responders to examine their drug purchases/receipts rather than rely solely on
memory. In the case of mental illness, the differences in the wording of the questions may
matter as well, as discussed in Subsection 3.1. These findings suggest that the framing of
survey questions may affect truthful reporting of mental illness and other conditions.
Table 3 examines under-reporting for a subset of people who use multiple drugs. This analysis
is akin to an individual fixed-effects model. For example, we take an individual observed
as taking drugs for both depression and diabetes, and examine the relative excess underreporting of mental illness for the same individual.14 Column 2 in Table 3 shows that among
people who take both drugs, mental illness diagnosis and drug use is under-reported 45%
and 22% of the time, respectively, whereas diabetes diagnosis or drug use is under-reported
only 14% of the time. Hence, the excess under-reporting of mental illnesses remains and
is robust to such individual comparisons. The results are similar for individuals who take
depression, hypertension, and diabetes drugs (Column 3).

4.1

Sensitivity analysis

In this subsection, we explore alternative explanations besides stigma for our results. First,
individuals may not recall that they have been diagnosed with a mental illness; this is unlikely
in our setting as we only focus on recent treatments for depression. If we only use the data
on the prescription drug use in the past 12 months, the under-reporting rate of depression
is 32% and the under-reporting rate of other conditions is 15%.
Second, we investigate how the estimated under-reporting rates of mental illness and other
diagnoses vary with treatment intensity. Individuals who use prescription drugs for a given
condition rarely or irregularly may be more likely to forget about their diagnosis. Additionally, such individuals may not have been told about their condition by their doctor. The
results are presented in Figure 1. In Graph A, treatment intensity is measured by the number
14

Note that prescription drug frequencies are the same for all conditions in the data; all drugs have to be
taken daily.

13

of prescriptions filled from the start date of the administrative records to the survey date,
and in Graph B, it is measured by the duration of the longest treatment spell (in months).
For both measures of treatment intensity, we find that under-reporting of mental illnesses
indeed decreases with higher treatment intensity, but so does under-reporting of other conditions. Among individuals who have been treated for depression for short periods of time,
the under-reporting rate of mental illness diagnosis is higher than 50%. Among those who
have been treated for depression for relatively long periods of time, the under-reporting rate
of mental illnesses is close to 20%. Importantly, individuals are more likely to under-report
mental illness compared to other conditions, irrespective of treatment intensity.
Third, we address the possibility that our results are driven by doctor, rather than patient,
behavior. We might be concerned that a doctor may withhold mental illness diagnosis from
a patient for various reasons–for example, to not distress the patient. However, according to
the “Australian Guidelines for Medical Practitioners on Providing Information to Patients”,
a doctor can withhold information from the patient only under exceptional circumstances
(National Health and Medical Research Council, 2004). Doctors treating depression patients
are recommended to take patient preferences into account when prescribing antidepressant
treatment (Ellis and Smith, 2002). Still, some doctors might be unclear at communicating
the specifics of illnesses to their patients. Under the assumption that doctors are equally
unclear at communicating all types of illnesses to their patients, Table 4 presents the results
of a doctor fixed-effects specification (we can uniquely identify the prescribing doctor in the
administrative data). The main takeaway from this table is that for both, diagnosis and
prescription drug use, doctor fixed-effects do little to alter the results. Hence, doctor specific
communication issues are not likely to drive the main results.
A more nuanced issue with regards to communication between doctors and patients is that
doctors might be particularly unwilling to “label” their patients as being “depressed.” The
doctor fixed effects specification does not solve this issue. To deal with this possibility, we
present an important stylized fact from our data in Figure 2. If doctors either label or do
not label their patients as “depressed,” under the null that there is no mental health stigma,
the doctor-specific under-reporting rate of mental illness should be bi-modal—for a given
doctor, either all patients under-report, or all patients truthfully report. However, Figure 2
shows that there is a full distribution of under-reporting responses by patients that see the
same doctor.
A fourth concern is that some patients may be treated with multiple depression drugs before
an effective drug is found. This might lead mental health patients to be more uncertain of
the exact type of drugs they are currently taking and more likely to misreport in the survey.
14

We address this concern in Table 5 by examining under-reporting rates for patients who do
not switch drugs in the 6 months prior to the survey to patients who switch. Our headline
results from Table 2 are largely replicated in Column 1 of this table, showing that drug
switching is not driving our results. While the misreporting for switchers is higher (Column
4), the sheer number of switchers are small relative to the overall sample.
Fifth, we tackle the issue of multiple uses for depression-related drugs. Depression drugs may
be prescribed for the treatment of other conditions besides depression or anxiety. Depression
drugs can be used to treat depressive episodes of bipolar disorder (AMH, 2015). A patient
prescribed a depression-related medication, might be taking it for conditions related to physical pain. For example, diabetic neuropathy is one such condition (Goodnick, Jimenez, and
Kumar (1997) and Sindrup, Grodum, Gram, and Beck-Nielsen (1991)). We show that this
is not a major concern for us for four principle reasons. First, while this would be a relevant
worry if we only compared questions about self-reported diagnosis to prescription drug use,
it is not a concern when we compare self-reported prescription drug use to administrative
reports on drug use. Second, Australian insurance rules regarding reimbursement are quite
strict—most common antidepressants are only covered by insurance if they are prescribed
for depression.15 Third, in Table 6 we show that our results are not affected by excluding
patients who take antipsychotic drugs, which are used to treat bipolar disorder. Fourth, in
Table 6, we also show our results are robust to the removal of any antidepressant prescribed
by a neurologist who typically handles cases related to neuropathic pain. Finally, the most
dominant form of antidepressants that are prescribed for chronic pain are tricyclic antidepressants (McQuay, Tramer, Nye, Carroll, Wiffen, and Moore, 1996). The under-reporting
rate of mental illnesses decreases from 36% to 27% when we exclude patients taking tricyclic
antidepressants, but it still is substantially higher than the under-reporting rate of the other
conditions. Note that this may be a conservative estimate, because tricyclic antidepressants
have worse side effects than other antidepressants and are prescribed for severe depression
when other drugs do not work (AMH, 2015); thus, they may be most under-reported.
A few minor concerns remain. We show that the results are robust to alternative ways to
calculate under-reporting rates. Specifically, we had to decide how to treat individuals who
leave the question about diagnoses blank—that is, they do not report that they have been
diagnosed with any of the conditions listed in the survey question, but they also do not select
the option “none.” In Table 2, we count them as non-reporting any of the conditions; thus,
these individuals contribute to the estimated under-reporting rates of diagnoses. In Appendix
15

For example, sertraline (Zoloft): http://www.pbs.gov.au/medicine/item/2236Q-2237R-8837D-8836C,
page accessed on April 14th, 2015

15

Table B.1, we present the under-reporting rates of diagnoses when these individuals are,
instead, omitted from the sample. The re-estimated under-reporting rate of mental illness
diagnosis decreases, but only slightly so (to 34%), as do the under-reporting rates of other
diagnoses.
Another is related to “over-reporting.” We cannot examine over-reporting of diagnoses, as
not all diagnoses result in medication being prescribed (whereas all prescription medications
require diagnosis), but we can examine over-reporting of prescription drugs. We define overreporting rate as the proportion of individuals who report taking a particular drug in the
survey who are not observed purchasing this drug in the administrative data. Stigma in
mental health should not lead to any over-reporting; instead, we hypothesize that any overreporting is likely due to survey inattention, lack of doctor-patient communication, recall
biases, etc. Given that these potential reasons for over-reporting are not unique to mental
illness, we also hypothesize that over-reporting should not be systematically higher or lower
for mental illness compared to other conditions. In Appendix Table B.2, we examine overreporting of prescription drug use and find that depression drugs do get over-reported, but
at nearly the same rate as other drugs. Hence, over-reporting of depression drug use is
likely due to general survey errors. Finally, it might be the case that mental health drugs
have more generic options than other drugs, and hence cause issues with remembering exact
drug types. We discuss this in detail in section A.1.2 in the Appendix, and conclude that
this is not an issue in this context since mental health drugs and other drugs have similar
shares of generic options. As Appendix Figure A.1.2 in the Appendix shows, the ordering
of the prescription drug question on the survey questionnaire places it at the very end of
the question box. While this might cause these variables to be under-reported due to survey
fatigue, we note that this question is one of the first questions in the survey on medical
history of the patient; moreover, the drug question on diabetes is the question just prior to
the ones on depression.

4.2

Heterogeneity and Mental Health Care Seeking Behavior

4.2.1

Heterogeneity

In this subsection, we first analyze whether under-reporting of depression drug use varies by
the dose of a drug. The treatment of depression usually starts with a lower dose of a drug.
If the low-dose treatment is not effective, the dose is increased.16 Therefore, individuals who
16

http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Antidepressant-drugs/pages/introduction.aspx

16

take a lower dose of a drug are likely to be more recently diagnosed with depression and/or
have less severe depression. Recently diagnosed patients may be more likely to hide their
mental illness than patients with a longer history of depression, some of whom adapt to
their illness and feel less self-stigma. On the other hand, the relationship between disease
severity and under-reporting of mental illness can go both ways. On the one hand more
severe patients may be more likely to under-report mental illness, because they feel more
stigmatized (Hinshaw, 2007). On the other hand, if more severe patients face higher costs
of hiding their mental illness, they will be less likely to under-report.
We test these hypotheses in Table 7, in which we present under-reporting rates of depression
drugs by the dose of a drug. Appendix A.2 explains how we define “low” and “high” dose.17
The results show that low-dose depression drugs are under-reported at a higher rate than
high-dose depression drugs. This finding is unlikely to be driven by the variation in recall by
dose, because we do not find the same pattern for the other drugs. To get further insights
in the results, we divide depression patients into two groups by the length of treatment (12
months or less (25%) versus more than 12 months (75%)).18 Table 7 shows the following: (1)
for both groups of patients, under-reporting of high dose drugs is lower; (2) under-reporting
of both low- and high-dose drugs decreases with the length of treatment. Taken together,
these findings suggest that (1) more severe depression patients may indeed find it more costly
to hide their illness, and (2) more recent mental health patients may feel more stigma.
Our data also allows us to examine heterogeneity in under-reporting by demographic characteristics. A recent meta analysis of internalized stigma finds that stigma of mental illness
does not seem to systematically (and in a statistically significant way) vary by gender, age,
education, employment, and ethnicity (Livingston and Boyd, 2010). For example, results on
heterogeneity by gender are mixed, with some studies finding that men feel more stigmatized
than women and other studies finding the opposite. Most studies find that the perception
of stigma decreases with age, although there are studies with contrary findings. All studies
that find a significant relationship between employment and perceived stigma report that
more educated and employed individuals are less likely to feel stigmatized than less educated
and nonemployed individuals. Finally, there is evidence that non-Caucasian individuals are
more likely to feel stigmatized than Caucasian individuals (Livingston and Boyd, 2010). We
investigate whether there is variation in under-reporting of mental illness by these charac-

17

Out of 5,810 individuals who take depression drugs, close to 50% take a low dose of a drug, 35% take
a high dose of a drug, and for the rest we cannot determine the dose.
18
Consistent with treatment guidelines, a smaller proportion of new depression patients (25%) take highdose depression drugs compared to patients who have been treated for depression for longer (50%).

17

teristics and also whether these characteristics in general correlate with under-reporting of
other conditions.
Figure 3 shows that in our data, under-reporting of mental illness diagnosis increases sharply
from age 55 to 75 and then levels off, while the under-reporting rate of depression drug use
does not vary with age until 65 and then starts increasing. In Figure 4, we compare underreporting of mental illness by gender and education. Males are more likely to under-report
mental illness than females, irrespective of education level. Under-reporting of mental illness
is lower among university graduates. Figure 5 presents the under-reporting rates of mental
illness by individuals’ employment status and local area SES. The employed are somewhat
less likely to under-report mental illness than the nonemployed. On the other hand, the
differences in under-reporting of mental illness by local area SES are small.
In Table 8, we analyze the differences observed in the raw data more formally by regressing
the indicator for not reporting a mental health condition (Column 1) or drug use (Column
2) on gender, age, SES, and ancestry, conditional on taking depression drugs any time before
the survey (Column 1) or in the past 4 weeks (Column 2). The results of the regressions
are consistent with Figures 3 and 4. We find that under-reporting of mental illness increases
with age. Males and individuals without university degrees are found to be significantly more
likely to under-report mental illness. Controlling for other characteristics, we no longer observe significant differences in under-reporting of mental illness by employment (except for
the unemployed being more likely to under-report depression drug use). However, there is
a negative local area SES gradient in under-reporting of mental illness. We find some interesting results on ethnicity. Individuals from Asian, African, or Middle Eastern ethnic backgrounds are significantly more likely to under-report mental illness, especially mental illness
diagnosis, whereas having European ancestry decreases the probability of under-reporting
mental illness. We wish to highlight that the heterogeneity results are specific to mental illness and that these characteristics are not correlated with under-reporting of all conditions
(see Appendix Table B.3).
4.2.2

Health care seeking behavior

We next examine whether characteristics associated with mental illness under-reporting also
predict health-seeking behavior.19 To examine this question, we use information on both
mental health drug use and visits to a mental health professional. The information on the
visits to a mental health professional comes from the MBS data. All medical services covered
19

To perform this analysis, we need to make some sample restrictions, described in Appendix A.3.

18

by Medicare are recorded in the MBS data, including general practitioner (GP) and specialist
visits. Medicare does not cover psychologist visits for the general population, but patients
with a diagnosed mental disorder are eligible to receive compensation for a limited number of
psychologist visits (starting 1 November 2006). Close to 3% of all individuals in our sample
have visited a mental health professional in the past 12 months.
We first identify individuals who are deemed to be in “need” of mental health treatment
according to the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10), as explained in Appendix A.3
(n = 1,620). We use the results from Table 8 to predict the probabilities of under-reporting
mental illness diagnosis and mental health drug use for these individuals. We then examine
whether these predicted probabilities are correlated with treatment-seeking behavior in the
subsequent 12 months. The underlying hypothesis is that characteristics that correlate with
under-reporting conditional on seeking treatment should also predict lower probability of
seeking treatment. On average, about 18% of this selected sample receive treatment for
mental health in the subsequent 12 months (i.e., we observe that they use depression or
anxiety drugs or visit a mental health professional). Importantly, we account for concerns
about general “access” to health professionals by controlling for the number of GP visits in
the past 12 months and presenting results on GP visits as well.
Table 9 presents the results. Consistent with our initial hypothesis that stigma might play
a role in preventing health care seeking, we find that individuals with a higher predicted
probability of under-reporting are also less likely to seek mental health care (even though they
are more likely to seek care from a GP). A 10% increase in the probability of misreporting
on the diagnosis question reduces the probability of seeking mental health care by 11% (the
corresponding number for under-reporting on the prescription question is even larger at
nearly 23%). In Table B.4, we further examine which particular characteristics are driving
the results presented in Table 9. Consistent with the heterogeneity results on under-reporting
of mental illness, we find that the probability of seeking mental health treatment decreases
with age, although older people have more GP visits overall. Similarly, Asian, African,
or Middle Eastern individuals are less likely to receive mental health treatment, although
they visit a GP more often. We also find that men are less likely to receive mental health
treatment than women, but men also have fewer GP visits than women. Overall, the results
are suggestive that the stigma of mental illness may affect not only reporting of mental illness
but also seeking mental health treatment.

19

5

Conclusion

Conditional on taking prescription medication, we find that individuals are much more likely
to under-report diagnosis and prescription drug use regarding mental health ailments, compared to other conditions. We interpret the additional misreporting in mental health as
evidence of the stigma of mental health issues. Our simple model posits that if mental
health concerns are seen as an undesirable trait in society, people are more likely to hide
them, even when the costs of truthfully reporting are quite low.
Our interpretation of misreporting as evidence of stigma is based on a broad definition of
stigma. It is perhaps natural to think of stigma as taste-based discrimination (people dislike
others with depression), with the resulting costs. Since we only observe individual agents’
reporting choices, we are unable to separate misreporting directly due to stigma concerns
from misreporting due to the agent’s intrinsic motivations such as guilt, shame, self-image
issues, etc. In our context, therefore, stigma is an amalgam of these forces. We posit that
these intrinsic motivations also arise indirectly from the same basic force—in the absence of
discrimination concerns, there is nothing to feel shameful/guilty about.
We can separate this notion of stigma from concerns about labor market discrimination—
since a large portion of our sample is retired, we can claim that there is no labor market based
statistical discrimination motive in their responses. In future work, we hope to shed light
on the more nuanced differences between discrimination concerns and the related intrinsic
motivations mentioned above.
The most important facet of stigma that pertains to public health policy is the extent to
which it might prevent individuals from seeking appropriate care. Our results show that
stigma concerns play a significant role in determining health care seeking behavior in the
case of mental health. To the extent that policy or broader market forces can reduce stigma
in mental health, our conclusions suggest that this will lead to more individuals seeking and
obtaining treatment, and eventually lessening the burden of the disease.

20

References
Akerlof, G. A., and R. E. Kranton (2000): “Economics and identity,” Quarterly
journal of Economics, 115(3), 715–753.
Al-Najjar, N. I., and M. M. Pai (2014): “Coarse decision making and overfitting,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 150, 467–486.
Almada, L., I. M. McCarthy, and R. Tchernis (2015): “What Can We Learn About
the Effects of Food Stamps on Obesity in the Presence of Misreporting?,” (February
11, 2015). Available at SSRN:http://ssrn.com/abstract=2563822orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.2563822.
AMH (2015): Australian Medicines Handbook. Australian Medicines Handbook : Adelaide,
S.Aust.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2012): “Use of the Kessler Psychological Distress
Scale in ABS Health Surveys, Australia, 2007-08,” Information paper, catalogue no.
4817.0.55.001.
Baker, M., M. Stabile, and C. Deri (2004): “What do self-reported, objective, measures of health measure?,” Journal of Human Resources, 39(4), 1067–1093.
Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2011): “Identity, morals, and taboos: Beliefs as assets,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 805–855.
Benabou, R., and J. Tirole (2011): “Laws and norms,” Discussion paper, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Besley, T., and S. Coate (1992): “Understanding welfare stigma: taxpayer resentment
and statistical discrimination,” Journal of Public Economics, 48(2), 165–183.
Blume, L. (2002):
“Stigma and social control,” Discussion
Ökonomie/Economics Series, Institut für Höhere Studien (IHS).

paper,

Reihe

Blumkin, T., Y. Margalioth, and E. Sadka (2014): “Welfare Stigma Re-examined,”
Journal of Public Economic Theory, doi: 10.1111/jpet.12109.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001): “Measurement error in survey
data,” Handbook of econometrics, 5, 3705–3843.

21

Coffman, K. B., L. C. Coffman, and K. M. M. Ericson (2013): “The size of the
LGBT population and the magnitude of anti-gay sentiment are substantially underestimated,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Comino, E., D. Tran, M. Haas, J. Flack, B. Jalaludin, L. Jorm, and M. Harris
(2013): “Validating self-report of diabetes use by participants in the 45 and up study: a
record linkage study,” BMC Health Services Research, 13(1), 481.
Currie, J. (2004): “The take up of social benefits,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 10488.
Derksen, L., A. Muula, and J. van Oosterhout (2014): “Love in the Time of HIV:
Theory and Evidence on Social Stigma and Health Seeking Behavior,” .
Ellis, P. M., and D. A. R. Smith (2002): “Treating depression: the beyondblue guidelines
for treating depression in primary care,” Medical Journal of Australia, 176(10), S77–S83.
Festinger, L., and J. M. Carlsmith (1959): “Cognitive consequences of forced compliance.,” The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58(2), 203.
Furuya, K. (2002): “A socio-economic model of stigma and related social problems,”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 48(3), 281–290.
Goffman, E. (1963): Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Simon and
Schuster.
Goodnick, P. J., I. Jimenez, and A. Kumar (1997): “Sertraline in diabetic neuropathy:
preliminary results,” Annals of clinical psychiatry, 9(4), 255–257.
Harlow, S. D., and M. S. Linet (1989): “Agreement between questionnaire data and
medical records: the evidence for accuracy of recall.,” American Journal of Epidemiology,
129(2), 233–48.
Heffetz, O., and K. Ligett (2014): “Privacy and Data-Based Research,” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 28(2), 75–98.
Hinshaw, S. P. (2007): The mark of shame: Stigma of mental illness and agenda for
change. Oxford University Press, New York.
Hoffmann, V., J. R. Fooks, and K. D. Messer (2014): “Measuring and Mitigating
HIV Stigma: A Framed Field Experiment,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
62(4), 701–726.

22

Ishida, J. (2003): “The role of social norms in a model of marriage and divorce,” Journal
of economic behavior & organization, 51(1), 131–142.
Johar, M., G. Jones, and E. Savage (2012): “Healthcare Expenditure Profile of Older
Australians: Evidence from Linked Survey and Health Administrative Data,” Economic
Papers: A journal of applied economics and policy, 31(4), 451–463.
Johnston, D. W., C. Propper, and M. A. Shields (2009): “Comparing subjective and
objective measures of health: Evidence from hypertension for the income/health gradient,”
Journal of health economics, 28(3), 540–552.
Kupfer, D. J., E. Frank, and J. M. Perel (1989): “THe advantage of early treatment
intervention in recurrent depression,” Archives of General Psychiatry, 46(9), 771–775.
Livingston, J. D., and J. E. Boyd (2010): “Correlates and consequences of internalized
stigma for people living with mental illness: A systematic review and meta-analysis,”
Social Science & Medicine, 71(12), 2150–2161.
Mahajan, A. P., J. N. Sayles, V. A. Patel, R. H. Remien, D. Ortiz, G. Szekeres,
and T. J. Coates (2008): “Stigma in the HIV/AIDS epidemic: a review of the literature
and recommendations for the way forward,” AIDS (London, England), 22(Suppl 2), S67.
Mant, A., V. A. Rendle, W. D. Hall, P. B. Mitchell, W. S. Montgomery,
P. R. McManus, and I. B. Hickie (2004): “Making new choices about antidepressants
in Australia: the long view 19752002,” Medical Journal of Australia, 181(7), 21.
Marquis, K. H., and J. C. Moore (2010): “Measurement errors in SIPP program reports,” Survey Methodology, 1.
McQuay, H., M. Tramer, B. Nye, D. Carroll, P. Wiffen, and R. Moore (1996):
“A systematic review of antidepressants in neuropathic pain,” Pain, 68(2), 217–227.
Meyer, B. D., W. K. Mok, and J. X. Sullivan (2009): “The under-reporting of transfers in household surveys: its nature and consequences,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 15181.
Moffitt, R. (1983): “An economic model of welfare stigma,” The American Economic
Review, 73(5), 1023–1035.
Mullainathan, S. (2002): “Thinking through categories,” Unpublished manuscript:
http://www.chicagobooth.edu/research/workshops/theoryoforg/archive/PDF/
mullainathan.pdf.

23

Mullainathan, S., J. Schwartzstein, and A. Shleifer (2008): “Coarse thinking and
persuasion,” Quaterly Journal of Economics, 123(2).
National Health and Medical Research Council (2004): “General Guidelines for
Medical Practitioners on Providing Information to Patients,” Commonwealth of Australia.
Ngatia, M. (2011): “Social interactions and individual reproductive decisions,” Discussion
paper, Working paper, Yale University.
Schwartzstein, J. (2014): “Selective attention and learning,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 12(6), 1423–1452.
Sindrup, S. H., E. Grodum, L. F. Gram, and H. Beck-Nielsen (1991):
“Concentration-response relationship in paroxetine treatment of diabetic neuropathy
symptoms: a patient-blinded dose-escalation study.,” Therapeutic drug monitoring, 13(5),
408–414.
Thornton, R. L. (2008): “The demand for, and impact of, learning HIV status,” The
American economic review, 98(5), 1829.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999): “Mental Health: A Report
of the Surgeon General.,” Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health
Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental Health.

24

Figure 1: Variation in under-reporting rates of mental illness and other diagnoses by treatment
intensity.

Under-reporting rate
.2
.4
0

0

Under-reporting rate
.2
.4

.6

B. Longest treatment spell, months

.6

A. Total number of prescriptions filled

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

4th quartile

1st quartile

2nd quartile

3rd quartile

Mental illness

Mental illness

Other conditions

Other conditions

4th quartile

Notes: The under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals observed
purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report this condition in the survey. In Graph
A, treatment intensity is measured by the total number of prescriptions filled, and in Graph B, it
is measured by the duration of the longest treatment spell (in months).

25

0

2

4

Percent
6

8

10

Figure 2: Doctor-specific under-reporting rates of mental illness diagnosis

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Proportion of patients underreporting mental illness diangnosis

1

Notes: The under-reporting rate for each doctor is estimated as the proportion of his/her patients
observed purchasing drugs for depression who do not report mental illness diagnosis in the survey.

26

.1

.2

Under-reporting rate
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure 3: Variation in under-reporting rate of mental illness by age

40

50

60

70

80

90

Age
Diagnosis
Drug use

Notes: The under-reporting rate of mental illness diagnosis is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for depression drugs who do not report mental illness
diagnosis in the survey. The under-reporting rate of mental health drug use is estimated as the
proportion of individuals observed purchasing drugs for depression who do not report using
depression drugs in the survey. The lines in the graph represent the estimates of Epanechnikov
kernel-weighted local polynomial regression estimates. Top 1% of the age distribution are
excluded from estimations.

27

0

.1

Under-reporting rate
.2
.3

.4

Figure 4: Variation in under-reporting rate of mental illness by sex and education

No university

University

No university

Female

University

Male
Diagnosis
Drug use

Notes: The under-reporting rate of mental illness diagnosis is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for depression who do not report mental illness diagnosis in
the survey. The under-reporting rate of mental health drug use is estimated as the proportion of
individuals purchasing drugs for depression who do not report depression drug use in the survey.

28

0

.1

Under-reporting rate
.2
.3

.4

Figure 5: Variation in under-reporting rates of mental illness by employment status and local
area socioeconomic status.

Non-employed

Employed

Non-employed

Lower SES area

Employed

Higher SES area
Diagnosis
Drug use

Notes: The under-reporting rate of mental illness diagnosis is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for depression who do not report mental illness diagnosis in
the survey. The under-reporting rate of mental health drug use is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for depression who do not report depression drug use in the
survey. A “lower” (“higher”) socioeconomic status area is as an area with lower (greater) than
median SEIFA index.

29

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of key variables

Mean (sd)
A.Demographic and socioeconomic characteristics
Age
Male
Ancestrya :
Australian/New Zealand
European
Asian
African/Middle Eastern
American
University degree
Employment status:
Self-employed
Employed for wages
Unemployed
Retired
Other
Local area SES (SEIFA Index):
1st quintile
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile
B. Self-reported lifetime diagnoses
Depression/Anxiety
Cardiovascular diseaseb
Diabetes
C. Self-reported prescription drug use in past 4 weeks
Depression
Cardiovascular diseasec
Diabetes
Other conditiond

62.59(11.05)
0.46
0.53
0.71
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.24
0.13
0.35
0.02
0.38
0.12
0.10
0.17
0.24
0.21
0.28
0.19
0.42
0.09
0.04
0.38
0.05
0.26

Observations
215,618
a
Notes: Ancestry categories are not mutually exclusive, because respondents can select
more than one ancestry. b Hypertension, heart disease, or stroke. c Hypertension,
congestive high failure, high blood cholesterol, or thrombosis. d heartburn, gout, or thyroid
problems.

30

Table 2: The under-reporting rates of mental illness and other conditions

Under-reporting rate

Difference from MI

Estimate

Estimate

S.E.

S.E.

Observationsa

A. Self-reported diagnoses
Mental illness
0.365
(0.003)
31,199
Other conditions:
0.169
(0.001)
−0.196∗∗∗ (0.003)
94,188
b
∗∗∗
Cardiovascular diseases
0.178
(0.001)
−0.187
(0.003)
80,344
∗∗∗
Diabetes
0.113
(0.003)
−0.252
(0.004)
13,844
B. Self-reported prescription drug use
Mental illness
0.196
(0.005)
5,810
Other conditions:
0.136
(0.001)
−0.059∗∗∗ (0.005)
108,045
Cardiovascular diseasesc
0.139
(0.001)
−0.057∗∗∗ (0.005)
77,711
∗∗∗
(0.007)
5,026
Diabetes
0.129
(0.005)
−0.067
Other diseasesd
0.130
(0.002)
−0.066∗∗∗ (0.006)
25,308
Notes: In panel A, under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals
observed purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report this condition in the
survey. In panel B, under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals
observed purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report using these drugs in the
survey. Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses. a Unit of
observation is individual-condition. b Hypertension, heart disease, or stroke. c Hypertension,
congestive high failure, high blood cholesterol, or thrombosis. d heartburn, gout, or thyroid
problems. ∗∗∗ indicates that the under-reporting rate of the condition is different from the
under-reporting rate of mental illness at the 1% significance level.

31

Table 3: Within-individual differences in the under-reporting rates of mental illnesses and other
conditions

MI+CVD

MI+Diabetes

MI+CVD+Diabetes

(1)

(2)

(3)

A. Self-reported diagnoses
Mental illness

0.441
0.446
0.462
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.009)
Cardiovascular diseasesa
0.213
0.202
(0.003)
(0.007)
[−0.227]∗∗∗
[−0.260]∗∗∗
Diabetes
0.140
0.133
(0.006)
(0.006)
[−0.307]∗∗∗
[−0.329]∗∗∗
Observations
17,521
3,523
3,098
B. Self-reported prescription drug use
Mental illness
0.221
0.224
0.250
(0.010)
(0.023)
(0.030)
Cardiovascular diseasesb
0.144
0.149
(0.009)
(0.025)
[−0.077]∗∗∗
[−0.101]∗∗∗
Diabetes
0.142
0.144
(0.019)
(0.024)
[−0.081]∗∗∗
[−0.106]∗∗∗
Observations
1,636
344
208
Notes: The sample consists of individuals who take drugs for mental illness as well as
cardiovascular disease and/or diabetes. MI stands for mental illness, and CVD for
cardiovascular disease. In Panel A, under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report this
condition in the survey. In Panel B, under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of
individuals observed purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report using these
drugs in the survey. Standard errors in parentheses. The differences between the
under-reporting rates of other conditions and mental illnesses in square brackets.
a
Hypertension or heart disease; b Hypertension. ∗∗∗ indicates that the under-reporting rate
of the condition is different from the under-reporting rate of mental illness at the 1%
significance level.

32

Table 4: Within-doctor differences in the under-reporting rates of mental illness and other conditions

Difference from MI
Estimate
A. Self-reported diagnoses
Cardiovascular diseasesa
Diabetes

−0.169∗∗∗
−0.239∗∗∗

Observationsb
Doctors

S.E.
(0.002)
(0.003)

263,326
17,955

B. Self-reported prescription drug use
Cardiovascular diseasesc
−0.060∗∗∗
Diabetes
−0.079∗∗∗
d
Other diseases
−0.070∗∗∗

(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.005)

Observationsb
116,573
Doctors
9,495
Notes: In Panel A, under-reporting is defined as not reporting a given condition in the
survey conditional on purchasing drugs for this condition. In Panel B, under-reporting is
defined as not reporting drug use for a given condition in the survey conditional on
purchasing these drugs. Presented figures are estimates of prescribing doctor fixed-effects
regressions. Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses.
a
Hypertension, heart disease, or stroke. b Unit of observation is individual-doctor-condition.
c
Hypertension, congestive high failure, high blood cholesterol, or thrombosis. d Heartburn,
gout, or thyroid problems. ∗∗∗ indicates that the under-reporting rate of a condition is
different from the under-reporting rate of mental illness at the 1% significance level.

33

Table 5: Variation in the under-reporting rates of prescription drugs by the number of conditionspecific drugs taken in the past 6 months

One drug

More than one drug

Mean

Diff. from MI

na

Mean

Diff. from MI

na

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Mental illness (MI)

0.187
0.283
(0.005)
5,280
(0.020)
530
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Other conditions:
0.134
0.053
0.143
0.140
(0.001)
(0.006)
77,478
(0.002)
(0.020)
30,567
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Cardiovascular diseases
0.136
0.051
0.145
0.148
(0.002)
(0.006)
52,298
(0.002)
(0.020)
25,413
Diabetes
0.145
0.042∗∗∗
0.117
0.166∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.009)
2,143
(0.006)
(0.020)
2,883
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Other diseases
0.128
0.059
0.156
0.127
(0.002)
(0.006)
23,037
(0.008)
(0.021)
2,271
Notes: The under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals observed
purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report using these drugs in the survey.
Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses. a Unit of observation is
individual-condition.

34

Table 6: Sensitivity of results to taking into account alternative uses of antidepressants: underreporting rate of mental illness diagnosis

Estimate

S.E.

Observations

Excluded observations:
Patients treated for bipolar disorder
0.375
(0.003)
29,548
Antidepressants prescribed by neurologist
0.359
(0.003)
29,967
Tricyclic antidepressants
0.271
(0.003)
23,240
All of the above
0.275
(0.003)
21,292
Notes: Under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals observed
purchasing drugs for depression who do not report mental illness diagnosis in the survey.
Standard errors in parentheses.
Table 7: Variation in the under-reporting rates of prescription drugs by dose

Low dose
Estimate

High dose
S.E.

Estimate

S.E.

Mental illness:
All patients
0.237
(0.008)
0.145
(0.008)
Treated for ≤ 12 months
0.354
(0.017)
0.220
(0.028)
Treated for > 12 months
0.192
(0.009)
0.136
(0.008)
Other conditions:
All patients
0.135
(0.002)
0.144
(0.002)
Notes: The under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion of individuals observed
purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report using these drugs in the survey.
Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses.

35

Table 8: Variation in under-reporting rate of mental illness by demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics.

Diagnosis

Prescription drug use

Estimate
Age
Male
Ancestry:
Australian/New Zealand
European
Asian
African/Middle Eastern
American
University degree
Employment status:a
Self-employed
Employed for wages
Unemployed
Local area SES:
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile

S.E.

Estimate

S.E.

0.013∗∗∗
0.026∗∗∗

(0.000)
(0.006)

0.004∗∗∗
0.033∗∗∗

(0.001)
(0.011)

−0.009
−0.042∗∗∗
0.146∗∗∗
0.094∗∗∗
0.076∗∗
−0.070∗∗∗

(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.031)
(0.007)

−0.003
−0.028∗∗
0.082∗
0.060
−0.021
−0.045∗∗∗

(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.046)
(0.054)
(0.073)
(0.015)

0.008
0.001
−0.012

(0.011)
(0.008)
(0.015)

0.011
0.013
0.056∗∗

(0.023)
(0.015)
(0.026)

−0.007
−0.012
−0.016∗
−0.025∗∗∗

(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.010)

−0.006
−0.011
−0.023
−0.043∗∗

(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.018)
(0.019)

Mean (dep var)
0.365
0.196
Observations
31,199
5,810
Notes: In Column 1, the sample consists of individuals who purchased depression drugs at
some time between the start date of the administrative records and the survey date, and
the dependent variable takes the value 1 if an individual does not report mental illness
diagnosis in the survey and the value 0 otherwise. In Column 2, the sample consists of
individuals who purchased selected depression drugs in the past month, and the dependent
variable takes the value 1 if an individual does not report using these drugs in the survey
and the value 0 otherwise. Presented figures are probit average marginal effects.
Regressions control for the time effects. a Omitted category is nonemployed. ∗ denotes
statistical significance at the 10% level, ∗∗ denotes statistical significance at the 5% level,
and ∗∗∗ denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.

36

Table 9: Variation in health care seeking by predicted probability of under-reporting of mental
illness

[
P
rob(U Rdiagnosis ), %
[
P
rob(U Rdrugs ), %
Number of GP visits last year

GP visits

MH treatment

GP visits

MH treatment

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.041∗∗∗
(0.009)
0.671∗∗∗
(0.019)

−0.002∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.074∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.679∗∗∗
(0.018)

−0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

Mean(dep var)
10.747
0.175
10.747
0.175
Observations
1,618
1,618
1,618
1,618
Notes: See Appendix A.3 for the details on the sample. In Columns (1) and (3), the
dependent variable is the number of GP visits in the next 12 months from the survey date
and presented figures are OLS coefficients. In Columns (2) and (4), the dependent variable
takes the value 1 if an individual took prescription drugs for depression/anxiety or visited a
mental health professional in the next 12 months from the survey date and the value 0
otherwise and presented figures are probit average marginal effects. Standard errors are in
parentheses. ∗∗∗ denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.

37

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Matching survey data to administrative records

A.1.1

Diagnoses

The drugs for different conditions are identified in the administrative data using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification System, controlled by the World Health
Organization Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology (WHOCC)20 . The following table provides the ATC codes related to the health conditions we analyze.
Disease/Health Condition

ATC codes

Depression
Cardiovascular disease
Diabetes

N06A
All C codes, except for C10a
A10

Notes: a C10 group of ATC codes consists of cholesterol lowering drugs. Individuals are
not asked whether they have been diagnosed with high blood cholesterol in The 45 and Up
Study.
A.1.2

Drugs

We match the drugs from the survey question on prescription drug use to the administrative
records using a drug-specific ATC code. For example, ATC code for sertraline is N06AB06,
ATC code for citaloprim is N06AB04, and ATC code for venlafaxine is N06AX16.
For depression drugs, both drug (active ingredient) name (e.g., sertraline) and brand name
(e.g. Zoloft) are mentioned in the survey drugs. Therefore, both patients who use a brandname drug and patients who use generic versions of the drug should report this in the survey,
especially that the names of most generic depression drugs contain the name of the active
ingredient. For example, generic sertraline drugs are called APO-Sertraline, Auro-Sertraline
50, Chem mart Sertraline, Eleva 50, GenRx Sertraline, Sertra 50, Sertracor 50, Sertraline AN,
Sertraline Actavis, Sertraline Sandoz, Sertraline generic health, Sertraline-DRLA, Setrona,
Terry White Chemists Sertraline and Xydep 50. Having said that, we may be somewhat
over-estimating the under-reporting of depression drugs because of people who use generic
depression drugs that do not contain the active ingredient in their name (like Xydep 50).
20

http://www.whocc.no/atc ddd index/

38

Although the active ingredient is always listed on the package, people may not pay attention
to this information.
For some of the other drugs (most of the hypertension, cholesterol, and heartburn drugs),
however, there is only a brand name mentioned in the survey question and the name of
the drug (active ingredient) is not specified. Thus, individuals who use a generic version of
the drug may answer negatively about their use of these drugs. Consequently, the underreporting of the other drugs is likely to be over-estimated, more so than the under-reporting
of depression drugs, and the true difference between the under-reporting rates of depression
and other drugs may be even larger than our estimate.
It is also important to note that the availability of generic alternatives is comparable between the depression drugs and the other most commonly used drugs. For example, there
are on average 14 generic versions of the branded depression drugs (15 for Zoloft, 13 for
Cipramil, and 14 for Efexor). The hypertension drugs have on average 9, cholesterol drugs
14, and diabetes drugs 11 generic versions of the respective branded drugs. Moreover, it
is as common to include the active ingredient in the name of the generic depression drugs
(64% of the generic depression drugs on average) as it is for the other drugs. For example, 67% of the generic hypertension drugs have the active ingredient included in the name.
The corresponding figures for the generic cholesterol and diabetes drugs are 71% and 82%,
respectively.

A.2

Dose

The PBS data have information on the strength of the drug, which we use to classify drugs
into low and high dose. We refer to the patient information sheets for each drug to define
“low” and “high” dose of a drug. For example, one of the depression drugs, Zoloft (sertraline)
comes in 50 mg and 100 mg tablets. According to the patient information sheet, one 50 mg
tablet is a usual starting dose, which can be increased gradually up to 200 mg a day if
necessary.21 Thus, we define 50 mg as “low” dose and 100 mg as “high” dose of Zoloft
(sertraline).
Our definition of low and high dose relies on an assumption that individuals take one unit
(tablet/capsule) of the prescribed drug per day. Some patients may be prescribed low-dose
drugs but instructed by their doctor to take more than one unit of a drug per day. In this
case, we may misclassify some of the high-dose patients as low-dose patients. To minimize
21

http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcmed.nsf/pages/pfczolot/$File/pfczolot.pdf

39

this type of measurement error, we exclude: (1) patients who purchase more than one pack
of a low-dose drug at a time, and (2) patients who fill another script for the same low-dose
drug within 14 days from the first script (17% of all depression drug users in total). We are
do not have enough information to determine whether these patients take a low dose or a
high dose of a drug. Additionally, we exclude a small number of patients (n=37) who took
both a low dose and a high dose of the drug in the past month.
Another related issue is that patients may be prescribed a combination of multiple low dose
drugs for depression. In this case, some of the low-dose depression drug users (as per our
definition) may, in fact, take a high combined dose of depression drugs, which again leads to
measurement error. To address this issue, we check what proportion of low-dose depression
drug users are taking other depression drugs. We find that this proportion is low (3%).
Consequently, excluding these individuals does not affect our results.

A.3

Analysis of health care seeking: sample selection

In Subsection 4.2.2, an individual is defined as receiving “mental health treatment” if he is
prescribed depression/anxiety drugs or is referred to a mental health professional (psychiatrist or psychologist), as per the administrative medical records. Since we can observe the
complete history of prescription drug use only for the individuals who hold a health care
concession card, we restrict the sample to the concessional individuals in the analysis of
health care seeking. More specifically, we limit the sample to the individuals who purchased
prescription drugs, other than for depression or anxiety, using a health care card both in the
year before and in the year after the survey date (41% of the sample).
To identify individuals in need of treatment, we further restrict the sample to the individuals
with a likely moderate or severe mental disorder, according to the Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10), which is based on the self-reported depressive and anxiety symptoms. The
scores of the Kessler scale vary from 10 (no psychological distress) to 50 (severe psychological
distress). A score of 25 or more indicates that an individual is likely to have a moderate or
severe mental disorder (Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2012). We exclude individuals who
have received mental health treatment in the past 12 months, because we want to focus on
“new” mental health patients. Individuals who have died in hospital within 12 months from
the survey date and the outliers of GP visits (top 1%) are also excluded from the sample.

40

B

Additional tables and figures
Figure B.1: Survey question on diagnoses.

Notes: The left panel presents the question asked to women and the right panel the
question asked to men.

41

Figure B.2: Survey question on prescription drug use.

42

Table B.1: Sensitivity of results to alternative variable coding: under-reporting rates of diagnoses

Under-reporting rate

Difference from MI

Estimate

Estimate

S.E.

S.E.

Observationsa

Mental illness
0.344
(0.003)
30,191
∗∗∗
Other conditions:
0.146
(0.001)
−0.198
(0.003)
91,718
Cardiovascular diseasesb
0.155
(0.001)
−0.188∗∗∗ (0.003)
78,191
Diabetes
0.093
(0.002)
−0.251∗∗∗ (0.004)
13,527
Notes: In this table, we code individuals who do not report any health conditions in the
survey but do not state that they have no health conditions as missing (in Table 2, we code
them as non-reporting any conditions). Under-reporting rate is estimated as the proportion
of individuals observed purchasing drugs for a given condition who do not report this
condition in the survey. Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses.
a
Unit of observation is individual-condition. b Hypertension, heart disease, or stroke. ∗∗∗
indicates that the under-reporting rate of a condition is different from the under-reporting
rate of mental illness at the 1% significance level.

43

Table B.2: The over-reporting rates of prescription drugs for mental illness and other conditions

Over-reporting rate

Difference from MI

Estimate

Estimate

S.E.

S.E.

Observationsa

Mental illness
0.158
(0.005)
4,920
∗
Other conditions:
0.148
(0.001)
−0.010
(0.005)
114,402
Cardiovascular diseasesb
0.110
(0.001)
−0.048∗∗∗ (0.005)
75,569
∗∗∗
Diabetes
0.176
(0.004)
0.018
(0.007)
7,265
d
∗∗∗
Other diseases
0.233
(0.002)
0.076
(0.006)
31,568
Notes: The sample consists of concessional individuals. See Appendix A.3 for the details
how concessional individuals are identified. Over-reporting rate is estimated as the
proportion of individuals reporting drug use for a given condition in the survey in the past
4 weeks who did not purchase drugs for this condition in the past 3 months. Standard
errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses. a Unit of observation is
individual-condition. b Hypertension, congestive high failure, high blood cholesterol, or
thrombosis. d Heartburn, gout, or thyroid problems. ∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate that the
over-reporting rate of a condition is different from the over-reporting rate of mental illness
at the 10% and 1% significance level, respectively.

44

Table B.3: Variation in under-reporting rates of other conditions by demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.

Diagnosis

Prescription drug use

(1)

(2)

Age
0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
∗∗∗
Male
−0.053
(0.003)
0.005∗∗
(0.002)
Ancestry:
Australian/New Zealand
−0.011∗∗∗
(0.003)
−0.015∗∗∗
(0.003)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
European
−0.019
(0.003)
−0.019
(0.003)
∗∗∗
Asian
0.009
(0.008)
0.048
(0.007)
African/Middle Eastern
0.046∗∗∗
(0.010)
0.050∗∗∗
(0.009)
American
0.024
(0.016)
0.016
(0.015)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
University degree
−0.023
(0.004)
−0.026
(0.004)
Employment status:b
Self-employed
−0.016∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
Employed for wages
−0.034∗∗∗
(0.004)
−0.004
(0.004)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Unemployed
0.023
(0.008)
0.054
(0.008)
Local area SES:
2nd quintile
0.003
(0.005)
−0.003
(0.004)
∗
3rd quintile
−0.003
(0.004)
−0.008
(0.004)
4th quintile
−0.009∗
(0.005)
−0.011∗∗
(0.004)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
5th quintile
−0.013
(0.005)
−0.024
(0.004)
Mean (dep var)
0.169
0.136
Observationsa
94,188
108,045
Notes: In Column (1), the sample consists of individuals who purchased drugs for a
cardiovascular disease and/or diabetes at some time between the start date of the
administrative records and the survey date, and the dependent variable takes the value 1 if
an individual does not report this condition in the survey and the value 0 otherwise. In
Column (2), the sample consists of individuals who purchased drugs for a cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, and/or other conditions in the past month, and the dependent variable
takes the value 1 if an individual does not report using these drugs in the survey and the
value 0 otherwise. Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses.
Regressions control for the time effects. a Unit of observation is individual-condition.
b
Omitted category is nonemployed. ∗ denotes statistical significance at the 10% level, ∗∗
denotes statistical significance at the 5% level, and ∗∗∗ denotes statistical significance at the
1% level.

45

Table B.4: Variation in health care seeking by demographic and socioeconomic characteristics.

Number of GP visits last year
Age(demeaned)
Age(demeaned)2 /100
Male
Asian/African/Middle Eastern
University degree
Employment status:a
Self-employed
Employed for wages
Unemployed
Local area SES:
2nd quintile
3rd quintile
4th quintile
5th quintile

GP visits

Mental health treatment

(1)

(2)

0.663∗∗∗
0.050∗∗∗
−0.040
−0.475
1.253∗∗∗
−0.402

(0.019)
(0.017)
(0.100)
(0.311)
(0.454)
(0.544)

0.004∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗
−0.072∗∗∗
−0.068∗∗
0.024

(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.020)
(0.031)
(0.034)

−0.465
−0.120
−0.080

(0.744)
(0.523)
(0.545)

−0.065
−0.044
−0.006

(0.051)
(0.034)
(0.035)

−0.500
0.451
1.192∗∗
0.646

(0.487)
(0.459)
(0.490)
(0.536)

0.064∗∗
0.073∗∗
0.033
0.046

(0.032)
(0.030)
(0.033)
(0.035)

Mean(dep var)
10.747
0.175
Observations
1,618
1,618
Notes: See Appendix A.3 for the details on the sample. In Column (1), the dependent
variable is the number of GP visits in the next 12 months from the survey date. In Column
(2), the dependent variable takes the value 1 if an individual took prescription drugs for
depression/anxiety or visited a mental health professional in the next 12 months from the
survey date and the value 0 otherwise. Standard errors in parentheses. a Omitted category
is nonemployed. ∗ denotes statistical significance at the 10% level, ∗∗ denotes statistical
significance at the 5% level, and ∗∗∗ denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.

46

