NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DECLINING DESIRE TO WORK AND DOWNWARD TRENDS IN UNEMPLOYMENT
AND PARTICIPATION
Regis Barnichon
Andrew Figura
Working Paper 21252
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21252

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

We would like to thank Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker (the editors), Robert Hall and Richard
Rogerson (our discussants) as well as Vladimir Asriyan, Vasco Carvalho, Davide Debortoli, Chris
Foote, Bart Hobijn, Andreas Hornstein, Chris Nekarda, Kris Nimark, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Thijs
van Rens, Martin Schneider, Justin Wolfers and Yanos Zylberberg for helpful comments. We also
thank Roger Gomis, Erik Larsson, and Sebastien Willis for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or of the Federal Reserve
System. Barnichon acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad
(grant ECO2011-23188), the Generalitat de Catalunya (grants 2009SGR1157 and 2011BPB00152)
and the Barcelona GSE Research Network. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Regis Barnichon and Andrew Figura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Declining Desire to Work and Downward Trends in Unemployment and Participation
Regis Barnichon and Andrew Figura
NBER Working Paper No. 21252
June 2015
JEL No. E24,J6
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that a key aspect of the US labor market is the presence of time-varying heterogeneity
across nonparticipants. We document a decline in the share of nonparticipants who report wanting
to work, and we argue that that decline, which was particularly strong in the second half of the 90s,
is a major aspect of the downward trends in unemployment and participation over the past 20 years.
A decline in the share of "want to work" nonparticipants lowers both the participation rate and the
unemployment rate, because a nonparticipant who wants to work has (i) a higher probability of entering
the labor force (compared to other nonparticipants), and (ii) a higher probability of joining unemployment
conditional on entering the labor force. We use cross-sectional variation to estimate a model of nonparticipants'
propensity to want to work, and we find that changes in the provision of welfare and social insurance,
possibly linked to the mid-90s welfare reforms, explain about 50 percent of the decline in desire to
work among nonparticipants.

Regis Barnichon
CREI and Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
rbarnichon@crei.cat
Andrew Figura
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
andrew.figura@frb.gov

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21252

1

Introduction

The US labor market has witnessed two remarkable secular trends in the last 30 years. First,
the unemployment rate declined secularly after the early 80s, prompting policy makers to
adjust downward their estimate of the natural rate or NAIRU (Non-Accelerating In‡ation
Rate of Unemployment), as shown in Figure 1. Second, a decline in labor force participation
has brought down the participation rate to a level not seen in 30 years (Figure 2).
However, considerable uncertainty remains about the underlying reasons for these trends.
While the aging of the baby boom generation has often been cited as a possible factor,1
it is not clear that demographics alone is responsible for these trends. This uncertainty is
best illustrated with the recent lively debate about the "cyclical" or "structural" nature (i.e.,
persistence) of the low participation rate observed today.2
This paper argues that a key, but so far little studied, aspect of the secular changes witnessed by the US labor market is the presence of time-varying heterogeneity across nonparticipants (individuals outside the labor force), i.e., changes in the composition of the nonparticipation pool. We document a strong decline in desire to work among nonparticipants in the
second half of the 90s, and we show that that decline is a major aspect of the downward trends
in unemployment and participation over the past 20 years.
The Current Population Survey (CPS) has been measuring individuals’ desire for work
consistently since 1967, allowing us to construct a measure of nonemployed individuals’desire
to work over 1967-2014. We …nd that the share of nonparticipants who want to work has been
declining secularly over the past 30 years, with a particularly strong decline during the second
half of the 90s.
A downward trend in the share of nonparticipants who want a job has consequences for
the aggregate unemployment and participation rates, because people who want a job behave
di¤erently from people who do not want a job. Using matched CPS micro data to measure
worker transitions between labor market states, we …nd that a nonparticipant who wants a job
enters the labor force (i) often and (ii) mostly through unemployment, while a nonparticipant
who does not want a job enter the labor force (i) rarely and (ii) mostly through employment.
Because of this di¤erence in behavior, a decline in the fraction of nonparticipants who want
a job lowers both the unemployment rate and the participation rate. We develop a stock-‡ow
accounting framework to quantify this e¤ect, and we …nd that the decline in nonparticipants’
1

Since older workers have lower unemployment and participation rates than younger workers, an older population will have both lower unemployment and participation rates. The aging of the baby boom generation has
been proposed to explain the inverse U-shape movement in unemployment since the early 70s (Perry (1970),
Flaim (1979), Gordon (1982), Summers (1986), and Shimer (1998, 2001)).
2
See, e.g., Aaronson et al. (2012), Elsby and Shapiro (2012), Mo¢ tt (2012), Sherk (2012), Van Zandweghe
(2012), Erceg and Levin (2013), Hotchkiss, Pitts and Rios-Avila (2013).

2

desire to work since the mid-90s lowered the unemployment rate by about 0.5 ppt and the
participation rate by 1.75 ppt. This is a large e¤ect: in comparison, the widely studied aging of
the baby boom lowered unemployment by 0.7 ppt and participation by 2.5 ppt over the same
time period. Taken together, population aging and variations in the share of "want a job"
nonparticipants can account for the bulk of the low-frequency movements in unemployment
since the late 60s.
We conclude that a better understanding of the characteristics of individuals outside the
labor force is crucial to understand the trends in unemployment and participation, and in the
second part of the paper, we explore possible explanations for the decline in nonparticipants’
desire to work in the second half of the 90s.
Looking across di¤erent sub-groups, the decline in the number of nonparticipants who
want to work is due mainly to prime-age females, and, to a lesser extent, young individuals.
Moreover, the decline is mainly a low-income and non-single household phenomenon (with
virtually no decline in desire to work among single households), and is stronger for families
with children than without.
We estimate a model of nonparticipants’propensity to want a job, in which desire to work
can depend on individual characteristics, the family structure, as well as the di¤erent sources
of income, both at the individual and at the family level. We use time …xed e¤ects, so that our
coe¢ cient estimates depend on cross sectional variation, and we use our estimates to predict
changes in desire to work since the mid-90s.
Our estimates imply that changes in the provision of (i) welfare insurance and (ii) social
insurance (mainly disability) explain about 50 percent of the decline in the share of "want a
job" nonparticipants. This …nding suggests a possible role for the major welfare reforms of the
90s –the 1993 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) expansion and the 1996 reform of the Aid
to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program–, which precisely a¤ected low-income
households with children.
We then use a di¤erence-in-di¤erence strategy to try to identify the causal e¤ects of the
EITC expansion and the AFDC reform on low-income mothers. The strategy exploits the facts
that households without children receive little EITC or AFDC bene…ts and were therefore
little a¤ected by the reforms. The di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates attribute between 50 and
70 percent of the decline in mothers’desire to work to the welfare reforms. In other words, the
welfare reforms pushed some nonparticipants further away from the labor force. Thus, while the
"welfare to work" reform –designed to strengthen the incentives to work and to bring welfare
recipients into the labor force– is generally considered to have been successful in bringing
many nonparticipants into the labor force (Blank, 2002), our results imply that the e¤ect of
the reform may have been more subtle than previously thought. For some nonparticipants,
3

the reform appears to have had the opposite of the intended e¤ect.
Although the existence of di¤erent degrees of desire to work among nonparticipants has
been previously documented (Hall 1970, Clark and Summers, 1979), the existence of a secular
trend in desire to work and its e¤ects on the participation and unemployment rates are, as far
as we know, novel. Moreover, the e¤ect of nonparticipants’ characteristics on the aggregate
unemployment rate measure underscores the di¢ cult issue of the appropriate de…nition of
unemployment and the distinction between the "unemployment" and "out of the labor force"
classi…cations (Clark and Summers 1979, Flinn and Heckman, 1983, Jones and Riddell, 1999).
To quantify how the decline in desire to work a¤ects unemployment and participation, we
build on a large literature, going back at least to Darby, Haltiwanger and Plant (1986), that
studies the ‡ows of workers in and out of unemployment.3
Finally, the possibility that changes in the provision of social transfers can a¤ect desire to
work and thereby the aggregate unemployment and participation rates echoes Juhn, Murphy
and Topel (2002) and Autor and Dugan (2003) who argue that the growing attractiveness of
disability bene…ts relative to work increased the number of individuals outside the labor force.
Section 2 documents the decline in the fraction of nonparticipants willing to work; Section
3 quanti…es how the decline in nonparticipants willing to work a¤ects the unemployment and
participation rates; Section 4 discusses the robustness of our results; Sections 5 explores the
possible reasons for the decline in desire to work; Section 6 concludes.

2

Fewer people want to work

In this section, we show that the fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting to work" has
displayed substantial secular movements, with a particularly strong decline during the second
half of the 90s.

2.1

"Do you want a job now?"

To measure the extent to which nonemployed individuals are interested in working, we use data
collected by the BLS. Since 1967, the Current Population Survey (CPS) has been consistently
asking the question "Do you currently want a job now, either full or part-time?" to nonemployed individuals outside the labor force, also called "nonparticipants". We use the answer
to this question to separate nonparticipants into two groups; nonparticipants who want a job,
denoted N w and nonparticipants who do not want a job, denoted N n .
3

See, among others, Blanchard and Diamond (1989, 1990), Bleakley, Ferris and Fuhrer (1999), Jones and
Riddell (1999), Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009), Fujita and Ramey (2009), Barnichon (2012), Shimer (2012),
and Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin (2013).

4

Since the phrasing of the CPS question did not change over 1967-2014, we can construct
a consistent time-series of the share of nonparticipants who want to work over 1976-2014; i.e.,
the ratio
mt

Ntw
Ntw + Ntn

with Ntw and Ntn the respective number of "want a job" and "not want a job" nonparticipants.
For the period covering 1967-1975, we tabulated the data from successive BLS Employment
and Earnings publications, and for the period covering 1976-2014, we used micro data from
the CPS.
Figure 3 shows that the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants (mt ) displays an inverse
U-shape pattern over over 1967-2014, with a particularly strong decline in the second half of
the 90s.4;5 Interestingly, the behavior of the Congressional Budget O¢ ce (CBO)’s estimate of
the natural rate –one estimate of the long-run level of unemployment–displays a pattern that
is similar to that of mt ., a point to which we will later return.6

2.2

"Want a job" vs. "Not want a job"

While the trend in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants is striking, for it to be of any
consequence for the aggregate labor market, people who want to work must behave di¤erently
from people who do not want to work.
To evaluate whether this is the case, we match the CPS micro data over 1994-2010 to
measure and compare the transition rates of nonparticipants who report wanting a job (denoted
N w ) with the transition rates of nonparticipants who report wanting a job (denoted N n ).7
Figure 4 shows a representation of the labor market with three states –Employment (E),
Unemployment (U) and Nonparticipation (N)–, and reports the average monthly transition
rates out of Nonparticipation (either to E or U) for "want a job" nonparticipants (N w ) and
"not want a job" nonparticipants (N n ).
4

There is a subtle di¤erence in the survey before and after 1994. While the "desire for work" question is
asked to all rotation groups after 1994, it is only asked to the outgoing rotation groups before 1994, i.e., 1/4
of the sample. We veri…ed that this di¤erence did not a¤ect our measurement, by calculating the fraction of
marginally-attached using only the outgoing rotation groups over the whole sample 1976-2010, and compared
it with our main measure. Although this alternative measure is more noisy, the two series behave remarkably
similarly after 1994.
5
To assess the robustness of our …nding, we use another, little studied, CPS question that has also been
consistently asked since 1976: "Do you intend to look for work during the next 12 months?". That measure
also displays a marked decline in the second half of the 1990s.
6
Although not the focus of this paper, it is also interesting to note that desire to work among nonparticipants
is strongly counter-cyclical.
7
See the Appendix for details on the construction of these series, in particular the time-aggregation bias
correction. Since the question about "desire for work" was only asked to the outgoing rotation groups prior to
1994, we cannot measure worker ‡ows in and out of N w or N n prior to 1994, because we do not observe the
labor force status over two consecutive months.

5

We can see that someone who wants a job behaves very di¤erently from someone who does
not want a job.
First, someone who wants a job (N w ) is very likely to enter the labor force in the near
future (

NwU

+

fE; U; N w ; N n g

NwE

= :62, where

to state B 2

AB

denotes the average transition rate from state A 2

fE; U; N w ; N n g).

In other words, someone who wants a job is at

the margin of participation. In contrast, someone who does not want a job (N n ) is unlikely
to enter the labor force in the near future (

N nU

+

N nE

= :05) and is thus "far" from the

participation margin and from labor force activity.
Second, a "want a job" nonparticipant is much more likely to enter the labor force through
unemployment than through employment (

NwU

>

NwE

), but this is the opposite for a "not

want a job" nonparticipant: someone who does not want a job is much more likely to enter the
labor force through employment (

N nE

>

N nU

). These two di¤erences in behavior between

"want a job" and "not want a job" nonparticipants –the fact that
N nE

N nU

NwU

NwE

> 0 and

> 0– will later prove crucial, when we consider how changes in the share of

"want a job" nonparticipants a¤ect the unemployment rate.
To dig a little deeper, we study whether a di¤erence between "want a job" and "not want
a job" nonparticipants continues to exist once nonparticipants enter the labor force. Table
1 compares the transition rates of recent (entered a month ago) labor force entrants with
the transition rates of other labor force participants (who entered the labor force more than a
month ago).8 We can see that recent labor force entrants have much higher transition rates back
to nonparticipation. However, although "want a job" and "not want a job" nonparticipants
display very di¤erent transition rates into participation (Figure 4), the di¤erence is much less
marked once these individuals are inside the labor force. Table 1 shows that their job …nding
rates are similar and that their labor force exit rate are somewhat comparable. Interestingly,
a former "not want a job" (N n ) is more likely to leave the labor force than a former "want a
job" (N w ).

2.3

The fraction of "want a job" across demographic groups

Looking at di¤erent demographics, a decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants can
be seen among prime-age females, prime-age males and young workers. However, in terms of
the number of individuals a¤ected by the decline, the decline is mainly a prime-age female,
and to a lesser extent young worker, phenomenon.
First, similarly to Figure 3, Figure 5 plots mit , the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants
for four demographic subgroups (denoted with the subscript i): Prime-age male 25-55, Prime8

To do so, we match CPS micro data over three consecutive surveys (see Nekarda, 2009), and we adjust the
transition probabilities for time-aggregation bias as described in the Appendix.

6

age female 25-55, Younger than 25 and Over 55. In all groups except for old workers, mit
displays an inverted-U shape, rising in the 70s and declining in the second-half of the 90s.9
However these percentage point declines hide large di¤erences in the number of individuals
a¤ected by the decline in desire to work. Between 1994 and 2001, the number of primeage female willing to work declined by 930,000, of young individuals by 680,000, and the
number of prime-age male declined by "only" 250,000. Thus, the decline in desire to work is
predominantly a (i) prime-age female, and (ii) young individuals phenomenon. This di¤erence
between groups was not apparent in the behavior of the share of "want a job" nonparticipants,
because that measure does not capture di¤erences in participation rates across groups. In
particular, since prime-age males have a very high participation rate, there are few prime-age
male nonparticipants, so that the decline in mit is a phenomenon that a¤ected only a very
small share of the prime-age male population. This is not the case for prime age females and
young individuals.

3

Declining share of "want a job" and movements in unemployment and participation

Given the marked di¤erences in labor market behavior between "want a job" and "not want a
job" individuals, movements in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants may a¤ect the aggregate unemployment and participation rates. In this section, we use a stock-‡ow accounting
framework to quantify these e¤ects.
We make two points. First, the share of "want a job" nonparticipants is an important
aspect of the inverse U-shape behavior of unemployment between the early 1970s and the
early 2000s. Second, the decline in desire to work in the second-half of the 90s is related to
the currently low level of participation in the US.

3.1

Some accounting

Our starting point is a labor market described by four labor market states: Employment (E),
Unemployment (U ), Nonparticipant who wants a job (N w ) and Nonparticipant who does not
want a job (N n ).
As in the "Ins and Outs" literature (e.g., Shimer, 2012), we assume that the labor market
can be described by a Markov chain of order 1,10 so that the number of employed Et , unem9

For young workers, the secular decline appears to go back to the early 80s, pointing to an older phenomenon.
Since we found that the most striking di¤erence between N w and N n individuals was in their transition
rates into the labor force (and not their subsequent transition rates once inside the labor force), we assume that
the labor market with 4 states can be described by a Markov chain of order 1. In other words, once inside the
10

7

ployed Ut , "want a job" nonparticipants Ntw and "not want a job" nonparticipants Ntn satis…es
the system

0

0

B
=@

EU

EN w

EN n

E

1

C
B
B U C
C
B
tB
w C
@ N A
Nn t

UE

EU

UE

UN

w

EN w

UNw

EN n

UNn

AB
denotes
t
fE; U; N w ; N n g.

and where
B2

0

C
B
B U C
C
B
B Nw C =
A
@
n
N
t

with

t

1

E

UN

n

NwE

NnE

w

n

N
NwU

(1)

U

1

N U

NwE

NwNn

NnNw

NwNn

NnU

NnE

NnNw

the hazard rate of transiting from state A 2 fE; U; N w ; N n g to state

We can then use (1) to express any stock variable, for instance the unemployment rate

ut =

Ut
Et +Ut

and the participation rate lt =

LFt
P opt

with the population P opt = Et +Ut +Ntw +Ntn ,
AB
t j

as functions of the (present and past) worker transition rates

; 8j > 0 . For the US,

such functions are particularly simple, because the magnitude of the worker ‡ows are so large
that, at a quarterly frequency, the labor market is very well described by the steady-state of
system (1).11 As detailed in the Appendix, the steady-state of system (1) then gives us an
accounting identity that allows to express the unemployment rate ut and participation rate lt
as functions u(:) and l(:) of the 12 contemporaneous hazard rates

AB
t

.

Then, it is easy to write ut and lt as functions of the transition rates out of Employment
(E), Unemployment (U ), and Nonparticipation (N , including all nonparticipants, N w or N n )
with

(

ut = u(
lt = l

AB
t
AB
t

)

; A; B 2 fE; U; N g

where the N-U and N-E transition rates, denoted

NU
t

and

NE
t ,

(2)

are weighted averages of the

labor force, N w and N n individuals behave like the other labor force participants. In the appendix, we consider
a richer model that allows N w and N n individuals to continue behaving di¤erently once inside the labor force.
The quantitative results are similar to what we report in the main text. This is because N w and N n individuals
do not behave very di¤erently once inside the labor force. Thus, a change in the ratio of N w and N n individuals
a¤ect the unemployment rate mostly through the di¤erences in their labor force entry rates.
11
In the U.S., the magnitudes of the hazard rates are such that the half-life of a deviation of unemployment
from its steady state value is about one month (Shimer, 2012).

8

C
A

t

two transition rates out of N w and N n
(
NU
= mt
t
NE
t

=

NwU
t
wE
mt N
t

+ (1

mt )

+ (1

mt )

N nU
t
N nE
t

(3)

with the weight mt given by the share of "want a job" nonparticipants.
Since nonparticipants who want a job behave very di¤erently from the nonparticipants who
do not want a job (in particular,

NwU

>>

N nU

), changes in the fraction of nonparticipants

who want a job will a¤ect the transition rates out of Nonparticipation through (3) and thus
the unemployment and participation rates through (2).

3.2

Quantifying the e¤ect of lower desire to work

A Taylor expansion of the accounting identities (2) around the mean of the hazard rates
(

AB
t

'

AB

) and a little bit of algebra with (3) gives (see the Appendix for more details)

that the e¤ect of a change in the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants on the aggregate
unemployment rate, denoted dum
t , is given by
dum
t =

NwU

NU

NU

N nU

NwE

N nE

(mt

NE

NU

with m the average fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants, and
the …rst-order Taylor expansion of ut with respect to

m)

(4)

> 0, the coe¢ cient of

NU
t .

The e¤ect of a decline in desire to work on the aggregate unemployment rate is a priori
ambiguous. On the one hand, as captured by the …rst term on the right-hand side of (4),
a decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants lower the average NU transition rate
since "want a job" nonparticipants are more likely to join unemployment than "not want a
job" nonparticipants (

NwU

N nU

> 0), and this lowers the unemployment rate. On the

other hand, as captured by the second term on the right-hand side of (4), a decline in the
share of "want a job" nonparticipants lowers the average N-E transition rate, since "want
a job" nonparticipants are more likely to join employment (

NwE

N nE

> 0), and this

increases the unemployment rate. In practice however, a lower share of nonparticipants who
want to work unambiguously implies a lower unemployment rate. The two hazard rates out of
nonparticipation,

NU

NE

and

, are of similar magnitudes and

NU
NE

the e¤ect of a change in m on the unemployment rate is given by
NwU

|

NwE

{z

>0

+(
} |
9

N nE

N nU

{z

>0

)>0
}

' 1, so that the sign of

which is unambiguously positive for two reasons: (i) a nonparticipant who wants a job enters
the labor force mainly through unemployment (

NwU

NwE

> 0), and (ii) a nonparticipant

who does not want a job enters the labor force mostly through employment (

N nE

N nU

> 0).

To quantify the e¤ect of changes in the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants on the
labor force participation rate, we proceed in the exact same fashion and calculate dltm from
a relation similar to (4). Contrary to the unemployment rate, a decline in mt has an unambiguous e¤ect on the labor force participation rate. Since a lower fraction of "want a job"
nonparticipants lowers all transition rates out of Nonparticipation, a lower fraction of "want a
job" nonparticipants implies a lower labor force participation rate.

3.3

Controlling for demographic heterogeneity

Before proceeding with the decomposition results, we generalize our approach to control for
changes in demographics.
We do so for two reasons: First, changes in demographics are known to have large e¤ects
on the behavior of the unemployment and participation rates, and we want to put the e¤ects
of declining desire to work in the context of the contribution of demographics. Second, to the
extent that declining average desire to work could be explained by changes in the demographic
structure of the nonparticipation pool, we want to control for the demographic composition of
the population.
We divide the population into K = 8 demographic (age and sex) groups, denoted by
subscript i 2 f1; ::; Kg.12 The approach to identify the e¤ect of lower desire to work is exactly

as described in the previous section, except that all variables now have a subscript i. As

described in the Appendix, we can then aggregate across groups to estimate the e¤ects of (i)
demographics, and (ii) desire to work among nonparticipants, on the aggregate unemployment
and participation rates by using the de…nitions
8
K
X
>
>
>
u
=
! it uit
>
< t
i=1

K
X
>
>
>
>
: lt =

it lit

i=1

with ! it the labor force share of group i and

it

12

the population share of group i.

Speci…cally, we split the population into the following 8 sex/age groups: 16 to 24, male 25-34, male 35-44,
male 45-54, female 25-34, female 35-44, female 45-54, and 55 and over.

10

3.4

Decomposition of the unemployment rate

We start by analyzing the behavior of the unemployment rate.
Figure 6 plots the contributions of (i) demographics (top panel) and (ii) the fraction of
"want a job" nonparticipants (middle panel) to movements in unemployment. To help put
results into perspective, we also plot the CBO estimate of the natural rate (dashed line) as a
proxy for trend unemployment.
Demographics and the aging of the baby boom generation …rst increased unemployment
until the late 70s. Then, between 1979 and 2006 demographics lowered unemployment by
about 0.7 percentage point. However, demographics alone can account for only about half of
the trend in unemployment and its inverse U-shape.
The decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants lowered the aggregate unemployment rate substantially: Comparing the business cycle peaks of 1979 and 2006, the decline in
desire to work lowered the unemployment rate by about 0.5 ppt over the last 30 years. This
contribution is comparable with that of demographics.
Interestingly, taken together, demographics and desire to work among nonparticipants (bottom panel of Figure 6) appear to account for most of the low-frequency movements in unemployment, as captured by the CBO estimate of the natural rate.
Another way to make this point is to consider Figure 7. In that …gure, we plot the result
of a decomposition of the unemployment rate into its di¤erent ‡ows (stripped of demographic
e¤ects). Speci…cally, we use our stock-‡ow accounting framework and accounting identity (2)
to decompose the movements in the aggregate unemployment rate into the contributions of
respectively, (i) demographics (…rst panel), (ii) the ‡ows out of Nonparticipation (the N U
and N E ‡ows, second panel), (iii) the ‡ows out of Employment (the EU and EN ‡ows,
third panel) and (iv) the ‡ows out of Unemployment (the U E and U N ‡ows, fourth panel).
Summing up the four contributions gives the total change in the aggregate unemployment rate.
In addition, in the second panel (dashed line), we plot the contribution of the share of "want a
job" nonparticipants to movements in unemployment. We plot that contribution in the second
panel –"Transitions out of N"–, because the share of "want a job" a¤ects unemployment by
modifying the transitions out of N. More details about the decomposition are provided in the
Appendix.
We can see that the ‡ows out of E or out of U display little trend and thus cannot be
responsible for the secular movements in unemployment. Instead, demographics and the ‡ows
out of N –the top two panels of Figure 7– are responsible for the decline in unemployment
since the early 80s. Moreover, the decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants appears
to account for a signi…cant fraction of the contribution of the ‡ows out of N. Thus, consistent
with Figure 6, demographics and the share of "want a job" nonparticipants do seem to be the
11

main factors behind the decline in unemployment since the mid-80s.
We conclude that understanding how the characteristics of the nonparticipants can change
over time is crucial to better understand the behavior of long-run unemployment in the US.

3.5

Decomposition of the labor force participation rate

We now turn to analyzing the participation rate, and we provide two sets of results, as with
the unemployment rate.
First, Figure 8 plots the contributions of (i) demographics (top panel) and (ii) the fraction
of "want a job" nonparticipants (middle panel) to movements in participation. The bottom
panel plots the total contribution of (i) and (ii). To help put results into perspective, we also
plot the actual participation rate.
Second, Figure 9 plots the decomposition of the participation rate into its di¤erent ‡ows
(stripped of demographic e¤ects): (i) demographics (…rst panel), (ii) the ‡ows out of Nonparticipation (second panel), (iii) the ‡ows out of Employment (third panel) and (iv) the ‡ows out
of Unemployment (fourth panel). Summing up the four contributions gives the total change
in the aggregate participation rate. In addition, in the second panel (dashed line), we plot
the contribution of the share of "want a job" nonparticipants to movements in participation.
We plot that contribution in the second panel –"Transitions out of N"–, because the share of
"want a job" a¤ects participation by modifying the transitions out of N.
Overall, demographics has had a small e¤ect on participation since the late 60s, and it is
only since the end of the last recession that the aging of the baby boom generation substantially
lowered participation.13 In contrast, movements in the share of "want a job" appear to have
substantially a¤ected the participation rate over time. In particular, the decline in the share
of "want a job" nonparticipants in the second half of the 90s lowered the participation rate by
about 1 43 ppt (second panel of Figure 8 or 9).
Putting demographics and desire for work together, the bottom panel of Figure 8 shows
that demographics and the share of "want a job" account for most of the downward trend in
participation since the early 2000s. There is currently a large debate on the reasons for the
currently record low level of participation in the US. Our decomposition suggest that the low
share of "want a job" nonparticipants is an important factor behind the currently low level of
participation.
However, Figure 9 also shows that, unlike with the unemployment rate, other ‡ows contributed to the secular movements in participation. In particular, ‡ows out of Employment
13

The contribution of demographics to the participation rate is mainly driven by the population share of old
(65+) workers (who have a much lower participation rate than the other groups), and the population share of
65+ workers has started to increase markedly after 2007.

12

(third panel) are responsible for the strong increase in participation in the 70s and 80s. Thus,
we do not claim that demographics and "want a job" have always been major forces behind
secular movements in participation. We will come back to this point in the next section.

4

Discussion

Our previous results indicate that variation in the characteristics of nonparticipants and specifically changes in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants has been a major factor in the trends
in the unemployment and participation rates. In this section, we discuss two possible issues
associated with our results.14 The …rst issue has to do with timing: the behavior of the participation rate does not line up well with the share of "want a job" nonparticipants, suggesting
the absence of any relationship between the two series, and thus apparently contradicting our
conclusions. The second issue relates to the way we quanti…ed the e¤ect of a change in the
share of "want a job" nonparticipants on unemployment and participation by assigning to
any N w or N n individual the average transition rate out of that state. In this section, we
successively discuss these two concerns.

4.1

Timing

Our previous accounting exercise showed that the decline in the share of want a job had a
substantial e¤ect on both the unemployment and participation rates. However, while the lowfrequency behavior of unemployment lines up reasonably well with the behavior of the share
of "want a job" nonparticipants (…gure 3), which is consistent with our story, the participation
rate shows no apparent correlation with the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants (…gure
8, middle panel). For instance, while participation displayed an inverse U-shaped pattern
between 1980 and 2010, the share of "want a job" was roughly ‡at until the mid-90s and only
then started to decline. This lack of correlation may seem surprising and could suggest some
issue with our decomposition exercise.
However, we think that this conclusion would be too hasty. Many di¤erent forces have
a¤ected the participation rate over the past 45 years, so that the absence of any correlation
between participation and one of the factors (in our case, the share of "want a job") is not
necessarily a problem.15
First, an important factor behind the large increase in participation in the 70s and 80s is
the increase in the participation rate of women (e.g., Abraham and Shimer, 2001). And indeed,
14

We thank our discussants for pointing out these possible issues.
Our point recalls that of Elsby et al. (2013), who show that the apparent acyclicality of the participation
rate is in fact the result of o¤-setting worker ‡ows.
15

13

going back to our stock-‡ow decomposition of the participation rate, shown in Figure 9, we
can see that the most important component behind the secular increase in participation during
that time is a secular change in workers’transition rates out of Employment (third panel).16
This e¤ect was very strong and dwarfed the contribution of the other ‡ows.
Another powerful factor behind movements in the participation rate is workers’job …nding
rate. In strong labor markets, workers’job …nding rate is high, and this raises the participation
rate. This mechanism can be seen in the contribution of two ‡ows: the job …nding rate out of
unemployment (UE) and the job …nding rate out of nonparticipation (NE).17 For instance, in
the second-half of the 90s, participation increased, because both the UE and NE rates reached
historically high values.18
With these di¤erent forces a¤ecting the participation rate through di¤erent ‡ows, we conclude that one cannot reject the results of our quantitative decomposition from an inspection
of the correlation between the participation rate and the share of "want a job" nonparticipants.
However, to evaluate the plausibility of our results, we can focus on the ‡ows directly
a¤ected by the share of "want a job" (but little a¤ected by the aforementioned factors). Since
we saw in section 2 that the largest di¤erence between "want a job" and "not want a job"
Nonparticipants (N) is their transition rate into Unemployment (U), we should observe a strong
correlation between the share of "want a job" and the N to U transition rate. Figure 10 shows
that this is indeed the case: the N to U transition rate displayed a marked decline in the second
half of the 90s that coincides with the decline in the share of "want a job". In other words,
the timing is consistent with our story.

4.2

Average versus marginal change

A more subtle and more di¢ cult issue is the following: When we quantify the e¤ect of a
change in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants on the average transition rates out of
Nonparticipation (N), equation (4) implicitly attributes to any N w or N n individual the average
transition rate out of that state. As a result, as the share of "not want a job" nonparticipants
increased in the late 90s, we posited that some average N w individuals (i.e., with very large
transition rates out of N ) became average N n individuals (with very small transition rates out
16
Abraham and Shimer (2001) show that this was due to the dramatic decline in women’s transition rate from
Employment to Nonparticipation (i.e., to women becoming more attached to the labor force).
17
A higher job …nding rate out of unemployment raises the labor force participation rate, because it raises
the number of employed workers relative to the number of unemployed workers, and because employed workers
are much less likely to leave the labor force than unemployed workers.
18
These e¤ects can be seen in the bottom panel of Figure 9 for the UE rate (the high UE rate pushed up the
participation rate through the "Transitions out of U"), and in the second panel of Figure 9 for the NE rate (the
high NE rate pushed up the participation rate through the "Transitions out of E" over 97-99). See Figures 7
and 8 in the appendix for time series of the UE and NE rates.

14

of N ). Such an assumption is valid if a large event substantially changed the behavior of some
nonparticipants. We will refer to this scenario as the "average change" scenario.
However, an alternative scenario could be that the increase in the share of "not want a job"
was due to individuals at the margin between "want a job" and "not want a job". If this were
the case, the true change in behavior would have been marginal, and a change in the share
of "want a job" nonparticipants would have had a negligible e¤ect on the transition rates out
Nonparticipation, so that our decomposition would strongly overestimate the contribution of
the decline in desire to work to unemployment and participation. We will refer to this scenario
as the "marginal change" scenario.
Although it is di¢ cult to de…nitely conclude in favor of either scenario, we will argue that
the "average change" scenario is the more likely one.
First, as previously shown in Figure 10, the transition rate from Nonparticipation to Unemployment displayed a strong downward trend in the 90s, and that trend does line up well
with the decline in the share of "want a job".19 Moreover, our estimated e¤ect of the decline
in the share of "want a job" on transitions out of N matches well with the observed trend in
the "Transition out of N" component of unemployment (…gure 7, second panel), suggesting
that we are not attributing an unreasonable weight to that mechanism.
Second, if our story is correct and variations in the share of "want a job" have a sizable
e¤ect on unemployment, a group without a decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants
should have had a markedly smaller downward trend in its unemployment rate.
Figure 11 shows that such a di¤erential behavior did occur in the data: while the fraction
of "want a job" nonparticipants declined for individuals not living alone, it was roughly ‡at
for individuals living alone. Thus, if our previous result that a lower share of "want a job"
nonparticipants leads to a lower unemployment rate is correct, we should observe diverging
trends in the unemployment rates of the two groups.
Figure 12 shows that this is indeed the case. In the top panel, we can see that individuals
living alone experienced a smaller secular decline in unemployment than individuals not living
alone.20 To better make this point, the middle panel plots the evolution over time of the
di¤erence in (i) unemployment, and (ii) the share of "want a job", for individuals respectively
19

In contrast, the "marginal change" scenario would imply that the change in the share of "want a job" only
had a marginal e¤ect on the aggregate transition rate from N to U . Thus, the "marginal change" scenario
cannot account for the secular decline in the transition rate from N to U , unless the transition rates from N w
to U and/or from N n to U themselves displayed strong secular declines. However, there were no such declines
(Figure 8 in the Appendix).
20
Similarly, while the participation of individuals not living alone started declining in the early 2000s, the
participation rate of individuals living alone kept increasing up until the beginning of the Great Recession. This
is again consistent with the smaller decline in desire to work for individuals living alone and consistent with our
previous result that a lower desire for work should lead to a lower participation rate.

15

alone and not alone. That is, we plot uat

unt and mat

mut where uat is the unemployment rate

of people living alone, mat the share of "want a job" for people living alone, and with similar
de…nitions for unt and mnt for people not living alone. We can see a very high correlation
between the two series, which is again consistent with our results that the share of "want a
job" a¤ects the behavior of the unemployment rate.
A …nal, more speculative, element that we think can support our "average change" scenario
is that of a big shock. If a large shock a¤ected nonparticipants, it could have led them to
substantially modify their behavior (e.g., by switching from behaving like an average N w to
behaving like an average N n ), and thereby led to large e¤ects on the unemployment and
participation rates. In the next section, we explore the reasons for the decline in the share of
"want a job" nonparticipants in the second half of the 90s, and we …nd that a change in the
provision of welfare and social insurance, likely linked to the mid-90s welfare reforms and thus
arguably a large shock, does account for much of the decline in desire to work.

5

Why fewer people want a job?

In the second part of the paper, we investigate the reasons for the decline in the share of "want
a job" nonparticipants since the mid-90s.
As a preliminary step, we note that the decline in desire to work is concentrated among (i)
non-single and (ii) low-income households. While we already saw that the fraction of "want
a job" nonparticipants did not decline for those living alone (…gure 11), among non-single
households, the decline in desire to work is concentrated among low income families (Figure
13). And among low-income non-single households, the decline in desire to work is more
pronounced for individuals with children than without (Figure 14).
Since the family structure seems to play an important role, the next section discusses a
very simple model of family labor supply to help frame the discussion and guide the empirical
analysis. Then, we estimate an empirical model of nonparticipants’propensity to want a job,
in which desire to work can depend on individual characteristics, the family structure, as
well as the di¤erent sources of income. Since the decline in desire to work is a low-income
phenomenon, we pay special attention to the role played by welfare income and other social
transfer programs.
Our estimates suggest that the mid-90s welfare reforms may have played an important role,
and we try to identify their causal e¤ects on desire to work by using a di¤erence-in-di¤erence
strategy. We conclude by discussing the implications of our results.

16

5.1

A model of family labor supply

We sketch a simple framework of family labor supply.21 We focus only on family members
decision to search for a job,22 and we consider a sequential multiple-earner model in which the
primary earner makes his/her work decision independently of the secondary earners. The …rst
secondary earner, say the spouse, then makes his/her labor supply decision by maximizing
utility, taking account of the primary earner’s income. The next secondary earner, say a
teenager living in the household, then makes his/her labor supply decision in a similar fashion.
And so on, for the other family members.
We posit that there exist search frictions, so that each worker must search in order to get
a job, and a worker can increase his/her job …nding probability by increasing the intensity of
search.23
In this framework, we interpret the nonemployment states –Nonparticipant who does not
want a job (N n ), Nonparticipant who wants a job (N w ) and Unemployed (U )– as arbitrary
distinctions introduced by the household survey and its imperfect measurement of search intensity. Speci…cally, while search intensity s is a continuous variable, a survey cannot precisely
measure s. Instead, a household survey like the CPS can classify workers into di¤erent labor
market states –Nonparticipant who does not want a job (N n ), Nonparticipant who wants a
job (N w ) and Unemployed (U )–that correspond to increasing intensities of search.
In this framework, it is easy to show that search intensity (or the propensity to report
"want a job") is in‡uenced by the following mechanisms:
1. Returns to employment:
Higher employment income increases desire to work among primary workers, but has an
ambiguous e¤ect on desire to work among secondary workers. The e¤ect is ambiguous,
because the direct e¤ect is compensated by an added-worker e¤ect (Lundberg, 1985, Juhn
and Potter, 2007): As the family income generated by "higher-order" workers increases
through higher employment income, desire to work amongst secondary workers decline.
2. Returns to nonparticipation:
Higher nonparticipation income lowers desire to work among primary workers and has
an ambiguous e¤ect on desire to work among secondary workers. The ambiguity occurs
21

We leave a more formal labor supply model with intrafamilial choice for the Appendix.
In particular, the model will not fully capture the complex dynamics associated with the movements inand-out of the labor force emphasized in Sections 3 and 4. This aspect of the problem is a very active area of
research. See for instance Krusell et al. (2012).
23
The model takes the wage and job …nding rate as given. Such a simple model could be consistent with nonclearing labor market models, such as search and matching models (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994), e¢ ciency
wage models, or search models with job rationing (Michaillat, 2011).
22

17

again because of the added-worker e¤ect, although this time it is because higher returns to
nonparticipation lowers search intensity of higher order workers, which lowers disposable
income.
3. Heterogeneous preferences:
If the disutility of search varies with demographic characteristics such as age, gender or
education, search intensity will vary with demographic characteristics, and a change in
the composition of the population will a¤ect the observed average desire to work.24
4. Higher asset income lowers search intensity through a "wealth e¤ect".

5.2

An empirical model of nonparticipants’propensity to want a job

To quantitatively assess di¤erent explanations for the decline in desire to work, we consider a
linear model of nonparticipants’propensity to want a job: The probability that a nonparticipant of type i wants a job (i.e., be N w ) at time t is given by
P (N w jN )it = Xit +

J
X

j wj;it

+

t

+ "it

(5)

j=1

with Xit a vector of characteristics for type i at time t, wj;it an income source of type j, and
t

a time dummy. Because we use time …xed e¤ects, our coe¢ cient estimates will depend on

cross sectional variation.
To measure worker characteristics as well as income and its di¤erent categories, we use
matched annual data from the (March) Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the CPS
over 1988-2010. In addition to information contained in the basic CPS …les, the March supplement includes detailed information on income. Since the March supplement only contains
information related to past year’s income, we match the March supplements across successive
years, so that we can study the relation between the current year’s income and desire to work.25
Matching March supplements also allows us to instrument for income in year t with income
in year t

1. There is likely substantial measurement error in the reported income variables,

and instrumenting with lagged income variables allows us to correct for the downward bias
24
Another possibility that we will not consider explicitly here is that desire to work changed over time because
of a change in preferences. While we do not discard this possibility, we prefer to keep it as a residual explanation.
25
To construct our data set we link individuals and families across consecutive March supplements. The time
series and cross sectional behavior of the want job variable in our matched data set is quite similar to that
in the unmatched March supplements and to that in the basic monthly CPS. Because unique individual and
family-level identi…ers comparable to identi…ers in other years are missing in the 1995 March supplement, our
data set excludes the years 1994 and 1995, but otherwise includes all years from 1988 to 2010. Since some of
the detailed income categories we use were not available on a consistent basis prior to 1988, our sample period
starts in 1988.

18

imparted by this measurement error (under the assumption that the measurement error is
i.i.d.).
An individual of type i is de…ned by the following demographic characteristics: (i) age
group –we classify workers into 8 groups spanning 16-85–, (ii) sex, (iii) education level –less
than high school, high school or some college, college or more–, (iv) married or not, (v) school
status –in school or not–, (iv) position in household –head, spouse, child, other–, and …nally
(vii) number of children (younger than 19) in the household. Xit is a thus vector of 7 dummy
variables.
We consider the di¤erent income categories: individual social insurance transfers, individual welfare income, other individual income, asset income, total tax payment, earned family
income and family income from social transfers.26 Social insurance transfers include supplemental security income (SSI), social security disability insurance (SSDI), social security pensions, survivor’s insurance, workmen’s compensation and veterans’bene…ts,27 but since we are
restricting our sample to individuals younger than 55, the "social insurance transfers" category
captures mostly disability insurance. Note that we treat separately individual income, which
would a¤ect desire to work through changes in the returns to nonparticipation or employment,
and the income provided by higher-order family members (labeled "family income"), which
would a¤ect desire to work through added-worker e¤ects.28 We also add asset income to capture a possible wealth e¤ect. Income values are de‡ated using the BEA de‡ator for personal
consumption expenditures.
Finally, since the impairment associated with the receipt of disability insurance is conditioned on the existence of an impairment that (in theory) precludes any work activity (and thus
a¤ects desire to work), we include a dummy for receiving disability insurance (SSI or SSDI).
Similarly, since welfare recipients are strongly encouraged or mandated to return to employment, participation in a welfare program may a¤ect search intensity and desire to work, we
include a dummy for receiving welfare income.
26
Earned labor income includes wages and salaries, self employed income, farm income. Welfare income
(also called public assistance) includes AFDC/TANF bene…ts. Asset income includes interest income, dividend
income and rents. The category "other" includes all other individual income sources reported.
27
SSDI provides income supplements to people who are physically restricted in their ability to be employed
because of a notable disability, usually a physical disability. SSI provides stipends to low-income people who
are either aged (65 or older), blind, or disabled. There are two important di¤erences between SSI and SSDI: (i)
SSI is means-tested, while SSDI is not, and (ii) SSDI is only available to individuals with su¢ cient recent work
experience.
28
To "rank" family members, we proceed as follows. We classify as primary earner, the family member with
the highest earned labor income, or if none, the household head. The second worker is the spouse (if any) or
the individual who is closest in age to the primary earner. We continue by considering family members with
increasing distance in age from the primary earner.

19

5.3

Coe¢ cient estimates

Table 2 presents our coe¢ cient estimates for the di¤erent income categories, and the …rst
column of Table 2 reports coe¢ cient estimates for all individuals aged 16 to 55.29
Most strikingly, receiving welfare and receiving disability insurance have very di¤erent
implications for desire to work. While receiving disability insurance substantially reduces the
probability to want to work by 17 percentage points (ppt), consistent with the fact that an
impairment should preclude any work activity and thus lower desire to work, receiving welfare
increases the probability to want to work by 17 ppt. This latter result is consistent with
the fact that welfare recipients are strongly encouraged (especially since 1988) to return to
employment quickly, which should push welfare recipients to exert more search e¤ort.30
Increasing the income from social insurance reduces desire to work (a $1000 increase decreases the probability to want a job by 0.7 ppt), but the e¤ect is small compared to the e¤ect
of participation (e.g., being o¢ cially recognized as disabled).
Increasing welfare income has no signi…cant e¤ect on desire to work. This small e¤ect is
again in contrast with the strong e¤ect of participation (i.e., being on welfare). Thus, most
of the e¤ect of the welfare or social insurance programs on desire to work occurs through the
program participation margin, as captured by our dummy variables.
Turning to income from higher-order family members, the coe¢ cients for earnings and
transfer are highly signi…cant and negative, indicating that an added-worker e¤ect is at play.
Speci…cally, a $1000 extra annual family income reduces the probability to want a job by 4.5
ppt for earnings and by about 2 ppt for transfer income. Higher asset income lowers desire to
work, consistent with the existence of a wealth e¤ect, although the coe¢ cient is not signi…cant,
and lower taxes lower desire to work, indicating again an added-worker e¤ect.
Finally, for demographic characteristics, individuals with the highest expected lifetime
return from work are the most likely to want to work: young, highly educated, men are the
most likely to want to work.31 Being married lowers desire for work, as well as being in school.
Digging deeper into sub-groups, Table 2 also presents the coe¢ cient estimates for prime-age
females and individuals younger than 25. Overall, the results are similar and consistent with
our aggregate regression.
29
The coe¢ cients were estimated using cross-sectional variation over 1988-2010. Using cross-sectional variation over the pre-1994 period only gives similar results.
30
In 1988, the Job Opportunity program was created and required a much larger number of welfare recipients
to engage in work-related activities (Mo¢ tt, 2003). The legislation also strongly encouraged states to conduct
human capital, education, and training programs meant to facilitate return to employment.
31
The coe¢ cient estimates for demographic characteristics are shown in the Appendix.

20

5.4

The welfare reform and wage gains of the 90s

Before discussing the predictions of the model, it is helpful to brie‡y discuss two changes in the
returns to employment and nonparticipation during the 90s that were of particular relevance
for low-income non-single households, the group most a¤ected by the decline in desire to work:
(i) the provision of "welfare" was dramatically re-organized in the mid-90s, (ii) real wages
increased strongly across the income distribution, propped up by a booming economy.
5.4.1

The welfare reforms of the mid-90s

A major re-organization of the provision of welfare took place in the mid-90s with the aim to
"end welfare as we know it" (Clinton, 1996) and to move welfare recipients into work.
First, traditional welfare was dramatically re-organized by the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996. The Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) program, a federal assistance program that provided …nancial assistance to low-income
families with children (see Mo¢ tt, 2003 for a detailed review of the program), was replaced by
the stricter (in terms of eligibility and time limits) Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
program (TANF). With TANF the duration of bene…ts is limited to …ve years and the emphasis
on return to work is strengthened with sanctions for non-complying applicants (Mo¢ tt, 2003).
Following the reform, the number of welfare caseloads declined massively (Blank, 2002) as well
as federal spending devoted to AFDC/TANF (Figure 15).32
Second, the Earned-Income Tax Credit (EITC) program, a program aimed at o¤setting
the social security payroll tax for low-income families with children, was expanded in order to
encourage work e¤ort (Rothstein and Nichols, 2014). Figure 15 shows the dramatic changes in
the organization of "welfare" that took place in the 90s, as a large increase in federal spending
devoted to EITC compensated the decline in AFDC/TANF spending.
Note that both the AFDC/TANF program and the EITC program are targeted at individuals who are (i) low income and (ii) with children, which are precisely the individuals a¤ected
by the decline in desire to work.
5.4.2

Strong wage growth over 1995-2000

The second half of the 90s also coincides with strong positive growth in real wages for all deciles
of the income distribution.33
32

One can note an interesting correlation between federal spending devoted to AFDC/TANF and the share of
"want a job" nonparticipants: both increased in the early 70s and then decreased markedly over the second-half
of the 90s.
33
Figure 4 in the appendix shows the cumulative changes in real wages since 1994 for di¤erent percentiles of
the wage distribution.

21

Since higher wage leads to higher search intensity of primary workers, strong wage growth is
unlikely to explain the decline in desire to work through its e¤ect on primary earners. However,
large gains in wage income imply large gains in real family income, which can, through the
added-worker e¤ect, lead to lower desire to work among secondary workers.
A mechanism going through an added-worker e¤ect is consistent with our earlier observation
that desire to work only declined among non-single households (for which an added-worker
e¤ect is active).

5.5

Predicted changes in desire to work

With the estimated coe¢ cients in hand, we can isolate the contribution of a given characteristic
or income variable to the change in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants. Speci…cally,
the contribution of characteristic xi to the decline in desire to work between 1994 and 2006 is
given by:34
m06

m94 =

i (xi;06

xi;94 )

with xi;t the average value of characteristic i in year t, xi;t =

P

$it xit with $it the share of

i

nonparticipant of type i at time t.

The …rst column of Table 3 shows that, excluding time …xed e¤ects, our model explains
about 53 percent of the decline in the fraction of nonparticipants reporting to want a job.
According to our model, the main factors behind the decline in desire to work are changes
in welfare bene…ts and in insurance transfers (mainly disability insurance). Together, they
lowered the share of nonparticipants wanting to work by a total of 2.6 ppt. Most of this e¤ect
is driven by the program participation dummies. As the number of individuals on disability
increased, aggregate desire to work declined. And as the number of individuals participating
in welfare decreased (Figure 15), aggregate desire to work declined. We return to this point in
our discussion section.
Family income and the added-worker e¤ect had a small e¤ect on desire to work because two
forces compensated each other. On the one hand, higher family earnings due to higher wages
lowered desire to work by 0.5 ppt, but on the other hand, lower income from social transfers
raised desire to work by 0.3 ppt.
Finally, age, sex, education, the fraction of nonparticipants in school, the structure of the
household or the number of children do not explain the decline in desire to work.
Looking into sub-groups, the model accounts for respectively 62 and 42 percent of the
decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants for prime-age women and young workers.
34

We compare 1994 to 2006 in order to avoid cyclical phenomena linked the the Great Recession.

22

The added-worker e¤ect seems to have played the largest role for young workers, as higher
family earnings lowered their desire to work by 0.7 ppt.
All in all, our model estimated in the cross-section does a good job at accounting for a
large share of the decline in desire to work since 1994, particularly among prime-age female;
the largest group a¤ected by the decline in desire to work. While we are still short of explaining
all of the decline in desire to work, our approach is likely to be downward biased. The income
information in the March CPS is self-reported and thus likely plagued with measurement error.
In particular, welfare or social security income, which play la large role in our story, are the
income categories with the most measurement error (2010 CPS documentation). We have
tried to control for measurement error through IV estimation, but some e¤ects may remain.
Relatedly, EITC payments may not be reported by respondents, and the previous analysis may
miss the e¤ect of the EITC expansion that could have also contributed to the decline in desire
to work (through an added worker e¤ect), a point to which we turn next.35

5.6

Di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates

Our previous results suggest that an important factor behind the decline in desire to work is a
change in the provision of social transfers. Since welfare reforms of the mid-90s are promising
candidates for such changes, this section tries to identify the causal e¤ects of (i) the expansion
of EITC and (ii) the AFDC/TANF reform.
To do so, we build on Eissa and Hoynes (1996, 2004) and Mc Kernan et al. (2000), and we
use a di¤erence-in-di¤erence strategy that exploits the facts that households without children
receive little EITC or AFDC/TANF bene…ts and were little a¤ected by the reforms. First, we
identify the e¤ects of the EITC expansion on desire to work by focusing on married individuals,
who are eligible to EITC but not to AFDC. Then, we focus on single women with the aim of
getting a lower bound on the e¤ect of the AFDC-TANF reform.
5.6.1

EITC expansion and desire to work among married mothers

Our …rst empirical implementation follows Eissa and Hoynes (2004) and focuses on married
mothers: Eligibility to EITC depends on the presence of a qualifying child in the family, and
we will estimate the e¤ect of the EITC expansion on desire to work by comparing the outcome
of the a¤ected group (married women with children) to the outcome of a comparison group
that is little a¤ected by the program (married women without children).36
35
In theory, EITC payments are parts of social transfers. However, we fear that they are unlikely to be
reported as such by respondents, since the transfer-related survey questions never mention receipts of any tax
credit.
36
A caveat of this approach is that, while AFDC/TANF is primarily targeted to non-married individuals,
a small fraction (about 7%) of AFDC/TANF caseloads are married couples with children. This is because a

23

We restrict the sample to married women between 25 and 55. To determine EITC eligibility,
we treat as a dependent child any member of the tax-…ling unit younger than 19. To better
select women that are most likely to receive EITC, the sample is limited to individuals with
no level of education higher than a high school degree.
We estimate the following formulation
P (N w jN )it =

gt

+

g

+

t

+ Xit + "it

(6)

where i, g, and t index individual, group, and time respectively, and with Xit a vector of
controls (age, sex, education, family income, and number of children),
equal to 1 if the woman has a child or more and zero otherwise,
to 1 for any tax year after 1993, and
Thus,

gt

t

g

a …xed (group) e¤ect

a common time e¤ect equal

the interaction between …xed group and time e¤ect.

measures the relative change in desire to work for single women with children after

1993, the year of the EITC expansion. Our estimation period is again 1988-2010.
Table 4 presents the results. After controlling for characteristics, we …nd that the EITC
explains 71 percent of the decline in low-educated married mothers’ desire to work between
1988-1993 and 1994-2010.
5.6.2

AFDC/TANF reform and desire to work among single mothers

Our second empirical implementation follows Eissa and Hoynes (1996) and Mc Kernan et al.
(2000) and focuses on single mothers. To identify the e¤ect of the AFDC/TANF reform on
single mothers’desire to work, we compare the outcome of the a¤ected group (single women
with children) to the outcome of a comparison group that is una¤ected by the program (single
women without children) after the reform in 1996.
We use the same speci…cation as with married women, except that the time dummy

t

equals 1 after 1996, the year of the AFDC/TANF reform. Table 4 presents the results. After
controlling for characteristics, our coe¢ cient estimate suggests that the AFDC/TANF reform
explains 52 percent of the decline in low-educated single mothers’ desire to work between
1988-1995 and 1996-2010.
A caveat is that since single mothers are eligible to both EITC and AFDC/TANF, our
di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimate may be contaminated by the EITC expansion, which happened
only two years before the AFDC/TANF reform. However, since the EITC expansion should
increase desire to work, our estimate can also be seen as a lower bound on the e¤ect of the
AFDC/TANF reform on single mothers’desire to work.
program called AFDC-UP provided cash bene…ts for 2-parent families when the primary earner was unemployed.
As a result, our estimate of the e¤ect of EITC may be contaminated by the e¤ect of the AFDC/TANF reform.

24

5.7

Discussion: from welfare to disability?

Both our cross-sectional estimates (section 5.5) as well as our di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimate
(section 5.6) indicate that the AFDC/TANF reform led to a decline in desire to work among
nonparticipants. This set of result is surprising in light of a large literature on the e¤ects of the
welfare reforms on the labor market. Indeed, it is well accepted that the reform brought many
nonparticipants, in particular single mothers, into the labor force (Blank, 2002). However, our
…ndings suggest that the welfare reform lowered desire to work for some nonparticipants, i.e.,
pushed some nonparticipants away from the labor force.
In this section, we argue that these two views are not necessarily incompatible, and we
speculate that the strong work requirements introduced by the AFDC/TANF reform could
have, through a kind of "sink or swim" experience, pushed the "stronger" welfare recipients
into the labor force and pushed the "weaker" welfare recipients outside of welfare and further
away from the labor force, and possibly into disability insurance.
While employment and participation increased for many nonparticipants following the welfare reform, a signi…cant minority of traditional welfare recipients were left both jobless and
without welfare support. The decline in the number of caseloads was substantially larger than
the corresponding gains in employment: for instance, while employment among single mothers
rose by approximately 820,000 between 1995 and 2001, welfare caseloads fell by approximately
twice as much (Blank, 2002), suggesting that a number of traditional welfare recipients ended
up neither employed nor on welfare. Consistent with this suggestive evidence, welfare leavers’
studies (which follow individuals over time after they leave welfare) …nd that only about 60 percent of welfare leavers are working at some future point (Cancian et al., 1999, Loprest, 2001),
and Martinson (2000) …nds that 20 percent of leavers never work in a four-year follow-up of
work programs.
The emergence of a minority of traditional welfare recipients both jobless and without
welfare support could have been caused by the AFDC/TANF reform. The reform made eligibility for welfare much stricter with (i) time limits and (ii) stronger work requirements and
the use of sanctions for noncompliant applicants (Blank, 2002).37 This made the receipt of
welfare strongly conditional on the recipient’s ability to …nd a job. For individuals with poor
job …nding prospects and strong barriers to employment (e.g., mildly disabled, in poor health,
37

First, adult applicants can only receive bene…ts for a lifetime maximum of 60 months, and about 20 states
chose to impose shorter time limits. Second, according to the Federal provision of TANF, states must require
recipients to engage in work activities and must impose sanctions (by reducing or terminating bene…ts) if an
individual does not participate. Half of the families receiving TANF assistance must be engaged in a work
activity for at least 30 hours a week (20 for single parents with young children). Job search, job readiness
activities, or vocation training can only count as a satisfactory work activity for a limited amount of time.

25

emotionally disturbed, mentally slow or addicted to drugs or alcohol),38 this requirement can
be hard to ful…ll, leaving them ultimately out of the welfare system and without …nancial
support.39
In turn, the need for …nancial support could have led a number of these traditional welfare
recipients to apply for disability insurance, and in particular non-elderly SSI (which provides
income support for low-income disabled individuals). A number of papers have argued that
there is some degree of substitutability between AFDC/TANF and non-elderly SSI (e.g., Kubik,
1999), and that some of the increase in SSI caseloads can be attributed to the AFDC/TANF
reform.40 Indeed, both programs serve disadvantaged populations that tend to have low levels
of education, minimal work history, and high rates of both physical and mental impairments.
Schmidt (2012) even suggests that SSI may be partially playing the role of an alternative safety
net in the post-welfare reform era.
However, SSI and AFDC/TANF di¤er in one important aspect: their emphasis on return
to work. While welfare recipients are expected to ultimately return to the labor force, disability recipients are not. In fact, one of the requirements to receive disability bene…ts is that
the "impairment prevents any other work that exists in the national economy" (Daly and
Burkhauser, 2003). Thus, our conjecture raises an interesting possibility: While the "welfare
to work" reform was designed to do bring welfare recipients into the labor force, the reform
could have had the opposite e¤ect on the "weaker" nonparticipants by shifting them from a
program with some connection to the labor force (welfare) to a program with no connection
to the labor force (disability insurance).

5.8

A ‡ow decomposition of the share of "want a job" nonparticipants

To conclude this paper, we show that the worker ‡ows behind the movements in the share of
"want a job" nonparticipants are consistent with our "sink or swim" conjecture. Importantly,
and although the evidence is tantalizing, we caution that these are just correlations, and we
leave a proper study of the "sink or swim" interpretation of the welfare reform for future
research.41 More details about the decomposition are provided in the Appendix.
38

For instance, Dworsky and Courtney (2007) …nd that most of the TANF applicants in Milwaukee face such
barriers to employment.
39
Consistent with this idea, Grogger (2000) …nds that welfare time limits lowered the number of caseloads by
about 200,000 during the second-half of the 90s.
40
Schmidt and Sevak (2004) …nd that the pre-reform state-level welfare waivers –pre-reform experiments of a
welfare system with stronger work requirements–led to a signi…cant increase in the likelihood that single-mother
families reported SSI receipt. Schmidt (2012) …nds that the TANF sanction policies signi…cantly increased SSI
caseloads share for both adults and children. Kubik (2003) also argues that switching from AFDC/TANF to
SSI has …nancial advantages both for the individuals as well as the state.
41
Note that the point of this paper is to show that time-variation in the characteristics of nonparticipants
–the decline in the share of want a job– are a crucial aspect of secular movements in the unemployment and

26

Using our accounting framework, we can proceed as with the unemployment and participation rates and decompose movements in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants into the
separate contributions of the worker ‡ows in and out of fE; U; N w ; N n g.

We …nd that two worker ‡ows, the ‡ows between N w and N n , account for most of the

decline in the fraction of "want a job" nonparticipants (mt ) since the mid-90s. Figure 16 plots
the share of "want a job" nonparticipant, mt , over 1994-2010 along with a counterfactual mt
generated solely by movements in N w N n and N n N w transitions. We can see that the two ‡ows
account for most of the downward trend in mt since 1994,42 so that the lower share of "want a
job" is due mainly to (i) lower entry of nonparticipants into "want a job" (lower N n N w ), and
(ii) higher exit from "want a job" to "not want a job" (higher N w N n ).43
The behavior of the N n N w and N w N n ‡ows is consistent with the "sink" aspect of the
welfare reform, i.e., the reform would have pushed the weaker nonparticipants further away
from the labor force. The lower N n N w rate could be due to lower entry into welfare (recall
that an individual on welfare is much more likely to want a job), and the higher N w N n rate
could be due to higher exit from welfare (and possibly entry into a disability program).
Interestingly, the ‡ows in and out of "want a job" are also consistent with the "swim"
aspect of the welfare, i.e., the reform would have pushed the stronger nonparticipants into the
labor force. Although most of the decline in the share of "want a job" between 1994 and 2001
is due to ‡ows between N w and N n , the next most important factor (…gure 16) is an increase
in the ‡ows from "want a job" into the labor force (the ‡ows from N w to U or E).44

6

Conclusion

This paper argues that a key aspect of the US labor market is the presence of time-varying
heterogeneity across nonparticipants, i.e., changes in the composition of the nonparticipation
pool. In particular, we …nd that the share of nonparticipants who report wanting to work
declined over the past 35 years, with a particularly strong decline in the second-half of the 90s.
The decline primarily re‡ected reductions for prime age females, and to a lesser extent, young
people.
participation rate. We do not claim that the contribution of the late-90s decline in the share of want a job to
(i) unemployment (about -.5 ppt) and (ii) participation (about -1.75 ppt) is the e¤ect of the welfare reform on
unemployment and participation. Doing so would require identifying the contribution of the welfare reform to
each worker ‡ow (for instance, using a di¤erence-in-di¤erence approach as in the previous section) and then
translating the movements in the ‡ows caused by the reform into changes in unemployment and participation
rates.
42
Con…rming this visual inspection, a variance decomposition exercise as in Fujita and Ramey (2009) shows
w n
n w
N
that N
and tN N account for, respectively, 50% and 25% of the variance of mt .
t
43
The transition rates between N w and N n are plotted in …gure 9 in the Appendix.
44
The transition rates from "want a job" (N w ) to U or E are plotted in …gure 8 in the appendix.

27

A decline in desire to work lowers both participation and unemployment because a nonparticipant who wants to work has both a higher probability of entering the labor force and a
higher probability of joining unemployment conditional on entering the labor force. We quantify the e¤ect of the decline in desire to work in the late 90s on aggregate labor market variables
and …nd that the unemployment rate was lowered by about 0.5 ppt and the participation rate
by about 1.75 ppt. Taken together, population aging and lower desire to work can account for
the bulk of low-frequency movements in unemployment since the late 60s.
We explore possible explanations for the decline in desire to work among nonparticipants
using cross-sectional estimates of a model of nonparticipants’propensity to want a job as well
as di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates of the e¤ects of the mid-90s welfare reforms.
Our …ndings suggest that the mid-90s "welfare to work" reforms –the 1993 EITC expansion
and the 1996 AFDC/TANF reform–played an important role in lowering desire to work among
nonparticipants. Our cross-sectional estimates imply that changes in the provision of welfare
and social insurance explain about 60 percent of the decline in desire to work among prime-age
females, while the di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates attribute between 50 and 70 percent of the
decline in mothers’desire to work to the welfare reforms.
We conjecture that two mechanisms could explain these results. First, the EITC expansion
raised family income and reduced secondary earners’ (typically women) incentives to work.
Second, the strong work requirements introduced by the AFDC/TANF reform would have,
through a kind of "sink or swim" experience, left the "weaker" (i.e., least able to …nd work)
welfare recipients without welfare and pushed them away from the labor force and possibly
into disability insurance.
Our conjecture raises an interesting possibility: While the "welfare to work" reform was
designed to strengthen the incentives to work and to bring welfare recipients into the labor
force, the reform could have had the opposite e¤ect on some nonparticipants, either by giving
secondary earners less incentives to work, and/or by shifting the "weaker" nonparticipants from
a program with some connection to the labor force (welfare) to a program with no connection
to the labor force (disability insurance). Exploring this possibility is an important task for
future research.
We end this paper by speculating about possible future values for the unemployment rate
at the next business cycle peak. As of March 2015, more than …ve years since the end of
the recession (as de…ned by the NBER), the unemployment rate stands at 5.5 percent. The
"long-run" forces that drove the unemployment rate to a 40 year low of 3.8% in April 2000,
–aging and lower desire to work–, are still present today (Figure 6), but are masked by a low
job …nding rate that is still 20 percent below its pre-recession peak of 2006 and 30 percent
below its 2000 peak. Bringing workers’transition rates back to their 2000 levels and holding
28

the share of "want a job" nonparticipants at its current level imply an unemployment rate at
3.8 percent. Perhaps more realistically, bringing workers’ transition rates back to their 2006
pre-recession levels would imply an unemployment rate of 4.5 percent, suggesting that the
unemployment rate still has substantial room for improvement.45

45

One can do a similar exercise for the participation rate. Bringing workers’ transition rates back to their
2006 levels (but keeping both demographics and the share of "want a job" at their current levels) implies a
participation rate of 65.8 percent, lower than the 2000 peak at 67.3 percent, but substantially higher than the
rate of 62.7 percent as of March 2015.

29

References
[1] Aaronson, Daniel, Jonathan Davis, and Luojia Hu. 2012. “Explaining the Decline in the
U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate.” FRB Chicago, Chicago Fed Letter 296 (March).
[2] Autor D., M. Duggan, "The Rise In The Disability Rolls And The Decline In Unemployment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 118(1), pp 157-205, 2003.
[3] Barnichon, R. “Vacancy Posting, Job Separation, and Unemployment Fluctuations,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(3): 315-330, 2012.
[4] Blanchard O. and P. Diamond. “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Paper on Economic
Activity, 1:1-60, 1989.
[5] Blanchard O. and P. Diamond. “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S. Workers,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 21(2), 85-156, 1990.
[6] Blank, R. "Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States," Journal of Economic Literature, 40(4): 1105-1166, 2002.
[7] Bleakley H., A. Ferris, and J. Fuhrer “New Data on Worker Flows during Business Cycles,”
New England Economic Review, July-August, 1999.
[8] Cancian, M, R.Haveman, T. Kaplan, D. Meyer and B. Wolfe. “Work, Earnings and WellBeing After Welfare,”in Economic Conditions and Welfare Reform. Sheldon H. Danziger,
ed. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute Employment Res., pp. 161–86, 1999.
[9] Clark, K. and L. Summers. "Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment: A Reconsideration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1): 13-60 1979.
[10] Daly M. and R. Burkhauser "The Supplemental Security Income Program," NBER Chapters in: Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, pages 79-140, 2003.
[11] Darby, M. J. Haltiwanger and M. Plant. “The Ins and Outs of Unemployment: The Ins
Win,” NBER Working Paper, 1986.
[12] Dworsky, A., and M. Courtney. “Barriers to employment among TANF applicants and
their consequences for self-su¢ ciency,” Families in Society 88(3): 379-89, 2007.
[13] Eissa, N and J. Liebman. "Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit,"
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111(2), pages 605-37, May 1996.

30

[14] Eissa, N and H. Hoynes. "Taxes and The Labor Market Participation of Married Couples:
The Earned Income Tax Credit," Journal of Public Economics, vol88, pages 1931-1958,
August, 2004.
[15] Elsby, M. B. Hobijn and A. Sahin. “On the Importance of the Participation Margin for
Labor Market Fluctuations,” Working Paper, 2013.
[16] Elsby, M. R. Michaels and G. Solon. “The Ins and Outs of Cyclical Unemployment,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009.
[17] Elsby, M. and M. Shapiro. “Why Does Trend Growth A¤ect Equilibrium Employment?
A New Explanation of an Old Puzzle," American Economic Review, June 2012.
[18] Erceg, C. and A. Levin. “Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of
the Great Recession,” Working Paper 2013.
[19] Flaim, P. “The E¤ect of Demographic Changes on the Nation’s Unemployment Rate,”
Monthly Labor Review, 3-10, 1979.
[20] Flinn, C. and J. Heckman. "Are Unemployment and Out of the Labor Force Behaviorally
Distinct Labor Force States?," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 1(1), pages 28-42, 1983.
[21] Fujita, S. and G. Ramey. “The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding Rates,” International Economic Review, 2009.
[22] Gordon, R. In‡ation, ‡exible exchange rates, and the natural rate of unemployment. In
Workers, Jobs and In‡ation, Brookings Institute, 89-152, 1982.
[23] Grogger, J. “The E¤ect of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 85, No. 2, Pages 394-408, 2003.
[24] Hall, R. "Why is the unemployment rate so high at full employment" Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 33:369-402, 1970.
[25] Hotchkiss, J., Pitts, M., Rios-Avila, F. 2012. “A Closer Look at Non-Participants during
and after the Great Recession.”Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper No.201210.
[26] Jones, S. and C. Riddell. “The Measurement of Unemployment: An Empirical Approach,”
Econometrica, 67, pp 142-167, 1999.

31

[27] Juhn, C., K. Murphy, R. Topel. “Current Unemployment, Historically Contemplated.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 79-116, 2002.
[28] Juhn, C. and S. Potter “Is There Still an Added-Worker E¤ect?,” NBER Working aper,
2007.
[29] Krusell P., T. Mukoyama, R. Rogerson and A. Sahin. "Is Labor Supply Important for
Business Cycles?," NBER Working Papers 17779, 2012.
[30] Kubik, J. “Incentives for the Identi…cation and Treatment of Children with Disabilities:
The Supplemental Security Income Program.” Journal of Public Economics 73(2): 187–
215, 1999.
[31] Kubik, J. “Fiscal Federalism and Welfare Policy: The Role of States in the Growth of
Child SSI.” National Tax Journal 56(1): 61–79, 2003.
[32] Loprest, P."How Are Families that Left Welfare Doing? A Comparison of Early and
Recent Welfare Leavers" FRBNY Economic Policy Review, 2001.
[33] Lundberg, S. “The Added Worker E¤ect”, Journal of Labor Economics, 3(1), 11–37, 1985.
[34] Martinson, K. "The National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies Evaluation: The
Experience of Welfare Recipients Who Find Jobs." MDRC for U.S. Dept. Health Human
Services. Washington, DC, 2000.
[35] McKernan, S., R. Lerman, N. Pindus and J. Valente, "The relationship between metropolitan and non-metropolitan locations, changing welfare policies, and the employment of
single mothers", Mimeo, 2000.
[36] Mo¢ tt, R. "The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program," NBER Chapters,
in: Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, pages 291-364, 2003
[37] Nekarda, C. “A Longitudinal Analysis of the Current Population Survey: Assessing the
Cyclical Bias of Geographic Mobility”. Working Paper, 2009.
[38] Michaillat, P. "Do Matching Frictions Explain Unemployment? Not in Bad Times," American Economic Review, 2011.
[39] Mo¢ tt, R. "The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program," NBER Chapters,
in: Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, pages 291-364, 2003.
[40] Mo¢ tt, R. ""The U.S. Employment-Population Reversal in the 2000s: Facts and Explanations" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 201-264, 2012.
32

[41] Perry, G. “Changing Labor Markets and In‡ation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 411-441, 1970.
[42] Rothstein, J. and A. Nichols. "The Earned Income Tax Credit," NBER Chapters, in:
Means-Tested Transfer Programs, 2014.
[43] Schmidt, L. and P. Sevak. “AFDC, SSI, and Welfare Reform Aggressiveness: Caseload
Reductions vs. Caseload Shifting,” Journal of Human Resources 39(3): 792–812, 2004.
[44] Shimer, R., “Why is the U.S. Unemployment Rate So Much Lower?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 13, pp. 11-61, 1998.
[45] Shimer, R., “The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, 969-1008, 2001.
[46] Shimer, R. "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 15(2), pages 127-148, April, 2012.
[47] Summers, L. "Why is the Unemployment Rate So Very High near Full Employment,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 17(2), pages 339-396., 1986.
[48] Van Zandweghe, W. 2012. “Interpreting the Recent Decline in Labor Force Participation.”
Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 5-34.

33

11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1967

UR
CBO estim ate of Natural UR
1977

1987

1997

2007

Figure 1: Unemployment rate (UR) and CBO estimate of the natural rate of unemployment,
1967-2014.

34

68
67
66
65

Percent

64
63
62
61
60
59
LFPR
58
1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Figure 2: Labor force participation rate (LFPR) and CBO estimate of the potential LFPR,
1967-2014.

35

0.11

0.1

Fraction

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05
Fraction of "Want a Job"
CBO estim ate of Natural UR
0.04
1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Figure 3: Fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" (solid line, 4-quarter moving
averages) and CBO estimate of natural unemployment rate (dashed line), 1967-2014.

36

Figure 4: Average monthly transition probabilities out of Nonparticipation for nonparticipants
who want a job (N w ) and nonparticipants who do not want a job (N n ), 1994-2010.

37

m 25-55

w25-55
0.18
0.16

Fraction

0.25

0.14
0.12

0.2

0.1
0.08

0.15

0.06
1967 1977 1987 1997 2007

1967 1977 1987 1997 2007

16-25

Fraction

0.25

55-85
0.035

0.2

0.03

0.15

0.025
0.02

0.1
1967 1977 1987 1997 2007

1967 1977 1987 1997 2007

Figure 5: Fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" by demographic group: male
25-55, female 25-55, younger than 25, and older than 55. 4-quarter moving averages, 1969-2014.

38

Demographics

ppt of U

6
5.5
5
1967

CBO estimate of Natural UR
1977

1987

1997

"Want a job"

6
ppt of U

2007

5.5
5
1967

1977

1987

1997

Demographics + "Want a job"

6
ppt of U

2007

5.5
5
1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

Figure 6: E¤ects of composition changes on the aggregate unemployment rate (U). Upper
panel: e¤ect of demographics. Middle panel: e¤ect of changes in the share of "want a job"
nonparticipants. Bottom panel: e¤ect of changes in demographics and the share of "want a
job" nonparticipants. The dashed line is the CBO estimate of the natural unemployment rate.
For clarity of exposition, the series are level shifted with their mean set to the mean of the
CBO natural rate. The plotted series are 4-quarter moving averages. 1967-2014.

39

ppt of U

0

Demographics

-0.5
-1
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

ppt of U

0.5

2006

Transitions out of N

0
-0.5
-1
1976

Fraction of "Want a job"
1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

ppt of U

1.5
Transitions out of E

1
0.5
0
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

ppt of U

4
Transitions out of U
2
0
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

Figure 7: Decomposition of the unemployment rate into the contributions of (i) demographics
(top panel), (ii) transition rates out of Nonparticipation –NE and N-U ‡ows–(second panel),
(iii) transition rates out of Employment –EN and EU ‡ows–(third panel), and (iv) (iii) transition rates out of Unemployment –UN and UE ‡ows–(bottom panel). Summing up the four
components gives the aggregate unemployment rate. The dashed line in the second panel plots
the contribution of the share of "want a job" nonparticipants to the unemployment rate. For
clarity of exposition, the contribution of each component is set to 0 in 1979Q4. The plotted
series are 4-quarter moving averages, 1976-2010.

40

ppt of LFP

68
66
64
62
60
1967

LFP
Demogaphics
1977

1987

1997

2007

ppt of LFP

68
66
64
62
60
1967

"Want a job"
1977

1987

1997

2007

ppt of LFP

68
66
64
62
60
1967

Demogaphics + "Want a job"
1977

1987

1997

2007

Figure 8: E¤ects of composition changes on aggregate labor force participation rate (LFP).
Upper panel: e¤ect of demographics. Middle panel: e¤ect of changes in the share of "want a
job" nonparticipants. Bottom panel: e¤ect of changes in demographics and the share of "want
a job" nonparticipants. The dashed line is the actual LFP. For clarity of exposition, the series
are level shifted with their mean set to the mean of aggregate LFP. The plotted series are
4-quarter moving averages. 1967-2014.

41

ppt of LFP

2
0
-2

ppt of LFP

1976
2

1981

1986

1991

1996

Transitions out of N

2001

2006

Fraction of "Want a job"

0
-2

ppt of LFP

1976
4

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

1991

1996

2001

2006

1991

1996

2001

2006

Transitions out of E

2
0
1976

ppt of LFP

Demographics

2

1981

1986

Transitions out of U

0
-2
1976

1981

1986

Figure 9: Decomposition of the participation rate into the contributions of (i) demographics
(top panel), (ii) transition rates out of Nonparticipation –NE and NU ‡ows– (second panel),
(iii) transition rates out of Employment –EN and EU ‡ows–(third panel), and (iv) (iii) transition rates out of Unemployment –UN and UE ‡ows–(bottom panel). Summing up the four
components gives the aggregate participation rate. The dashed line in the second panel plots
the contribution of the share of "want a job" nonparticipants to the participation rate. For
clarity of exposition, the contribution of each component is set to 0 in 1979Q4. The plotted
series are 4-quarter moving averages, 1976-2010.

42

0.13

Hazard rate

0.045

0.035

N->U (left scale)
Fraction of "Want a Job" (right scale)
0.025
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

0.05

Figure 10: The Nonparticipation to Unemployment transition rate (NU) on the left scale, and
the share of "want a job" nonparticipants (right scale). The plotted series are 4-quarter moving
averages, 1976-2012.

43

Fraction of "Want a Job", living alone
Fraction of "Want a Job", not living alone

0.12
0.11

Fraction

0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

2011

Figure 11: Fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" for nonparticipants living
alone (solid line) and nonparticipants not living alone (dashed line). 1976-2011.

44

Unemployment rate
Living alone
Not living alone

ppt of U

10

8

6

4
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

2011

Living alone vs. Not living alone
3
Difference in UR (rescaled)
Difference in "Want a job" (rescaled)

2
1
0
-1
-2
1976

1981

1986

1991

1996

2001

2006

2011

Figure 12: Top panel: unemployment rate for individuals living alone (solid line) and individuals not living alone (dashed line) along with their HP-…lter trends ( = 105 , thin dashed lines),
Bottom panel: Di¤erence in unemployment rate (solid line) and di¤erence in share of "want a
job" nonparticipants (dashed line) between individuals alone and not alone. The plotted series
are 4-quarter moving averages. 1976-2011.

45

0.24
First quintile
Second q uintile
Fourth quintile
Fifth quintile

0.22
0.2

Fraction

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Figure 13: Fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" for individuals with family
income in the …rst, second, fourth and …fth quintile. 1994-2011.
0.01
Married, no child
Married, with children

0
-0.01

Change in fraction

-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
-0.06
-0.07
-0.08
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Figure 14: Changes in the fraction of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" for married
individuals with children and married individuals without children. 1994-2011.
46

70

Spending (in billions, 2008 USD)

60

50
AFDC/TANF
40

30

SSI

20

10
EITC
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure 15: Welfare spending (in 2008 US$) for the Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (AFDC/TANF) program, which provides cash
assistance to poor families with dependent children; the Supplemental Security Income program (SSI), which pays cash to low-income people with disabilities or over 65; and the Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC), which provides a tax credit to low-to-middle income families.

47

0.095
Share of "Want a Job"
w

n

w

n

n

From N -> N and N -> N

0.09

n

w

w

w

2008

2010

From N -> N , N -> N and N ->LF
0.085

Fraction

0.08
0.075
0.07
0.065
0.06
0.055
1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Figure 16: Share of nonparticipants who report "wanting a job" (m) along with (i) the movements in m generated solely by changes in the N n N w and N w N n transition rates (thick
plain line) and (ii) the movements in m generated solely by changes in the N n N w , N w N n
and N w U and N w E transition rates, labeled N w LF (circled line). 4-quarter moving
averages, 1994-2010.

48

Table 1: Transition rates of labor force entrants
Transitions

UN
(UNw+UNn)

EN
(ENw+ENn)

UE

EU

Former Nw

.44
(.33+.11)

.16
(.08+.09)

.20

.08

Former Nn

.57
(.25+.32)

.27
(.03+.24)

.22

.03

Other

.19
(.13+.06)

.02
(.01+.01)

.27

.01

Note: Average monthly transition rates computed over 1994-2010. Former Nw refers to a participant who was a "want a job" nonparticipant one
month ago, Former Nn refers to a participant who was a "not want a job" nonparticipant one month ago, Other refers to other labor force
participants.

Table 2: Coefficient estimates

Disabled
On welfare
Social insurance
Individual income
Welfare income
Earnings
Family income
Social transfers
Asset income
Taxes
Married
Nb of children
Demographic
controls
Year dummies
Nb. Obs.

Aggregate

Females
25-55

Young
16-24

-17.2***
(11.9)
17.5***
(4.9)

-13.9***
(7.1)
22.9***
(5.2)

-6.4
(1.2)
14.4*
(1.9)

-0.7***
(9.6)
0.1
(0.1)

-0.6***
(5.1)
-1.0
(1.3)

-1.5***
(2.9)
1.4
(0.6)

-4.5***
(10.7)
-2.07***
(3.2)

-4.0***
(6.6)
-4.4***
(3.5)

-3.9***
(4.8)
-0.5
(0.4)

-3.8
(0.9)
8.3***
(3.7)

-0.7
(0.9)
4.5*
(1.9)

-0.9
(0.9)
5.9
(1.1)

-6.3***
(15.6)
-0.1
(0.9)

-8.3***
(14.1)
-0.1
(0.6)

-4.2***
(4.0)
-0.4**
(2.1)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

65,586

31,960

23,899

Note: The estimation period is 1988-2010. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. "Disabled" denotes the coefficient on a dummy equal to 1
when the individual receives disability insurance. "On welfare" " denotes the coefficient on a dummy equal to 1 when the individual receives
welfare income. Demographic controls include age group, age, sex, education level, married or not, school status, position in household, and
number of children.

Table 3: Actual and predicted change in the share of “want a job” nonparticipants
Aggregate
Actual

-4.0

Females
25-55
-4.4

Predicted, total
Predicted, detail
Demographics

-2.2

-2.7

-2.4

+0.6

+0.4

0.1

Disability

-1.1

-1.4

-0.3

Welfare

-1.5

-1.8

-1.6

Earnings

-0.5

-0.4

-0.7

Social transfers

+0.3

+0.4

+0.2

+0.0

+0.1

-0.1

Individual income

Family income

Other

Young
16-24
-5.7

Note: "Actual" denotes the observed decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants between 1994 and 2006, "Predicted" reports the
decline in the share of "want a job" nonparticipants as predicted by the model (excluding time fixed effects). In the category "Individual
income", "Disability" combines the effect coming from the disability dummy with the effect coming from changes in the level of social
insurance income, and "Welfare" combines the effect coming from the welfare participation dummy with the effect coming from changes in
the level welfare income.

Table 4: Difference in difference estimates of desire to work for women with and
without children
Married women

Single women

EITC

AFDC/TANF

Eissa and Hoynes (2004)

Mc Kernan et al. (2000)
Eissa and Hoynes (1996)

-2.3***
(2.6)

-3.6***
(10.3)

Demographic controls

Yes

Yes

Total decline

-3.2

-6.8

% explained

71%

52%

Policy change
Source

γ

Note: The estimation period is 1988-2010. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. In the first column ("married women"), γ measures the
relative change in desire to work for low-educated married women with children after the EITC 1993 reform. In the second column ("single
women"), γ measures the relative change in desire to work for low-educated single women with children after the AFDC/TANF 1996
reform. Controls include age group, the number of children and an "in school" dummy. “Total decline” depicts the total decline between the
post- and pre- reform sample period. “% explained” is the percentage of “total decline” attributed to the policy change.

