                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF EUROPEAN INTEGRATION

                                          Enrico Spolaore

                                       Working Paper 21250
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21250


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2015




This paper was prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of European Integration edited by Harald
Badinger and Volker Nitsch, to be published by Routledge. I thank the editors and anonymous reviewers
for their comments. All errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Enrico Spolaore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Political Economy of European Integration
Enrico Spolaore
NBER Working Paper No. 21250
June 2015
JEL No. F02,F15,F5,H41,H56,H77

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper discusses the process of European institutional integration from a political-economy perspective,
linking the long-standing political debate on the nature of the European project to the recent economic
literature on political integration and disintegration. First, we introduce the fundamental trade-off between
economies of scale associated with larger political unions and the costs from sharing public goods
and policies among more heterogeneous populations, and examine the implications of the trade-off
for European integration. Second, we describe the two main political theories of European integration
- intergovernmentalism and functionalism - and argue that both theories capture important aspects
of European integration, but that neither view provides a complete and realistic interpretation of the
process. Finally, we critically discuss the actual process of European institutional integration and its
limits, from its beginnings after World War II to the current crisis.


Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
       1. Introduction and Summary

The process of European integration is based on a time-honored strategy of partially
integrating policy functions and institutions in a few areas – such as coal and steel, trade, or,
later, a common currency - with the expectation that more integration will follow in other
areas over time.

This strategy became the main approach to European institutional integration in the 1950s,
after the collapse of a more ambitious attempt to create a defense and political community,
which would have included a common army, a common budget, and common legislative and
executive institutions - basically, a European federation. Faced with the failure to form a full
political union directly, supporters of European integration pursued an alternative path of
gradual and partial integration. The process took place mostly in technical and economic
areas but with the expectation that deeper, more “political” integration would follow, in part
as a result of the pressure from inefficiencies and crises associated with incomplete
integration. From this perspective, incompleteness was not seen as a bug but, possibly, as a
feature, as it was expected to lead to further integration down the road.

This gradualist strategy was effective at fostering durable integration when applied to areas
with large economies of scale and relatively low costs from heterogeneity of preferences and
traits across different populations – for example, the creation of a common market. The
approach, however, also led to the creation of incomplete and inefficient institutional
settings. Most notably, the euro was introduced in the absence of other institutions
historically associated with a successful monetary union, resulting in a “half-built house”
(Bergsten, 2012). A widespread rationalization of the imperfections and shortcomings of
European institutions was based on the expectation that the problems associated with
previous steps could always be fixed by more integration: commercial integration and
monetary integration would in due course be followed by more institutional and political
integration, such as a banking union, a fiscal union, or even a fully-fledged political union, in
what has been described as a “chain reaction” towards an “ever-closer union.”

A fundamental issue with this chain-reaction approach is that it tends to underestimate the
costs and constraints associated with heterogeneity of traits and preferences over public
goods and policies in populations with diverse societal structures, cultures and identities. In
fact, the trade-off between benefits from integration and heterogeneity costs is at the center
of a vast and growing literature on the political economy of integration (and disintegration).
An analysis of the implications of such trade-off can shed insights on the actual process of

                                               1
European integration and its limitations, as well as on the theories that have been developed
over the decades to understand the objectives and strategies behind the European project.

This paper provides a discussion of the process of European institutional integration from a
political-economy perspective, linking the long-standing political debate on the nature of
European integration to the more recent economic literature on political borders. 1

The rest of this paper is organized in three parts. Section 2 briefly discusses a few key
concepts on the political economy of integration and their implications for the European
project, with an emphasis on the basic trade-off between economies of scale and scope
associated with larger political unions and the costs from sharing public goods and policies
among more heterogeneous populations. Section 3 covers the two main political theories of
European integration, intergovernmentalism and functionalism, and argues that both theories
capture important aspects of European integration, but neither approach provides a complete
and realistic interpretation of this complex process. Finally, the actual process of European
institutional integration, from its beginnings after World War II to the current crisis, is
discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.

         2. The Political Economy of Institutional Integration: A Fundamental Trade-off
            and Its Implications for Europe

A useful starting point to study the political economy of institutional integration is the
fundamental trade-off between economies of scale and heterogeneity costs. 2 When larger and
diverse groups form common institutions and pool public functions and policies - a common
legal and judicial framework, a common currency, fiscal policies, defense and security, and
so on -, they can benefit from economies of scale in the provision of public goods, which are
non-rival in consumption and therefore cheaper on a per-capita basis when the costs are
spread over a larger population. Larger jurisdictions may also allow governments to
internalize externalities over a broader area, and to provide insurance against shocks, such as
natural disasters or regional economic crises.

Larger and more diverse jurisdictions, however, tend to face higher heterogeneity costs
stemming from different political, economic and cultural traits and conflicting preferences

1
  This paper paper was prepared for the Handbook of the Economics of European Integration edited by Harald
Badinger and Volker Nitsch, to be published by Routledge, and heavily builds on Spolaore (2013). General
discussions of the economic approach to political borders and integration are provided in Alesina and Spolaore
(2003) and Spolaore (2006, 2014). For overviews of the large literature on European institutional integration by
political scientists and political economists, see for example Gilpin (2001, chapter 13), Eichengreen and Frieden
(2001), Eichengreen (2006 and 2012), and Sadeh and Verdun 2009. Recent historical studies of the process of
European integration include Gilbert (2012), Ludlow (2006), James (2012), and Mourlon-Druol (2012).
2
  Alesina and Spolaore (1997, 2003) and Spolaore (2006, 2014).

                                                          2
over public goods and policies. The relations between various measures of heterogeneity
(ethnic and linguistic fractionalization and polarization, measures of genetic and linguistic
distance, and other measures of historical and cultural diversity) and a series of political
outcomes (provision of public goods, quality of government, redistribution, conflict within
and across states) have been documented in a vast and growing empirical literature, including
for instance Alesina et al. (2003), Alesina and La Ferrara (2005), Montalvo and Reynal-
Querol (2005), Esteban, Mayoral and Ray (2012), Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín and Wacziarg
(2012), Spolaore and Wacziarg (2012), and Arbatli, Ashraf and Galor (2013). This empirical
literature is still in its infancy, and there are numerous open questions about the definitions
and methods to measure the effects of heterogeneity on different outcomes. 3 Nonetheless, a
general finding is that more heterogeneous populations typically face higher political costs in
the provision of public goods and a higher likelihood of civil conflict.

In principle, heterogeneity can also be a source of benefits as well as of costs for societies. In
communities where agents have diverse preferences and characteristics, individuals and
groups can benefit by specializing in the production of different goods and services, while
also learning new ideas from each other. Benefits from heterogeneity, however, are mostly
about interactions over rival goods, which cannot be consumed simultaneously by several
people. In fact, low heterogeneity may lead to conflict if different individuals and groups
share very similar preferences over the same rival goods, such as specific territories and
resources (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2012). The opposite relation holds for diverse preferences
over non-rival goods - such as a common government, legal system, and public policies -
which must be shared by all within a given political jurisdiction, whether they like them or
not. In the area of public goods, therefore, different preferences mean higher political costs
and a higher likelihood of domestic conflict. In sum, heterogeneity of traits and preferences
is mostly beneficial when different individuals and groups interact about rival goods but
costly when the interaction is about non-rival goods. Consequently, heterogeneity of
preferences over public goods is a major limit to the integration of institutions that provide
common policies to large and diverse populations.

Up to a point, the trade-off between economies of scale and heterogeneity of preferences can
be addressed through decentralization at different layers of administration. Public goods with
higher heterogeneity and lower economies of scale can be more efficiently provided at lower
administrative levels (e.g., municipal and regional governments), while public functions with
higher economies of scale and externalities, relative to heterogeneity costs, can be centralized



3
 In particular, an important question is the extent to which ethnic and cultural divisions are endogenous, and
respond to political and institutional change - an issue on which we will return in Section 4.

                                                          3
at increasingly higher levels. 4 These ideas are partly reflected in the legal documents at the
basis of European integration. For instance, the Maastricht Treaty of 1992, which
reorganized and redefined European institutions, specified the following “principle of
subsidiarity” (Article 3b): “In areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence, the
Community shall take action, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity, only if and in
so far as the objectives of the proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member
States and can therefore, by reason of the scale or effects of the proposed action, be better
achieved by the Community.” 5

Nevertheless, the creation of layers of distinct and overlapping jurisdictions, each organized
around a subset of public functions and policies with different economies of scale and
heterogeneity costs, faces limitations and challenges both in terms of economic efficiency
and political stability. A key issue for disentangling different functions at different levels is
that the provision of public goods comes not only with significant economies of scale, but
also with economies of scope. It is usually more efficient to provide several public goods
together, rather than through separate authorities. A particularly important kind of
“economies of scope” is associated with the exercise of fundamental sovereignty and
monopoly of legitimate coercion, which is a prerequisite for the provision of a vast range of
public goods and policies. In fact, even when different public goods are decentralized at
lower administrative layers, modern federal systems tend to centralize sovereignty – which
can be defined as the residual power to take fundamental decisions over domestic and foreign
relations for a state or federation, after all other specific rights and powers have been
assigned to various layers of authorities.

In practice, the centralization of sovereignty is often achieved through the pooling of the
means on which the ultimate monopoly of legitimate coercion depends, including explicit
military power. Consequently, the formation of a sovereign polity usually goes hand in hand
with the integration of defense and security under one authority, which exercises the ultimate
monopoly of coercion within a territory. In turn, such power of coercion can be used to
collect resources and finance a broader set of public goods, on which different groups and
individuals may have different preferences. Therefore, ultimate political integration - the
formation of a sovereign state or federation - has historically been associated with the
pooling of defense, security and foreign policy – public functions with very high economies
of scale and scope but also very high heterogeneity costs across large and diverse


4
  These issues are at the center of the large literature on fiscal federalism - e.g., Oates, 1999; for a discussion from a
political-economy perspective see Alesina and Spolaore, 2003, chapters 2, 9 and 12.
5
  http://www.eurotreaties.com/maastrichtec.pdf.


                                                             4
populations. It is not clear how the European “principle of subsidiarity” would apply to the
fundamental issue of centralizing sovereign power and control over means of coercion.

Over the centuries, the formation of large and heterogeneous states, federations and empires
has taken place as the result of actions by non-democratic rulers (Leviathans) interested in
maximizing their own rents while ignoring the preferences of large part of their subjects,
and/or in response to significant external security threats. 6 In contrast, there are very few
historical examples – if any – of consensual formation of sovereign states or federations by
large and diverse populations under democratic and peaceful conditions.

In this respect, the history of European institutional integration so far has been no exception.
A founding document of the process of European integration is the Schumann declaration of
1950, which defined the pooling of coal and steel production as “the first concrete foundation
of a European federation indispensable to the preservation of peace.” Nonetheless, no
European federation was formed. In 1952 the six founders of the European Steel and Coal
Community signed a treaty for the establishment of a European Defense Community and a
European Political Community, which would have included a common army, a common
budget, and common legislative and executive institutions - basically, a European federation.
The project was abandoned, however, after the treaty failed to be ratified in the French
parliament. Instead, the supporters of European integration focused on the creation of a
European common market, established with the Treaty of Rome in 1957. The Treaty of
Rome no longer mentioned a European federation, but stated the vaguer objective of laying
the “foundations of an ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe.”

Consistently with the analysis of this Section, those earlier successes of European integration
took place in areas, such as commercial integration, where economies of scale are very high,
while heterogeneity costs are relatively low and partially offset by benefits from diversity. In
contrast, failure to integrate occurred in areas, such as defense and security, with the highest
political costs from heterogeneity. The subsequent history of European institutional
integration stems from the lessons (both learned and not learned) of those early successes and
failures at integration, as we will see in the rest of this chapter.




6
  For a classic analysis of federalism from this perspective, see Riker (1964). Conflict and political borders are
studied in Alesina and Spolaore (2005, 2006) and Spolaore (2012). For a discussion of the attempts to integrate
defense and security in Europe see Spolaore (2013, pp. 128-131).

                                                           5
         3. Political Theories of European Integration: Intergovernmentalism vs.
            Functionalism

Europe’s political economy is notoriously complex and controversial. Over the decades,
scholars and commentators have emphasized different motivations, strategies and
interactions among the several actors involved in the process of European integration, from
national governments and voters to supranational technocrats and domestic interest groups.

A traditional distinction in the political literature on European integration is between the
“intergovernmentalist” view and the “functionalist” view. 7 The two views differ in their
answers to two basic questions: what are the objectives of European integration, and who is
in charge?

Intergovernmentalists believe that the European project is in the hands of national
governments who pursue domestic interests, mostly in the economic area. For instance,
Moravcsik (1993, 1998, 2012), a leading proponent of this theory, argues that national
governments have built European institutions to pursue the economic interests of their
domestic constituencies, and views the euro as an economically-motivated project, mainly
reflecting the interests of German exporters and other powerful economic agents. This line of
analysis is part of a broader political-economy literature stressing the connections between
domestic economic interests and national attitudes and policies towards European integration
(for example, Frieden 2002). 8

From an intergovernmentalist perspective, the European Union is just a particularly complex
international organization of sovereign states. European supranational institutions, such as
the European Commission and the European Court of Justice, are only instruments and
commitment devices that nation states have built and use in order to pursue their own
objectives, while their national governments retain all fundamental power about key
decisions.



7
  We only focus on these two views here because, historically, they have been the most influential in the study of
European integration by political economists. Of course there exist many other political theories and interpretations
of European integration - for example, social constructivism, which investigates how identities such as “European
citizenship” have been “socially constructed” through the use of norms and language (see for example Rosamond,
2003) - a theme connected to the endogenous formation of a European identity, on which we briefly touch below
(see also the discussion in Spolaore, 2013).
8
  The intergovernmentalist view of European integration is sometime qualified as “liberal” intergovernmentalism to
distinguish it from “realist” approaches that also emphasize the central role of nation states, but stress power and
military interests rather than domestic economic goals achieved through international cooperation (e.g., Garrett 1993
and Gilpin 2001).

                                                         6
Functionalists, in contrast, believe that supranational institutions are distinct from national
governments, and fully in charge of specific functions - hence the term “functionalism.” 9 In
their view, “supranational actors” such as Jean Monnet (head of the European Coal and Steel
Community in the 1950s) or Jacques Delors (head of the European Commission in the 1980s
and early 1990s) played an autonomous role and provided impetus to the process,
independently of national governments’ more parochial interests.

Perhaps even more important is the functionalists’ different emphasis on the long-term
objectives and dynamics of European integration. The process of functional integration,
while starting within specific and relatively narrow economic functions (coal and steel,
trade), is expected to move to broader and more “political” areas. In the long run, economic
integration is expected to lead to political integration – either to a fully-fledged sovereign
federation (“the United States of Europe”) or to a “post-modern” political community in
which traditional sovereign states have become much less powerful or even obsolete. 10

From a functionalist perspective, building partial and incomplete institutions is not a
shortcoming, but a natural feature of a dynamic process, whereas crises and problems
associated with previous integration can be solved through further integration. The creation
of the euro can then be seen as the ultimate example of functionalist integration. From this
perspective, commercial integration and capital mobility could be maintained within Europe
only by forming a monetary union, which, in turn, might be sustained in the long run only
through further institutional integration: a banking union, a fiscal union, possibly full
political unification.

Both the intergovernmentalist view and the functionalist view capture important aspects of
European integration. However, neither view provides a complete, realistic and satisfying
interpretation of this complex process. 11

Intergovernmentalists are fundamentally correct when they stress the central role of national
governments and national interests in the actual process of European integration. The history
of the European Union (and of its predecessor, the European Community) shows that
Europe’s supranational institutions – such as the European Commission or the European
9
  The leading functionalist theorist of European integration was Haas (1958, 1964). The view of Haas and his
followers is sometime labeled as “neo-functionalist,” to distinguish it from Mitrany’s pre-existing theory of
international integration (Mitrany 1975). A critical reconsideration of functionalism was provided by Haas (1975).
For more recent analyses from a functionalist perspective see for instance Pierson (1996), Sandoltz and Stone Sweet
(1998), and Stone Sweet (2000).
10
   For an early critical discussion from a political perspective see Hoffman (1966).
11
   Recent historical studies, such as Gilbert (2012), Ludlow (2006), James (2012), and Mourlon-Druol (2012), have
also moved away from a stark dichotomy between functionalist and intergovernmentalist perspectives, while
embracing more complex and nuanced interpretations of the actual process of European integration.

                                                        7
Court of Justice - cannot move far against the fundamental interests of national governments.
Supranational institutions and procedures, while playing an important role in the daily
functioning of Europe, “could not work for a week in the absence of the will to cooperate of
the member states, especially the largest ones – Germany and France above all” (Gilbert
2012, p. 3).

Moreover, by emphasizing and analyzing the interactions between national governments and
domestic economic interests, this line of research provides useful insights on the details of
the political economy of European integration. 12

Intergovernmentalist analyses, however, with their sharp focus on domestic economic
interests, can miss the central role of long-term political goals and strategies that have
historically determined the process of European integration. At its roots, the European
project is motivated by broader political considerations. Since its very beginnings, right after
World War II, the paramount goal of the European project has been to build, through gradual
integration, a political and institutional system that would prevent the tragedies of the first
half of the 20th century, when independent and unconstrained nation states had pursued
unilateral and costly protectionist policies during the Great Depression and engaged in two
enormously destructive wars. Even though economic interests have certainly played an
important role in the actual process of European integration, the overall design and strategy
would not be comprehensible without considering its long-term political and strategic
motivations.

Insofar as it emphasizes the ultimate political goals of the process and its dynamic aspect,
functionalism is much closer to capture the political and ideological framework and strategy
behind much of the European construction, from the earlier steps by Jean Monnet and his
followers in the 1950s to the new impetus provided by Jacques Delors and his collaborators
in the 1980s and 1990s. Nevertheless, the functionalist interpretation is not fully adequate to
capture the actual process of European integration either. A problem with the theory is that it
tends to overestimate the role and powers of supranational agents and institutions - in this
dimension, as already mentioned, the intergovernmentalist view is much more realistic. 13

The overestimation of supranational actors is a symptom of a deeper issue with the
functionalist view, stemming in part from its dual nature, as a positive description of the
ideology and goals of the supporters of European integration, but also as a normative theory
of how European integration should actually proceed. While the functionalist analysis is a
very useful description of the political objectives of European integration, it is also an

12
   For example, see Frieden (1998, p. 33) for prescient insights on the political economy of European integration and
the euro.
13
   For a more extensive discussion of this point, see Spolaore (2013, pp.136-138).

                                                         8
involuntary mirror of its problems and limits. As a normative strategy of integration, the
functionalist approach tends to underestimate the obstacles and limitations that would
eventually affect a dynamic process of gradual integration towards an “ever-closer” union.

As highlighted in the previous section, in order to understand the political economy of
European integration it is crucial to consider the implications of the fundamental trade-off
between benefits from integration and heterogeneity costs. A central problem with the
functionalist strategy of European integration, based on gradual integration of specific
functions, has indeed been the lack of a realistic assessment of the increasing costs and
constraints imposed by heterogeneity of preferences over the provision of public goods and
policies when populations have different traits, cultures and identities.

As we already mentioned in Section 2, stable integration is more likely to take off in areas
such as commercial integration, where heterogeneity costs are relatively low and partly offset
by the benefits from diversity. As integration proceeds to other areas, heterogeneity costs
continue to increase and become politically prohibitive. The functionalist approach does not
anticipate that heterogeneity costs and constraints will eventually become binding and may
stop the process for good. Followers of this approach are therefore prone to setting up
incomplete and inefficient arrangements, relying on the overoptimistic expectation that such
inefficiencies can always be addressed at a later stage through additional integration.

Hence, as we will see in more detail in the next section, the functionalist perspective can
provide a useful interpretation of the earlier successes towards European integration, but its
optimistic implications are not a reliable guidance to the problems and limitations that the
process is bound to meet as functional integration moves from lower-heterogeneity areas to
higher-heterogeneity areas.

       4. The Actual Process of European Integration and its Limits

The history of European institutions includes policies that resulted in durable integration
(“successes”) as well as policies that did not (“failures”). In fact, such history started with an
early success (the formation of a coal and steel community, proposed with the Schuman
declaration in 1950 and established with the Treaty of Paris in 1951), and a dramatic failure
(the collapse of the defense and political community in 1952, discussed in Section 2). Those
two different experiences motivated the subsequent strategy of European integration. The
fathers of European institutions came to believe that the creation of an ambitious federal
structure with major political functions faced insurmountable political obstacles, at least in
the shorter run. Instead, they hoped to proceed towards increasing political integration
through a gradualist and dynamic strategy, basically along the functionalist lines described in
the previous section. Specific functions could be delegated to supranational institutions in


                                                9
relatively narrow areas, mostly technical and economic (coal and steel, common market, later
a common currency), but with the expectation that this would lead to more institutional
integration in other areas over time. In other words, Monnet and his followers shared the
functionalist view that partial integration would gradually lead to an ever-closer union over
time, by creating pressure for more functional integration.

The strategy was partly motivated by the hope that, in the long run, national politicians,
voters and interest groups would learn about the benefits of integration, and would therefore
demand broader and deeper integration in more areas. Even more important was the
expectation that different European populations and policy-makers, by learning to interact
and cooperate in economic and institutional matters, would gradually converge in values,
norms, and preferences. Over time, this would lead to an “endogenous” reduction in what we
have called heterogeneity costs, therefore facilitating further integration in more sensitive
and political areas.

These optimistic expectations have been fulfilled only in part. There is no doubt that the
European project has greatly expanded from its early beginnings, dramatically growing both
in member countries - from the initial six to twenty-eight - and in the extent of functions
involved - from a European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) to a European Economic
Community (EEC) to a European Union (EU) including an economic and monetary union
(EMU).

It is however much less clear whether European policy-makers and populations have
converged in values and preferences over public goods and policies, along the lines expected
by the supporters of European integration. In principle, cultural traits and preferences can
indeed change and adapt in response to economic and political changes. 14 There is little
evidence, however, that the kind of economic and political cooperation associated with the
building of European institutions is bringing about a significant convergence in national
preferences, characteristics, and behaviors or the formation of a unitary “European
identity.” 15

Nevertheless, the builders of European institutions did not rely only on positive mechanisms,
such as an increasing demand for integration due to learning and convergence of preferences.
Monnet and his followers also expected that partial integration might lead to further
integration, paradoxically, because of its own shortcomings and limits – its own

14
   For example, see Fearon (2006) for a discussion of the political literature on how ethnic and linguistic divisions
and their relevance can be affected by political and institutional changes. Bisin and Verdier (2010), Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2013) and Spolaore (2014) provide discussions of the growing economic literature on culture and
economic outcomes.
15
   Analyses of the political economy of “nation-building” are provided in Alesina and Spolaore (2003, pp. 76-78)
and Alesina and Reich (2013).

                                                          10
“incompleteness.” This was clearly explained by one of Monnet’s collaborators (Ball, 1994,
p. 10):
        “There was a well-conceived method in this apparent madness. All of us working
        with Jean Monnet well understood how irrational it was to carve a limited economic
        sector out of the jurisdiction of national governments and subject that sector to the
        sovereign control of supranational institutions. Yet, with his usual perspicacity,
        Monnet recognized that the very irrationality of this scheme might provide the
        pressure to achieve exactly what he wanted - the triggering of a chain reaction. The
        awkwardness and complexity resulting from the singling out of coal and steel would
        drive member governments to accept the idea of pooling other production as well.”

More recently, the functionalist argument that partial steps in integration would create need
and pressure for further integration, in a sort of “chain reaction,” was explicitly echoed by
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (2004, p. 14), a close collaborator of Jacques Delors and a key
architect of the euro:

        “[T]he road toward the single currency looks like a chain reaction in which each step
        resolved a preexisting contradiction and generated a new one that in turn required a
        further step forward. The steps were the start of the EMS [European monetary
        system] (1979), the re-launching of the single market (1985), the decision to
        accelerate the liberalization of capital movements (1986), the launching of the project
        of monetary union (1988), the agreement of Maastricht (1992), and the final adoption
        of the euro (1998).”

In fact, the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was seen by its creators not in purely
economic and technical terms, but, in Monnet’s tradition, as “a further step—and as a
prerequisite for yet other steps—in the political unification of Europe” (Padoa-Schioppa
2004, p. 6). 16 The same idea was stressed by the first President of the European Central
Bank, Wim Duisenberg, according to whom EMU was a “stepping stone on the way to a
united Europe.” 17 And this stepping-stone role could be played in spite of (or even as a
consequence of) its institutional shortcomings. In the functionalist tradition, the fact that
EMU lacked institutions historically associated with a successful monetary union - such as a
fully-fledged lender of last resort, a banking union, a fiscal union, and so on - could be
rationalized as part of a dynamic path that, in the longer term, would necessarily lead to a
political union. For instance, in 1991 German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said: "It is absurd to
expect in the long run that you can maintain economic and monetary union without political


16
   For detailed historical analyses of the negotiations and decisions leading to EMU see Dyson and Featherstone
(1999) and James (2012).
17
   Quoted in Overtveldt (2011), p. 63.

                                                        11
union." 18 In Monnet’s chain-reaction tradition, Kohl’s statement was not meant as a damning
assessment of the long-term viability of EMU, but as an optimistic prediction that,
eventually, political union would “have to” follow economic and monetary union.

The current crisis in the Euro Area certainly confirms the risks and inefficiencies associated
with incomplete institutional integration. Up to a point, recent events have also confirmed
that such inefficiencies and crises can create the pressure for more institutional integration –
for example, in banking supervision. It is indeed possible (but far from guaranteed) that
Europeans will come out of their economic, financial and political crisis with stronger and
more deeply integrated institutions. Nonetheless, the crisis has also illustrated the very high
costs, risks, and limitations associated with the chain-reaction method of partial integration. 19

As we have seen, a fundamental problem with the functionalist chain-reaction approach -
both as a theory of European integration and as a policy strategy - is that it tends to
underestimate the heterogeneity costs and constraints involved when political integration is
attempted among populations with different preferences, cultures, and identities.

Stable integration is more likely to take off in areas such as trade, where heterogeneity costs
across populations are relatively low, and partly offset by the benefits from diversity. As
integration proceeds to other areas, after low-hanging fruits are picked, steeper heterogeneity
costs are encountered. At some point, such costs may become politically prohibitive, and
stop the process, or even lead to a collapse of the whole system. The risks are particularly
high if the previous steps towards more integration have not been taken with the broad
democratic consensus of all populations involved. 20

Consequently, previous success at integrating in areas with lower heterogeneity costs (such
as commercial integration) does not necessarily imply further successes at integrating more
“political” areas with higher heterogeneity costs (such as fiscal policies or defense).
Therefore, the functionalist approach to European integration is really based on a
misconception: the expectation that economic integration will lead to political integration.
While political unification historically has been used to foster economic integration within a
unified domestic market, the opposite does not typically hold. On the contrary, economic
integration reached through international cooperation is a substitute rather than a complement
18
   Quoted in Marsh (2011), p. 301.
19
   For a more detailed discussion of these issues see Spolaore (2013, pp. 138-139). An interesting diagnosis along
partially similar lines is provided by Mody (2013). For an empirical analysis see Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
(2014), who find that the 1992 Maastricht Treaty, the 2004 enlargement and the 2010 Eurozone crisis seem to have
reduced pro-Europe sentiment among European citizens, even though most Europeans still support the common
currency. These authors conclude that “Europe seems trapped in catch-22: there is no desire to go backward, no
interest in going forward, but it is economically unsustainable to stay still.”
20
   For a discussion of the so-called democratic deficit in European institutions see Alesina and Spolaore (2003,
chapter 12).

                                                        12
of political integration. If countries can manage to lower barriers to trade among themselves
without full political integration, they will face lower incentives to form a political union
with a unified domestic market, because such union would generate smaller additional gains
from trade. In fact, both theoretical considerations and empirical evidence suggest that
international economic integration is associated not with political integration but with
political disintegration (Alesina and Spolaore 1997, 2003; Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg
2000).

In sum, the method of gradual and partial integration can lead to stable integration when
applied to areas with lower heterogeneity costs and higher economies of scale, but there is no
guarantee that it can lead to further integration in areas with much higher heterogeneity costs,
or that those costs would endogenously decrease as a consequence of integration.

The formation of a common market, as already mentioned, is an excellent instance of the
effective use of partial integration. Overall, the reduction of barriers to economic exchanges
was in the general interest of European populations, even though specific sectors within each
country benefited from protectionism. As it has often been noted (e.g., Eichengreen 2006),
institutional integration in different areas allowed “linkages” between issues and credible
side-payments. For example, Europe’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) - originally
introduced in 1962 and amounting to a substantial share of the European institutions’ budget
- can be explained as part of a deal between France and Germany, whereas German taxpayers
subsidized French farmers whereas German exporters gained access to the French market.

The creation of a common European legal framework and common supranational institutions
has provided national governments with a credible “commitment technology,” going beyond
the institutional framework of traditional international organizations. For example, in a
landmark case in the early 1960s 21, the European Court of Justice decided directly in favor of
a Dutch importer of German chemical products that had objected to a tariff charged by the
Netherlands in violation of article 12 of the Treaty of Rome. In fact, in this and other cases
the European Court of Justice went beyond the legal provisions that had been formally
agreed with the Treaty of Rome, and, according to some scholars, brought Europe close to a
federal legal system (Weiler 1991, Krasner 1999). These novel legal doctrines, however,
were established not in conflict with national governments, but exactly in order to enforce
norms consistent with national goals, such as trade liberalization. Therefore, the expansion of
powers of the European Court of Justice illustrates the viability of the strategy of
supranational institutional integration insofar as it is directed areas with relatively low
heterogeneity cost and high economies of scale and externalities. In contrast, supranational

21
     Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen (26/62)

                                                        13
integration and centralization have been met with increasingly binding constraints when
attempting to move to more sensitive and political areas. For instance, in recent years
Germany’s Constitutional Court has elaborated the legal theory of conditional acceptance of
the supremacy of European norms, which can be accepted only insofar as they are consistent
with “fundamental German rights.” In an important ruling on the Lisbon Treaty in 2009, 22
the German Constitutional Court explicitly called the national states “the masters of the
treaties,” and "therefore must see to it that there are no uncontrolled, independent
centralization dynamics" within the EU.” 23

In spite of all its limitations, many supporters of the European project believe that economic
integration has benefited Europeans not only directly – through gains from trade – but also
indirectly, by reducing the risk of a European conflict. The hypothesis that international trade
reduces the risk of war has a long pedigree, going back at least to Montesquieu and Kant, and
is part of the broader theory of “liberal peace” brought in by democracy, trade, and
international organizations (e.g., Oneal and Russett 1999). Recent empirical studies (Martin,
Mayer and Thoenig 2008 and 2010) cast doubt on a positive relation between multilateral
openness (globalization) and peace. On the contrary, the ability to trade with third parties
reduces the costs of going to war between pairs of countries. Bilateral trade, however, by
increasing the opportunity cost of war between two countries, lowers the likelihood of
conflict between them, even when controlling for the degree of historical, linguistic and
religious similarity between their populations (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2013). These studies
suggest that regional trade agreements between “old enemies” – such as the formation of a
European common market – have probably decreased the risk of conflict among European
countries after World War II. An open question is whether European integration has played a
major or only a minor role in securing peace in Europe, when compared to other factors, such
as the role of the United States and NATO.

           5. Conclusions

This paper has discussed the political economy of European integration in light of the
implications of the fundamental trade-off between benefits from integration and political
costs associated with heterogeneous preferences over public goods and policies.

High heterogeneity costs have so far prevented Europeans from forming a full political
union. Attempts to integrate sensitive political functions –such as defense and foreign policy
– have not gone very far. Instead, Europeans have adopted a gradual strategy of pooling and
delegating functions and policies to supranational institutions in a relatively limited set of

22
     BVerfG, 2 BvE 2/08 of June 6, 2009
23
     Quoted in Spiegel, 2009.

                                              14
areas, mostly economic, while maintaining other prerogatives at the national or sub-national
level. In spite of supranational rhetoric, ultimate sovereign control and the monopoly of the
legitimate use of coercion have firmly remained in the hands of national governments.

This strategy has provided significant economic benefits to Europeans when appropriately
implemented in areas with relatively low heterogeneity costs and high economies of scale
and scope. However, serious problems and crises have their roots in the expectation that
incomplete and partial integration could always be overcome with further integration, in a
“chain-reaction” towards an “ever-closer union.” The euro, with its institutional
incompleteness and shortcomings, is a child of this strategy.

A realistic political-economy analysis naturally suggests a different, and potentially more
effective strategy. The likelihood of achieving durable integration is higher if further steps
towards integrating policies and institutions are undertaken only when they are economically
beneficial and politically stable on their own merits, and when they are democratically
supported by the populations involved.




                                             15
                                     REFERENCES

Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat and Romain
Wacziarg (2003), “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155-94.

Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2005), "Ethnic Diversity and Economic
Performance," Journal of Economic Literature, 43(3): 762-800.

Alesina, Alberto and Bryony Reich (2013), “Nation Building,” NBER Working paper 18839.

Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (1997), “On the Number and Size of Nations,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (4): 1027-56.

Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2003), The Size of Nations, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2005), "War, Peace, and the Size of Countries,"
Journal of Public Economics, 89(7): 1333-54.

Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore (2006), “"Conflict, Defense Spending, and the Number
of Nations," European Economic Review, 50(1): 91-120.

Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg (2000), “Economic Integration and
Political Disintegration,” American Economic Review, 90(5): 1276-96.

Arbatli, Eren, Quamrul Ashraf and Oded Galor (2013), “The Nature of Civil Conflict,”
Working Papers 2013-15, Brown University.

Ball, George W. (1994), “Forward” to Jean Monnet. The First Statesman of
Interdependence, by François Duchêne, New York: Norton

Bergsten, C. Fred (2012), "Why the Euro Will Survive. Completing the Continent's Half-
Built House," Foreign Affairs, September/October.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2010), “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and
Socialization,” in Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matt Jackson (eds.), Handbook of Social
Economics, Elsevier.

Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín and Romain Wacziarg (2012), "The Political Economy
of Linguistic Cleavages," Journal of Development Economics, 97(2): 322-38.

Desmet, Klaus , Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín and Shlomo Weber (2009), "Linguistic Diversity and
Redistribution," Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(6): 1291-318.


                                             16
Dyson, Kenneth and Kevin Featherstone (1999), The Road to Maastricht. Negotiating
Economic and Monetary Union, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry (2006), “European Integration,” in Barry R. Weingast and Donald A.
Wittman (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
799-813.

Eichengreen, Barry (2012), “European Monetary Integration with Benefit of Hindsight,”
Journal of Common Market Studies, 50 (S1) 123-36.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffry A. Frieden (2001), “The Political Economy of European
Monetary Unification: An Analytical Introduction,” in Barry Eichengreen and Jeffry
Frieden, (eds.), The Political Economy of European Monetary Unification,
Boulder: Westview Press, 1-21.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral and Debraj Ray (2012),"Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical
Study," American Economic Review, 102(4): 1310-42.

Fearon, James (2006), “Ethnic Mobilization and Ethnic Violence,” in Barry R. Weingast and
Donald A. Wittman (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 852-68.

Frieden, Jeffry A. (1998), “The Euro: Who Wins? Who Loses?" Foreign Policy, 112: 24-40.

Frieden, Jeffry A. (2002), "Real Sources of European Currency Policy: Sectoral Interests and
European Monetary Integration." International Organization 56(4): 831-60.

Garrett, Geoffrey (1993), “The Politics of Maastricht,” Economics and Politics, 5(2): 105–
23.

Gilpin, Robert (2001), Global Political Economy. Understanding the international Economic
Order, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Gilbert, Mark (2012), European Integration. A Concise History. Lanham: Rowman
Littlefield.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2014), “Monnet’s Error?”, EIEF,
Northwestern and Chicago Booth School.

James, Harold (2012), Making the European Monetary Union, Cambridge (MA): Harvard
University Press.

Haas, Ernst B. (1958), The Uniting of Europe: Political, Social, and Economic Forces, 1950-
1957, London: Stevens.

                                             17
Haas, Ernst B. (1964), Beyond the Nation State, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Haas, Ernst B. (1975), The Obsolence of Regional Integration Theory, Institute of
International Studies, University of California.

Hoffmann, Stanley (1966), “Obsolete or Obstinate? The Fate of the Nation-State and the
Case of Western Europe,” Daedalus, 95 (3): 862-915.

Krasner, Stephen D. (1999), Sovereignty. Organized Hypocrisy, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Ludlow, N. Piers (2006), The European Community and the Crises of the 1960s: Negotiating
the Gaulist Challenge, London: Routledge.

Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2008), "Make Trade Not War?",
Review of Economic Studies, 75(3): 865-900

Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2010), "The Geography of Conflicts
and Free Trade Agreements," CEPR Discussion Papers 7740.

Mitrany, David (1970), The Functional Theory of Politics. New York: St. Martin's Press.

Mody, Ashoka (2013), “A Schuman Compact for the Euro Area,” Bruegel Essay and Lecture
Series.
Montalvo, Jose G. and Marta Reynal-Querol (2005), “Ethnic Polarization, Potential Conflict
and Civil Wars,” American Economic Review, 95 (3): 796-816.
Moravcsik, Andrew (1993), "Preferences and Power in the European Community: A Liberal
Intergovernmentalist Approach," Journal of Common Market Studies, 31 (4): 473–524.
Moravcsik, Andrew (1998), The Choice for Europe. Social Purpose and State Power from
Messina to Maastricht, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Moravcsik, Andrew (2012), "Europe After the Crisis," Foreign Affairs, May/June

Marsh, David (2011), The Euro. The Battle for the New Global Currency, New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Mourlon-Druol, Emmanuel (2012), A Europe Made of Money. The Emergence of the
European Monetary System, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Oates, Wallace E. (1999), “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism,” Journal of Economic Literature
37: 1120-49.



                                             18
Oneal, J. R., and B. M. Russett (1999), The Kantian Peace: The Pacific Benefits of
Democracy, Interdependence, and International Organizations,” World Politics 52(1):1–37.

Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso (2004), The Euro and Its Central Bank. Getting United After the
Union, Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.

Pierson, Paul (1996), “The Path to European Integration: a Historical Institutionalist
Analysis,” Comparative Political Studies, 29: 123-63.

Riker, William (1964), Federalism, New York: Little Brown.

Rosamond, Ben (2003), “New Theories of European Integration,” in Michelle Cini (ed.),
European Union Politics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 109-127.

Sadeh, Tel and Amy Verdun (2009), “Explaining Europe’s Monetary Union: A Survey of the
Literature,” International Studies Review, 11: 277-301.

Sandholtz, Wayne and Alec Stone Sweet (eds.) (1998), European Integration and
Supranational Governance, Oxford University Press.

Spiegel (2009), “Germany's Lisbon Treaty Ruling: Brussels Put Firmly in the Back Seat,”
July 6, online version in English: http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/germany-s-
lisbon-treaty-ruling-brussels-put-firmly-in-the-back-seat-a-634506.html

Spolaore, Enrico (2006), “National Borders and the Size of Nations,” in Barry R. Weingast
and Donald A. Wittman (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 778-98.

Spolaore, Enrico (2012), “National Borders, Conflict and Peace,” in Michelle R. Garfinkel
and Stergios Skaperdas (eds), Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Peace and Conflict,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 763-86.

Spolaore, Enrico (2013), “What is European Integration Really About? A Political Guide for
Economists,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3): 125-44

Spolaore, Enrico, ed. (2014), Culture and Economic Growth, Cheltenham: Edgar Edwin.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg (2012), “War and Relatedness,” Tufts and UCLA
Anderson School.

Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg (2013), “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic
Development?” Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2): 1-45.



                                              19
Stone Sweet, Alec (2000), Governing with Judges: Constitutional Politics in Europe,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Van Overtveldt, Johan (2011), The End of the Euro, Chicago: Agate Publishing.

Weiler, Jospeh H. H. (1991), “The Transformation of Europe,” Yale Law Journal, 100: 2403-
83.




                                            20
