NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRATEGIC POLICY CHOICE IN STATE-LEVEL REGULATION:
THE EPA'S CLEAN POWER PLAN
James B. Bushnell
Stephen P. Holland
Jonathan E. Hughes
Christopher R. Knittel
Working Paper 21259
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21259
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

The authors thank seminar participants at the Energy Institute at Haas, the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, the University of California at Berkeley and the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Bushnell’s work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under award 1229008. Bushnell serves on the Market Surveillance Committee to the California
Independent System Operator (CAISO). The MSC is an independent advisory committee to the CAISO’s
Board of Governors.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21259.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by James B. Bushnell, Stephen P. Holland, Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Policy Choice in State-Level Regulation: The EPA's Clean Power Plan
James B. Bushnell, Stephen P. Holland, Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel
NBER Working Paper No. 21259
June 2015
JEL No. L5,L9,Q48,Q54
ABSTRACT
Flexibility in environmental regulations can lead to reduced costs if it allows additional abatement
from lower cost sources or if policy tailoring and experimentation across states increases regulatory
efficiency. The EPA's 2014 Clean Power Plan, which implements greenhouse gas regulation of power
plants under the Clean Air Act, allows substantial regulatory flexibility. The Clean Power Plan sets
state-level 2030 goals for emissions rates (in lbs CO2 per MWh) with substantial variation in the goals
across states. The Clean Power Plan allows states considerable flexibility in attaining these goals.
In particular, states can choose whether to implement the rate standards goals or equivalent mass-based
goals (i.e., emissions cap and trade, CAT). Moreover, states can choose whether or not to join with
other states in implementing their goals. We analyze incentives to adopt inefficient rate standards
versus efficient CAT standards using both analytical and simulation models. We have five main results.
First, we theoretically show that industry supply can be efficient under both CAT regulation and rate-based
regulation. However, under rate-based standards the carbon price must equal the social cost of carbon
and the rate standard must be equal across all the states. Second, we illustrate important differences
in the incentives of a unified coalition of states and the incentives of a single state. Third, our simulation
results show that when states fail to coordinate on a policy, the merit order can be ``scrambled'' quite
dramatically leading to significant inefficiencies. Fourth, the Nash equilibrium of a game between
coastal and inland western states is an inefficient policy for consumers and an uncoordinated policy
for generators. Finally, we show that how new plants are treated under the Clean Power Plan has large
effects on the scale and location of entry.
James B. Bushnell
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave.
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
jbbushnell@ucdavis.edu
Stephen P. Holland
Bryan School of Business and Economics
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC 27402-6165
and NBER
sphollan@uncg.edu
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21259

Jonathan E. Hughes
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
0256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309
jonathan.e.hughes@colorado.edu
Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Within the United States, state-by-state variation in regulatory approaches has been more
of the norm than an exception. Within the utility industries, individual state regulatory
commissions have used substantially different variations on the rate-of-return regulatory
framework, for example, while some states have chosen to rely on wholesale power markets
instead of vertically integrated utilities. In the environmental realm, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has often deferred to state or local air quality regulators to
develop specific implementation plans to achieve the EPA’s environmental mandates. The
Clean Air Act, one of the dominant environmental regulatory instruments, requires the EPA
to leave regulatory decisions up to individual states.
In electricity markets, the regulatory actions of states, or even local communities, often
affect the market outcomes in surrounding areas because electricity flows throughout regional
networks. In the climate change policy arena, California and states in the northeastern U.S.
have faced this issue with their unilateral adoption of cap-and-trade programs limiting carbon emissions from in-state sources. In both instances, there have been concerns that such
actions could spur “leakage” of both emissions and of beneficial economic activity to the
neighboring uncapped regions; specifically, while emissions may decrease within the regulatory jurisdictions, emissions may increase elsewhere as output increases from unregulated
power plants.1
A more subtle form of economic spillovers can arise when individual states respond to
regulatory requirements with different instruments. The choice of instrument affects each
power plant’s opportunity cost of selling electricity. Therefore, certain policies may provide
a competitive advantage to power plants within a particular state, and this advantage will
depend on the policies adopted in other states. In the face of these incentives, it is not clear
the equilibrium outcome will yield the efficient mix of policies.
Recent actions by the EPA to address greenhouse gas emissions create a similar dynamic.
In this case however, the stakes are much higher than the examples above. The EPA’s “Clean
Power Plan” (CPP) proposes major reductions in carbon emissions from electricity generators in the United States (US). Focusing on the electricity sector, the CPP uses existing
provisions of the Clean Air Act Amendments to regulate a substantial share of carbon emissions. Due in part to inaction at the federal level, recent US climate policy has been driven
almost exclusively by state and regional initiatives. This has raised concerns over inefficiencies from uncoordinated policies (Bushnell, Peterman and Wolfram (2008)). A national
1

See Fowlie (2009) and Chen (2009).

framework holds the potential to decrease inefficiencies created by the patchwork of state
and regional policies and could improve US standing in international climate negotiations
(Newell, Pizer and Raimi (2012), Stavins (2008)).
The regulatory approach taken by the EPA is, in many ways, unprecedented. The CPP
establishes state-level targets for carbon emissions rates in lbs of carbon dioxide per megawatt
hour of electricity generated (lbs per MWh). States have a great deal of flexibility in how
to achieve these goals. For example, they may adopt the default rate standard or they
could adopt an equivalent “mass-based” regulation such as a carbon cap and trade system
(CAT). Under a rate standard, the state must decrease its carbon emissions rate, whereas
under a mass-based standard the state must decrease its aggregate emissions (e.g., create
an emissions cap). Because these systems create different incentives, effects on consumers
and producers within a state could be quite different depending on the type of regulation
adopted. Because electricity is traded regionally across state lines, these effects depend on
both the type of regulation adopted by each state as well as regulations adopted by its
trading partners. Furthermore, the states’ private incentives may be at odds with those of
a national social planner.
We analyze the potential effects of the CPP in terms of electricity market outcomes and
state adoption incentives. We first analyze a general theoretical model and then calibrate a
simulation model to analyze electricity markets in the western United States.
We have five main results. First, we theoretically show that industry supply, i.e., the
merit order, can be efficient under both CAT regulation and rate-based regulation. However,
under rate-based standards the carbon price must equal the social cost of carbon and the
rate standard must be equal across all the states. Importantly, if carbon prices are equal
across states but rate standards are not equal, carbon costs would be different for identical
generators in the different states and thus the merit order could be inefficient. Efficiency
of supply is a necessary but not sufficient condition for efficiency. In fact, if demand is not
perfectly inelastic, we show that only CAT can be efficient. This result echoes earlier results
in the literature, e.g., Helfand (1991), Holland, Hughes and Knittel (2009).
Second, we illustrate important differences in the incentives of a unified coalition of states
and the incentives of a single state. For the coalition of states, adoption of CAT is best from
an efficiency perspective. However, from the perspective of an individual state, adoption of
a rate standard (instead of CAT) results in lower electricity prices. This benefits consumers
(both in this state and in other states) so consumers have an incentive to lobby for adoption
of rate standards. From a generator’s perspective, lower electricity prices from adoption of a
rate standard could lead to lower profits. However, regulated generators’ costs fall by more
2

than the electricity prices fall. This leads to a split in incentives for generators. Generators
whose operations are not covered by the regulation, e.g., distributed generation, renewables,
nuclear, small fossil plants, prefer the high electricity prices associated with CAT. On the
other hand, regulated generators (e.g., existing fossil plants) benefit from lower costs and
prefer rate standards. Holding carbon prices fixed, we show adoption of a rate standard is a
dominant strategy from the perspective of “covered” generators, but adoption of CAT is a
dominant strategy from the perspective of “uncovered” generators.
We explore our theoretical predictions using a simulation model for the eleven states in the
western interconnection of the U.S. electricity grid simulating a variety of regulation scenarios
including: no regulation (business as usual, BAU), a single West-wide CAT standard, a single
West-wide rate standard, state-by-state CAT standards, and state-by-state rate standards.
We also simulate mixed CAT and rate standards across two coalitions: the Coastal states
(CA, OR, and WA) and the Inland states (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, UT, and WY). We
update the model with current natural gas prices and test the sensitivity of our results to
this assumption.
This leads to our third main finding: when states fail to coordinate on a policy, the
merit order can be “scrambled” quite dramatically leading to significant inefficiencies. In
particular, state-by-state CAT or rate standards result in full-marginal costs (and a merit
order) which are substantially different than would result under a west-wide policy. We
show the merit order is further distorted when coalitions of states adopt different policies.
To estimate welfare effects of the different policies, we first calculate the short-run equilibria
under the different scenarios. We analyze changes in consumer surplus, generator profits,
carbon market revenue, and calculate the deadweight loss of each scenario based on an
estimate of the social cost of carbon. We assume the carbon price under a West-wide CAT
equals the social cost of carbon and therefore produces no deadweight loss. Under business
as usual, deadweight loss is approximately $0.69 billion per year.
The deadweight loss from adopting a West-wide rate standard is about 30% of the BAU
deadweight loss. This is due to electricity prices that are too low relative to the first best
resulting in too much consumption of electricity. This lower electricity price implies higher
consumer surplus under a rate standard. Perhaps more importantly, our short-run analysis
also shows substantial deadweight loss from a failure to coordinate policies. In particular,
state-by-state rate standards result in a deadweight loss which is twice that of business as
usual, i.e., which is twice as bad as doing nothing. In contrast, the deadweight loss from
failures to coordinate on CAT standards is only 30% of the BAU deadweight loss.
Fourth, we analyze the incentives to form regional trading markets. We consider the
3

incentives of the two blocks of states defined above: Coastal and Inland states. Our calculations show that from an abatement cost perspective (the sum of consumer surplus, generator
surplus, and any carbon market revenue) the strategic interaction between the regions would
result in west-wide adoption of CAT, i.e., CAT/CAT is the “Nash equilibrium”. When we
look at the individual sets of stakeholders, CAT/CAT is no longer an equilibrium. From a
consumer’s perspective, the Nash equilibrium would be Rate/Rate, i.e., would result in westwide adoption of a rate standard. The incentives of firms depend on the mix of covered and
uncovered generators. From the generator’s perspective, we find there is a strong incentive
to have different regulatory mechanisms; Cap/Rate and Rate/Cap are both Nash equilibria.
Finally, we analyze investment decisions. At the time of this writing, the extent to
which state-level plans may or may not include new plants under their Clean Power Plan
compliance strategies has not been resolved. Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act covers
only existing sources. New sources are regulated separately and will have to comply with a
source-specific CO2 emissions rate standard. We analyze investment in new combined-cycle
gas turbines under an assumption of 10% demand growth relative to 2007. Under a CAT
system, abatement levels are dramatically lower when new investments are excluded. Under
a rate standard, abatement levels are higher when new investments are excluded. Average
abatement costs are generally higher when new plants are excluded under CAT. The location
of new investment will also depend on the regulatory mix. In general new investment will
occur in the rate-standard regions if it is included under the Clean Power Plan, since CO2
emissions from a combined-cycle gas turbine are below the Clean Power Plan standard. Our
calculations show that investment swings can be quite dramatic for different changes in the
regulatory mix.
This work contributes to the literature on environmental and economic spillovers from
local climate policies. The fact that GHG policy has been driven at the local, rather than
national level, has long created concern over the geographic limitations of the regulations.
Three concerns exist. First, as noted environmental targets can be undermined if production
is able to shift away from the jurisdictional reach of the regulator through either leakage or
reshuffling of production sources.2 Second, the existence of many local regulatory programs is
unlikely to lead to the efficient amount of abatement across the regions as marginal abatement
costs will not equalize. Third, regulatory action in one area may put firms in that region at a
competitive disadvantage relative to firms in unregulated regions. These concerns have been
a challenge for regional climate initiatives in the US. More generally, concerns over leakage
have been a challenge for international climate agreements. In the crafting of European
2

See Bushnell, Peterman and Wolfram (2008), Fowlie (2009), and Chen (2009).

4

CO2 market, as well as the now defunct Waxman-Markey bill that would have established
a national cap in the United States, much attention has been paid to the “competitiveness”
question, which is fundamentally related to how vulnerable domestic producers are to leakage
from imports.
Our theoretical model is most closely related to Fischer (2003). Fischer analyzes carbon
trading between CAT and rate standards and finds that such trade raises carbon emissions.
Our theoretical work extends the work of Fischer by analyzing two components which are
necessary for understanding the CPP. First, we explicitly model trading in the product market (electricity) which crucially affects the interactions of the states’ policy choices. Second,
we analyze the states’ adoption incentives for CAT and rate standards. Burtraw, et al.
(Burtraw et al., 2015) also simulate electricity system outcomes under the CPP. They show
that the choice of allocation policy can mitigate some of the perverse effects of inconsistent
state regulatory choices. As we show here, however, states may not find it in their interest
to mitigate those effects.
Finally, our work contributes to the literature on rate-based environmental regulation.
Holland, Hughes and Knittel (2009) show a rate standard cannot, in general, achieve the efficient allocation of emissions and energy production.3 In the case of a national low carbon fuel
standard (LCFS) for transportation fuels, Holland, Hughes and Knittel (2009) and Holland
et al. (Forthcoming) find the inefficiency is quite large. Average abatement costs are several
times greater under an LCFS compared with a CAT system that achieves the same emissions
reduction. We make three main contributions to this literature. First, prior work assumes
demand for energy is essentially static. Since electricity demand can vary substantially hour
to hour, our work explicitly captures time varying demand. Importantly, because different
generators are dispatched in different periods depending on demand, mixed regulation may
introduce inefficiencies by distorting the merit order. Second, we quantify the efficiency cost
of rate standards compared to CAT policies in the electricity sector. While prior theory results imply rate standards are inefficient, we use our calibrated simulation model to estimate
the magnitude of these effects. Third, we investigate states’ unilateral incentives to adopt
rate standards or CAT regulations. Since the EPA rule allows states to choose which system
to adopt, understanding these incentives has important policy implications.4
Section 2 discusses the Clean Power Plan in more detail and provides policy background.
Section 3 develops the theoretical model and derives the theoretical results. Section 4
3

This inefficiency does not arise when rates are calculated using an exogenous base such as historical
emissions (Holland, Hughes and Knittel, 2009) or GDP (Pizer, 2005).
4
See also Holland (2012), Huang et al. (2013), Pizer (2005) and Zilberman et al. (2013).

5

presents the simulation model and Section 5 describes the results. Section 6 concludes.

2

The Clean Power Plan: GHG Regulation under the
Clean Air Act

Since the landmark 2007 decision by the U.S. Supreme Court in Massachusetts v. EPA, the
EPA has taken several steps to limit GHG emissions under the Clean Air Act (CAA). One
significant milestone occurred on June 2, 2014 when the Obama administration released the
Clean Power Plan (CPP) proposing to regulate GHG emissions from existing power plants.
Rather than following the usual permitting process, the CPP instead uses provisions in
Section 111 of the CAA. Section 111 provides a flexible framework for regulation, but also
imposes constraints on the types of policies that may be implemented under the CPP.
Regulation under Section 111 requires that the EPA establish “standards of performance”
which are defined as as “a standard for emissions of air pollutants which reflects the degree
of emission limitation achievable through the application of the best system of emission
reduction.” The text also requires state-level implementation of the standards.
The Clean Power Plan implements Section 111 by establishing emissions rates (in lbs
CO2 per MWh) for each state.5 These goals are constructed based on the estimated “best
system of emissions reductions” for each state. The states then develop plans for achieving
those goals, and the EPA approves the plans.
To estimate the best system of emissions reductions goals for each state, the Clean Power
Plan uses four “building blocks” each of which contributes to emissions reductions. The first
building block focuses on emissions from coal-fired generation. The second building block
focuses on shifting generation from relatively dirty coal-fired plants to relatively cleaner gasfired plants. The third building block requires increased generation from low emissions or
zero-emissions generation (e.g., nuclear and renewables). The final (fourth) building block
focuses on energy efficiency improvements. Efficiency improvements are treated as equivalent
to zero-emissions generation, thus both the third and fourth building blocks reduce the goal’s
emissions rate by increasing the denominator of the “lbs CO2 per MWh” goal.
5

It is unclear why the CPP specifies rate standards (i.e., in lbs CO2 per MWh) instead of mass-based
goals (i.e., in lbs CO2 ). The rationale is likely that rate standards are synonymous with performance goals
as required in Section 111. Comments to the EPA recommend that the CPP publish equivalent mass-based
goals for each state.

6

Each state’s emissions reductions goal from the four building blocks was published by
the EPA for 2030 with an interim goal for 2020. The goals range across states from less
than a 20% reduction in the emissions rate for North Dakota to over a 70% reduction
in the emissions rate for Washington (see NRDC Summary of EPA’s Clean Power Plan).
The percent emissions reductions from Building Block 2 (the largest building block) are
illustrated in Figure A.1. It is hard to compare the stringency of these different goals across
states without knowledge of the marginal abatement cost curves across states. Nonetheless,
it is clear that there is substantial variation in goals across states.
The CPP allows states to meet their goals by adopting either a “rate-based standard” or
a “mass-based standard,” i.e., a cap-and-trade (CAT) policy. The CPP also allows states to
join a regional multi-state plan.6 However, the CPP neither compels states to adopt a CAT
nor compels states to follow a regional approach. This flexibility could allow states to tailor
their regulations to better fit their unique circumstances. Alternatively, the flexibility could
lead states to adopt inefficient regulations which benefit some stakeholders at the expense
of others and lead to significant impacts in other states.

3

The model

Consider a model of electricity generation and consumption in multiple states (regions). Let
s index the states. Since electricity cannot be economically stored, prices vary across time
if demand varies. Let t index hours and assume electricity flows freely across the states so
that the electricity price in hour t is pt and is common across all the states.7 Total demand
at time t is given by Dt (pt ), and (net) consumer surplus, CS, is found by integrating under
the demand curve and summing over t.8
Supply in the model comes from a variety of generating units each with a constant
marginal cost of generation and a limited capacity. Since the generating units may be
regulated differently across states, we differentiate generating units by their location. Let
i index the technologies (e.g., coal-fired, combustion turbine, etc.) and s index the states.
6

The CPP states: “A state could adopt the rate-based form of the goal established by the EPA or an
equivalent mass-based form of the goal. A multi-state approach incorporating either a rate- or mass-based
goal would also be approvable based upon a demonstration that the state’s plan would achieve the equivalent
in stringency, including compliance timing, to the state-specific rate-based goal set by the EPA.”
7
In the simulations, we extend the model to include transmission constraints.
8
To analyze the distribution of consumer surplus, CSs , across the states, we assume that each state’s
share of demand is a constant fraction of total demand.

7

Assume ci is the marginal cost of generating from technology i; q̄si is the installed capacity
in state s of technology i; and βi is the carbon emissions rate of technology i.
Under a market-based carbon regulation, costs also include carbon costs. Let τ be the
social cost of carbon, and let r ∈ {BAU, CAT, RS} index the carbon regulations: “business
as usual,” “cap-and-trade,” and “rate standards.”9,10
Define the full marginal cost, F M Csir , as the sum of the marginal generation plus (private)
carbon costs. Below we define the full marginal cost for CAT and rate standards. In the
absence of carbon regulation, i.e.., in BAU , private carbon costs are zero and F M CsiBAU = ci .
We also define the full marginal social cost as the marginal generation plus social carbon
costs, i.e., ci +βi τ .11 Welfare, W r , under regulation r is defined as the gross consumer surplus
less full social costs, or, equivalently, the sum of net consumer surplus, generator profit, and
any carbon market revenue minus carbon damages.
The supply from each technology is determined by comparing the electricity price with
the full marginal cost. Generators supply at capacity if the electricity price exceeds their
full marginal cost, supply nothing if the price is below their full marginal cost, and supply
any amount up to capacity if the price equals their full marginal cost.
The market supply is determined by aggregating the supply from each generation technology. The resulting market supply is a non-decreasing step function which orders the
technologies by their full marginal cost. The order of the technologies along the supply
curve determines the order in which generation units would be called into service as demand
increases and is called the merit order.
The equilibrium electricity price in hour t is found from the intersection of hour t demand
and market supply. Specifically, under carbon regulation r, the price in hour t is given by:
prt = min{p : Dt (p) ≤

XX
s

Φ(F M Csir ≤ p)q̄si },

(1)

i

where Φ is an indicator function which takes the value one if the argument is true and zero
otherwise. Thus Φ(F M Csir ≤ p) is one if F M Csir ≤ p, i.e., if technology i is willing to supply
at price p and is zero otherwise. The set defined in Eq. 1 is the set of prices for which there
is excess supply. The minimum of this set will either be a price at which demand exactly
9

The CPP defines “rate-based standards” and “mass-based standards”. We simply refer to “rate standards” and “CAT” throughout.
10
Below we define additional regulatory environments, e.g., CAT x refers to a state with a CAT when other
states may have rate standards.
11
The full marginal social cost does not depend on the state or the carbon regulation.

8

equals market supply when all inframarginal generators supply at capacity (i.e., on a vertical
portion of the supply curve) or will be a price at which any smaller price would have excess
demand (i.e., on a horizontal portion of the supply curve).
Based on these equilibrium prices, we can now characterize the equilibrium generation
r
is equilibrium generation in state s from technology
and profits of each technology. If qsit
P r
r
r
r
i in hour t under regulation r, then profits are defined as πsi
≡
t (pt − F M Csi )qsit for
technology i in state s under carbon regulation r.12 Finally, we define equilibrium carbon
P P P
r
.
emissions as Carbonr = s i t βi qsit

3.1

Cap-and-trade (CAT) regulation

We now turn to equilibrium under a cap-and-trade (CAT) regulation limiting total carbon
emissions. Let Es be allowable emissions in state s and pcs be the price of tradeable certificates for one unit of carbon emissions in state s. It is well known that such a cap-and-trade
program raises costs of generators in proportion to their carbon emissions, and thus the full
marginal cost of technology i is F M CsiCAT = ci + βi pcs in state s.
These full marginal costs are illustrated in panel (a) of Fig. 1. The figure shows the
marginal costs of four technologies: nuclear (cN ), coal (cC ), gas (cG ), and oil (cO ). As
illustrated, the unregulated merit order would be first nuclear, then coal, gas, and finally oil
because cN < cC < cG < cO . If the emissions rates are such that βO > βC > βG > βN = 0,
the carbon regulation increases the full marginal costs of coal-fired generation more than
of gas-fired generation due to coal’s higher carbon emissions. Thus as illustrated the CAT
regulation switches the merit order of coal- and gas-fired generation. Market supply would
be found from Fig. 1 by re-ordering the technologies according to their full marginal costs.
If all states adopt CAT regulations, the equilibrium electricity price in hour t is charCAT
≡
acterized by Eq. 1 with this full marginal cost. Generator profits are given by πsi
12

Technically, we define:
r
qsit



q̄si ,
r
= q̄si αsit


0

r
if F M Csi
< prt ,
r
if F M Csi = prt ,
r
> prt .
if F M Csi

The equilibrium supply has three cases. If price is above marginal cost, then generation is at capacity.
If price is below marginal cost, then generation is zero. If price is equal to marginal cost, we assume
R
r
, where 0 < αsit
< 1. We define
that each generatorPsupplies
the same fraction of their capacity αsit
P
R
r
r
P
P
D(p
)−
Φ(F
M
C
<p
−ǫ)q̄
si
r
r
t
si
t
αsit = P P(Φ(F M C r <pr +ǫ)−Φ(F M C r <pr −ǫ))q̄si , where ǫ is small. Note that s i (Φ(F M Csi
< prt + ǫ) −
t
t
si
si
r
< prt − ǫ))q̄si is the additional capacity
becomes inframarginal when the price increases
Φ(F M Csi
P which
P
r
r
from pt − ǫ to prt + ǫ. Only the portion D(prt ) − s i Φ(F M Csi
< prt − ǫ)q̄si of this additional capacity is
required. So we assume that each technology on the margin supplies the same proportion of this additional
r
may need to be redefined such that the carbon market clears.
generation. With a carbon policy αsit

9

P
CAT
CAT
= t (pCAT
− ci − βi pcs )qsit
. Thus generator profits do not
− F M CsiCAT )qsit
t
include carbon market revenue, e.g., permits are auctioned not grandfathered, and welfare
calculations must account for the carbon market revenue separately.
P

CAT
t (pt

To complete the characterization of the CAT equilibrium, we describe equilibrium in the
market for carbon certificates. Since the supply of permits is fixed at Es , demand equals
P P
CAT
= Es . Note that a higher carbon price pcs decreases
supply in state s when i t βi qsit
carbon emissions, so there exists a carbon price which clears the carbon market.
The above characterization of the market equilibrium under CAT assumes each state
has its own independent regulation. The model is readily extended to allow carbon trading
between states. If states s and s′ allow carbon trading, then the price of carbon certificates
is equal across both states, i.e., pcs = pcs′ , and the market equilibrium is characterized by
P P
P P
CAT
+ i t βi qsCAT
= Es + Es′ . It is well known that allowing trading across
′ it
i
t βi qsit
cap-and-trade programs reduces the cost of achieving the aggregate emissions target. Note
that the equilibrium is invariant to the distribution of the cap across the states, i.e., only
the aggregate cap is relevant.

3.2

Rate standard regulation

Next we characterize equilibrium under a rate standard. A rate standard limits the aggregate
carbon emissions per MWh of electricity and can be tradeable (see Holland, Hughes and
Knittel (2009)). Let σs be allowed emissions per MWh in state s. Any technology whose
emissions rate, βi , exceeds the standard would be required to purchase certificates per MWh
based on the amount by which its emissions rate exceeds the standard. Conversely, any
technology whose emissions rate is below the standard could sell certificates based on the
difference between their emissions rate and the standard. Let pcs be the price of tradeable
certificates for one unit of carbon emissions. Thus the rate standard changes the full marginal
cost of generators based on whether they are buying or selling permits. In particular, the rate
standard changes the full marginal cost of technology i in state s from ci to ci + (βi − σs )pcs .
Note that full marginal costs may be higher or lower than BAU depending on whether βi −σs
is positive or negative, i.e., depending on whether a technology buys or sells certificates.
These full marginal costs are illustrated in panel (b) of Fig. 1 for the four technologies. As
illustrated, the rate standard reduces the full marginal costs of (i.e., subsidizes) nuclear- and
gas-fired generation, but increases the full marginal costs of coal- and oil-fired generation.
As with the CAT, the merit order under rate standards as illustrated switches gas and coal,
i.e., gas-fired generation is used before coal-fired generation as demand increases.
10

If all states adopt rate standards, the equilibrium electricity price in hour t is characterized
P RS
RS
RS
by Eq. 1 with these full marginal costs. Profits are πsi
≡
− F M CsiRS )qsit
=
t (pt
P RS
RS
− ci − (βi − σs )pcs )qsit . As above we assume that generators are not given permits.
t (pt
However some generators create permits by generating electricity, namely, those relatively
clean technologies for which βi < σs . In this case, the term −(βi − σs ) is positive and
captures the revenue which would arise from selling carbon credits. Thus the profits capture
all revenue streams and there is no carbon market revenue to be accounted for separately.
To complete the characterization of the equilibrium, we describe the market for carbon
certificates. The demand for carbon certificates is determined by the amount each technology
exceeds the standard and by how much electricity is generated from each technology. For
P
RS
if βi > σs .
example, demand for certificates in state s from technology i is t (βi − σs )qsit
P
RS
if βi < σs . Because demand
Similarly, supply in state s from technology i is t (σs − βi )qsit
less supply equals zero in equilibrium, the carbon market equilibrium is characterized by
P P
RS
i
t (βi − σs )qsit = 0. Note that a higher carbon price pcs decreases demand and increases
supply for carbon certificates, so there exists a carbon price which clears the carbon market.
Note also that the equilibrium condition can be written
P P
RS
β qsit
Pi Pt i RS
= σs ,
i
t qsit
which implies that the aggregate carbon emissions rate exactly equals the rate standard in
equilibrium.
The model can be readily extended to analyze two states who combine their rate standards
through carbon trading. Suppose the states s and s′ allow carbon certificates to be freely
traded between the states. Then the prices of the certificates are equal, i.e., pcs = pcs′ , and
the equilibrium condition is that demand across both states equals supply across both states.
Setting demand less supply equal to zero, we can characterize the carbon market equilibrium
P P
P P
RS
+ i t (βi − σs′ )qsRS
by i t (βi − σs )qsit
′ it = 0. This equilibrium condition can be written:
P P RS
P P
P P RS
RS
+ qsRS
qsit
q′
βi (qsit
′ it )
i
t
i
t
P P RS
= P P RS
σs + P P i RSt s it RS σs′ ,
RS
RS
i
t (qsit + qs′ it )
i
t (qsit + qs′ it )
i
t (qsit + qs′ it )

(2)

which implies that the aggregate carbon emissions rate equals a weighted average of the
allowed emissions rates across the states where the weights depend on generation.
In addition to trading carbon, which equates the carbon prices, states may also wish to
harmonize their rate standards, i.e., to set σs = σs′ . Note that if states do not harmonize their
rate standards, then the full marginal costs of identical generators can be different across
11

states even if carbon prices are the same. In order to avoid this additional inefficiency, states
would need to harmonize their rate standards as well as to allow carbon trading.
Combining rate standards across states does not have the efficiency justification of combining CAT regulations. Combining CATs across states allows the same aggregate emissions
target to be attained at lower cost. Combining rate standards across states does reduce
costs, but it also means that the emissions target changes: both the aggregate emissions and
the aggregate emissions rate are changed by combining rate standards in two states.

3.3

Mixed CATs and rate regulation

Finally, we consider the case of mixed regulation in which some states adopt CATs and other
states adopt rate standards. Under the Clean Power Plan proposals, states can choose what
type of regulation to adopt and a mixture of CATs and rate standards could result. The
model is readily extended to mixed regulation. In particular, the equilibrium electricity price
is found from the set defined in Eq. 1 where the full marginal costs are ci + βi pcs in a CAT
state and ci + (βi − σs )pcs in a rate standard state.
States could allow carbon trading across CATs and rate standards. If state s has a CAT
and state s′ has a rate standard, then trading carbon certificates would equate the price of
certificates in each state, i.e., would set pcs = pcs′ . Setting the difference between aggregate
certificate demand and supply equal to zero implies that the equilibrium certificate price is
P P
P P
RS
characterized by i t βi qsit
− Es + i t (βi − σs′ )qsRS
′ it = 0. This condition does not have
a clear interpretation either as a cap or a emissions rate constraint.

3.4

Theoretical results

We next compare the outcomes and adoption incentives under certain conditions for the
general model. The proofs of all the results are in the appendix. Section 4 then quantifies
the effects and makes additional comparisons with a simulation model in the context of the
emissions reductions required under the CPP.
The first result describes conditions under which supply is efficient under the different
regulations. We then address efficiency in a corollary.
Result 1. Efficient Supply: The merit order is efficient (full social costs are minimized):
(i): if all states adopt CATs and pcs is sufficiently close to τ for all s;
12

(ii): if all states adopt rate standards, pcs is sufficiently close to τ for all s, and σs is
sufficiently close to σ for all s; or
(iii): if there is mixed regulation, pcs is sufficiently close to τ for all s, σs is sufficiently
close to σ for all s, and |ci + βi τ − cj − βj τ | > στ for all i and j.
This result shows sufficient conditions for the efficiency of supply. Importantly, the
sufficient conditions become increasingly stringent across the regulations. For CATs, supply
is efficient if the carbon price equals (or is close to) the social cost of carbon.
For rate standards, supply can also be efficient. For a given carbon price, the CAT and
rate standard induce the same merit order since ci + (βi − σs )pcs < ci′ + (βi′ − σs )pcs if
and only if ci + βi pcs < ci′ + βi′ pcs Intuitively, the rate standard can induce the correct
relative prices across the technologies because it simply shifts the full marginal costs down
by a constant. However, supply efficiency for a rate standard requires that carbon prices
equal the social cost of carbon and that the rate standards be equal across states. Note that
these sufficient conditions will not be ensured by carbon trading alone but would also require
explicit harmonization of the rate standards across states. Thus the sufficient conditions are
more strict for rate standards than for CAT.
Surprisingly, Result 1 (iii) shows that mixed regulation can also attain the efficient supply
but only under more stringent conditions. This result is illustrated in panel (c) of Fig. 1 for
four technologies where some of each technology is subject to a CAT and some is subject
to a rate standard of σ and the carbon price is τ . Note that within each technology, the
implicit subsidy of the rate standard lowers the full marginal cost by στ , so the rate-standard
technology is dispatched first, e.g., gas under the rate standard is dispatched before coal under
the CAT. As illustrated, the merit order is efficient, because all the gas-fired generation is
used before the coal-fired generation as demand increases.
However, the efficiency of supply only occurs because the full marginal costs are sufficiently different. If the full marginal costs are close, i.e., if |cC + βC τ − cG − βG τ | < στ , then
the merit order is not efficient. As illustrated in panel (d) of Fig. 1 the full marginal costs are
sufficiently close that the merit order is rate-standard gas, followed by rate-standard coal,
then CAT gas, and then CAT coal. This merit order is inefficient since the full marginal
social cost of gas-fired generation is less than the full marginal social cost of coal.13
Result 1 also highlights the importance of coordination across states. For CATs, all
carbon prices need to be sufficiently close to τ , which can be ensured by carbon trading and
13

This inefficiency from mixed regulation is limited, because it only arises if full marginal costs are sufficiently close, i.e., if costs are small from the wrong merit order.

13

a correct overall cap. Note that with carbon trading the distribution of the cap across states
is irrelevant. With rate standards, trading can again ensure that carbon prices are equal
across states. However, now the standards must be set equally across states in order for the
merit order to be efficient, i.e., the distribution of the rate standards across the states is
crucial. The result also shows an additional inefficiency if states fail to coordinate on a CAT
or a rate standard.
This result also emphasizes the importance of carbon prices. Importantly, efficient supply
depends on the carbon price being sufficiently close to τ , but does not depend on the target
emissions level or the target emissions rate. Thus, to attain efficient supply, the regulator
would need to adjust the emissions cap or target emissions rate to maintain the carbon price
equal to τ . Unfortunately, the Clean Power Plan specifies emissions rate targets rather than
carbon price targets.
Result 1 shows the increasingly stringent conditions under which the different regulations
can lead to an efficient supply, i.e., an efficient merit order. However, efficiency of supply is
necessary but not sufficient for overall efficiency of a regulation, as the following corollary
makes clear:
Corollary 1. Efficiency: If demand is perfectly inelastic, then CATs, rate standards, or
mixed regulation achieve efficiency if the merit order is efficient.
If demand is not perfectly inelastic, then CAT regulations achieve efficiency if pcs = τ
for all s. Rate standards and mixed regulation do not achieve efficiency.
This corollary echoes earlier results in the literature (e.g., see Helfand (1991), Kwoka
(1983), Holland, Hughes and Knittel (2009)). If demand is perfectly inelastic, then there is
no consumption inefficiency and efficiency only requires efficient supply. However, if demand
is not perfectly inelastic, then only a CAT regulation with a carbon price of τ can attain the
first best.14
Given the importance of equal carbon prices in Result 1, the next result addresses the
benefits from carbon trading, which equates carbon prices across regions.
Result 2. Carbon Trading: Trading carbon between states reduces costs. Trading between states with CATs holds aggregate emissions constant. Trading between states with rate
standards may cause aggregate emissions to increase or decrease.
14

Holland (2012) shows that rate standards can attain the first best if they are coupled with an electricity
tax of στ .

14

This result shows that although carbon trading does reduce costs, it may not have clear
efficiency benefits. Under CATs aggregate emissions are held constant and thus a reduction
in costs leads to a clear efficiency gain. Under rate standards, aggregate emissions could
increase or decrease, and thus the welfare effects are indeterminate.
We next compare the equilibrium outcomes across policies in which all states adopt the
same policy. We analyze electricity prices, consumer surplus, and profits to “uncovered
generators,” namely, generators which are not covered by the regulation, e.g., renewables or
distributed generation.
Result 3. Prices, Consumer Surplus, and Uncovered Generator Profits: For a
given carbon price pcs > 0,
(i) electricity prices are higher under CATs than under either rate standards or no regulation, i.e., pCAT
≥ pRS
and pCAT
≥ pBAU
, and electricity prices under rate standards or
t
t
t
t
under mixed regulation can be either higher or lower than under no regulation;
(ii) consumer surplus is lower under CATs than under either rate standards or no regulation, i.e., CS CAT ≤ CS RS and CS CAT ≤ CS BAU , and consumer surplus under rate
standards or under mixed regulation can be either higher or lower than under no regulation;
and
(iii) profits for uncovered generation are higher under CATs than under either rate standards or no regulation, and profits for uncovered generation under rate standards or under
mixed regulation can be either higher or lower than under no regulation.
For a given carbon price, this result shows that electricity prices are higher under CATs
but can be higher or lower than BAU prices under rate standards. These price comparisons
follow from a comparison of the full marginal costs under the policies. Since full marginal
costs are higher under CAT than under rate standards or BAU, the electricity price is higher.
Similarly, since the full marginal costs under rate standards can be higher or lower than under
BAU, the electricity prices are similarly higher or lower. The results on consumer surplus
and profits of uncovered generation follow directly from the result on prices.
The result on uncovered generation is important since significant generation capacity may
not be covered by the Clean Power Plan, e.g., hydro, nuclear, and some combined heat and
power. The result shows that these uncovered generators will prefer CAT regulation because
they would benefit from the higher electricity prices. The effect is somewhat different for
“dirty” and “clean” uncovered generators. For dirty uncovered generators, the benefit arises
from the higher electricity prices and because the lack of carbon regulation does not increase
15

their costs. For clean uncovered generators, the difference arises from the higher electricity
prices and because the lack of carbon regulation does not decrease their costs under rate
standards. The inability to sell carbon credits under a rate standard implies that uncovered
clean generation prefers CAT. Note that this result also implies that incentives are strongest
under CAT for new clean generation and for efficiency improvements both of which might
be uncovered by the Clean Power Plan.
The result also has important implications for investment incentives. Investment will
occur in the most profitable locations. New fossil-fuel fired generation may be “uncovered”
since it is subject to other regulations, e.g., Section 111(b), and may not be subject to the
Clean Power Plan. Renewables and small combined heat and power will also likely not be
covered by the Clean Power Plan. The result implies that there would be more investment
in uncovered generation under CAT regulation than under rate standards.
We next analyze the incentives for states to adopt either CATs or rate standards. We
begin by analyzing the outcomes if states coordinate on either a single CAT or a single rate
standard. To focus the analysis, we assume additionally that carbon prices equal τ and rate
standards are equal across states, i.e., we assume that supply is efficient.
Result 4. Adoption Incentives of a Coalition: Suppose that all states adopt the same
regulation, i.e., all states have a unified CAT or unified rate standard. Suppose further that
the CAT or rate standard results in a carbon price equal to the social cost of carbon across
both regimes and across all states, i.e., pcs = τ for all s, and that rate standards are equal
across states, i.e., σs = σ for every s.
(i): pCAT
≤ pRS
+ στ for all t;
t
t
P P P CAT P P P RS
(ii):
≤ s i t qsit
s
i
t qsit
RS
CAT
≤ πsi
for all s and i;
(iii): πsi
P P P
P P P
CAT
RS
(iv):
≤ s i t (ci + βi τ )qsit
;
s
i
t (ci + βi τ )qsit

(v): CarbonCAT ≤ CarbonRS ;
(vi): W CAT ≥ W RS ; and
(vii): T RCAT + τ (CarbonRS − CarbonCAT ) ≥ (CS RS − CS CAT ) + (π RS − π CAT ).
If additionally we assume that demand is perfectly inelastic, then each of the weak inequalities above is an equality.
This result compares the outcomes when states coordinate on CATs or rate standards
and all carbon prices equal τ . Much of the intuition of the result comes from the comparison
16

of the electricity prices in Result 4 (i). This result shows that although electricity prices are
lower under rate standards, the drop in prices is bounded by στ . Because full marginal costs
are lower by στ under rate standards, prices are also lower by exactly this amount if demand
is perfectly inelastic. If demand is not perfectly inelastic, then a price which is lower by στ
could result in excess demand. Thus the price difference is at most στ .
Because electricity prices are lower under rate standards and the merit order is unchanged,
it follows that generation, generation costs, and carbon emissions are higher. Generator
profits are also higher under rate standards, despite the lower electricity prices because full
marginal costs are lower. Because full marginal costs are lower by στ and prices are lower
by at most στ , generator profits increase.
The inefficiency of rate standards, described in Corollary 1, implies the result on welfare
in Result 4 (vi). Rewriting this in Result 4 (vii) shows that the sum of carbon market
revenue and the increase in carbon market damages exceeds the sum of the increases in
consumer surplus and profit under rate standards.
With perfectly inelastic demand this equality becomes CS CAT + T RCAT = CS RS , which
shows that the gain in consumer surplus from a rate standard is exactly the foregone carbon
market revenue T RCAT . In this case, the carbon market revenue is exactly sufficient to
compensate consumers for the lost consumer surplus under CATs.
If demand is not perfectly inelastic, the inequality in (vii) is much less informative about
the ability of carbon market revenue to compensate consumers and producers for their losses
under a CAT. In particular, it shows that carbon market revenue plus the additional carbon
damages would be sufficient to compensate both producers and consumers for their losses
under CAT. However, the result suggests that it is an empirical question whether or not carbon market revenue by itself will be sufficient to compensate both producers and consumers
for their losses under CAT.

3.5

Incentives for Regulatory Choice

We now turn to the adoption incentives of an individual state. In particular the question
of how a state’s choice interacts with other states’ choices to influence economic outcomes.
This question can be directly addressed by the previous results in cases where the carbon
prices are exogenous to the specific mechanism. For example if the mechanism were a carbon
tax, rather than an emissions cap.

17

If carbon prices were exogenous, then Result 4 would be a good guide to the adoption
incentives of a single state.15 As in Result 4 (i), if the state adopted a rate standard instead
of a CAT, electricity prices would be lower in any hour in which that state’s generators were
marginal, but the electricity price would be lower by at most σs τ . Since generators’ costs
would be lower by σs τ , generators’ profits would be higher under the rate standard. With
lower electricity prices, consumer surplus would also be higher under a rate standard. Thus
consumers and covered generators would prefer that their state adopt the rate standard
regardless of what other states do. In other words, adoption of a rate standard would
be a dominant strategy from the perspective of covered generators or consumers. On the
other hand, lower electricity prices and no carbon market revenue imply that CAT adoption
would be a dominant strategy from the perspective of government revenues and of uncovered
generators. Thus, with fixed carbon prices, some perspectives would have dominant strategy
for adoption of a CAT but others would have a dominant strategy for adoption of a rate
standard.
Since the Clean Power Plan specifies emissions rates rather than carbon prices, carbon
prices are likely to be endogenous to the regulatory choices of neighboring states. This
complicates a single state’s adoption decision. Most likely endogenous prices increase the
potential benefits to states of not coordinating with neighboring states. For example, suppose
a state were to consider a CAT when all its neighbors adopt a rate standard. With an
exogenous carbon price, the full marginal costs would be higher under the CAT and thus the
state’s generators would be dispatched less frequently under the CAT. However, when prices
are endogenous, the increased imports would lower domestic emissions and hence relax a
capped emissions constraint.16 This implies that the state’s carbon price would be lower if it
adopted a CAT instead of an equivalent rate standard. By contrast, a state choosing a rate
standard when its neighbors are under CAT could experience either an increase or decrease
in its carbon price, depending upon the mix of available supply in that state. For example
if the rate state had excess “clean” generation capacity then increasing exports from those
clean sources would relax the rate standard constraint and hence lower carbon prices.
With endogenous carbon prices, we can construct an example where adoption of mixed
regulations lowers carbon costs for both CAT and rate states. Compliance costs and electricity prices would then be lower compared to a uniform CAT scheme. A state’s adoption
incentives will hence involve a combination of carbon price effects in addition to the effects outlined in Result 4. To assess the magnitude of these effects, we turn to a numerical
15

Result 5 in Supplementary Appendix A extends Result 4 to analyze the adoption incentives of a single
state assuming carbon prices are fixed at τ .
16
Intuitively, the state can achieve compliance through importing.

18

simulation model.

4

Numerical simulations

The theoretical model describes the inefficiencies which can result when states choose CAT
regulation or rate standards across an integrated product market. As described above, there
are several additional considerations to the actual Clean Power Plan that are difficult to
capture in a theoretical model, including the heterogeneity of both supply technologies and
emissions limits across states, and importantly, the endogeneity of carbon prices a market’s choice of regulatory mechanism. We approach this richer set of issues using numerical
simulation methods applied in the context of the electricity market in the western US. We
utilize an electricity transmission and supply model similar to that used in Bushnell and
Chen (2012) (BC 2010) and Bushnell, Chen and Zaragoza-Watkins (2014) (BCZ 2011). The
model has been calibrated using market data from the year 2007. In this section, we present
the simulation model and the data used to parameterize the model. Additional details on
the numerical simulation are in Online Appendix C

4.1

Optimization model and constraints

Because we assume firms act in a manner consistent with perfect competition in both the
electricity and emissions permit markets, market equilibrium is equivalent to the solution
of a social planner’s problem.17 Our social planner’s problem maximizes gross consumer
surplus less generation costs subject to constraints. Using the notation developed above, the
planner’s objective is thus:18

max CS +
qsit

XXX
s

i

(pt − ci )qsit .

(3)

t

Maximization of Eq. 3 is subject to generation, transmission, and policy constraints.
Generation constraints reflect installed capacity adjusted proportionally for the probability
of a forced outage of each unit.19 Unit forced outage factors are taken from the generator
17

Although the California market was notorious for its high degree of market power in the early part of
this decade, competitiveness has dramatically improved in the years since the California crisis, while the vast
majority of supply in the rest of the WECC remains regulated under traditional cost-of-service principles.
18
The objective does not consider carbon damages, which are addressed through the constraints.
19
This approach to modeling unit availability is similar to Wolfram (1999) and Bushnell, Mansur and
Saravia (2008).

19

availability data system (GADS) data that are collected by the North American Reliability
Councils.
Our transmission constraints replicate centralized locational marginal pricing (LMP).
Any LMP price differences are arbitraged away subject to the constraints of the transmissions
network.20 Our model divides the electricity market in the western U.S. into five transmission
regions. Optimization of Eq. 3 is therefore subject to constraints on the flows between these
five regions. These constraints are governed by existing line capacities. See Supplemental
Appendix C.3 for more detail on our modeling of transmission constraints.
The carbon policies are modeled with additional constraints. BAU is modeled by optimizing Eq. 3 subject to the generation and transmission constraints. Under CAT regulation
in state s, total emissions in the state must also be less than allowed emissions, i.e., the polP P
icy constraint is i t βi qsit ≤ Es . If two states harmonize their CAT regulations through
emissions trading, aggregate emissions across the two states must be less than total allowed
emissions. The shadow values of the constraints are the carbon prices that would result
from implementation with market mechanisms. Similarly, if state s adopts a rate standard, then the emissions rate in the state must be less than the allowed emissions rate:
P P
P P
i
t βi qsit /
i
t qsit ≤ σs . If two states harmonize their rate standards, then the constraint is on the aggregate emissions rate. Note that this is equivalent to allowing carbon
trading plus harmonizing the allowed emissions rates. The shadow values are again the
resulting carbon prices.21

4.2

Market demand

We model electricity demand in each of four regions for each of 80 representative time periods
(20 periods for each of four seasons).22 To create the 80 representative time periods, we sort
California aggregate generation into 20 bins based upon equal MW spreads between the
minimum and maximum generation levels observed in the 2007 sample year.23 Demand in
the representative time period is based on the mean of electricity prices and consumption
within each bin in 2007. To aggregate, we weight each representative time period by the
20

Arbitrage of price differences across locations could be achieved through either bilateral transactions or
a more centralized operation of the network.
P P
P P
21
Below we equivalently write the rate standard constraints as i t βi qsit ≤ σs i t qsit so that the
shadow value is in dollars per ton of carbon.
22
Although hourly data are available, for computational reasons we aggregate these data into representative
time periods.
23
California was the original focus of this work so aggregation is based only on California generation.

20

number of season-hour observations in each bin.24
We assume linear demand where the intercept in each time period is determined by the
mean hourly electricity price and consumption.25 For electricity prices, we use hourly market
prices in California and monthly average prices taken from the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) for the non-market regions.26 For electricity consumption, FERC form 714 provides
hourly total end-use consumption by control-area which we aggregate to the North American
Electric Reliability Commission (NERC) sub-region level. We apply EIA data on annual
consumption by state to calculate the fraction of a region’s demand that is attributable to
a given state.
Because electricity demand is extremely inelastic, we utilize an extremely low value for
the slopes of the linear demand curve. For example, in an early review article Taylor (1975)
finds short-run price elasticities of electricity demand for residential consumers on the order
of 0.15 with some estimates as high as 0.90. Commercial and industrial demand elasticities
are estimated at 0.17 and 0.22 in the short-run. More recently, Kamerschen and Porter
(2004) estimate total electricity demand elasticities in the range of 0.13 to 0.15 using US
annual data from 1978 to 2008. Reiss and White (2005) estimate a mean elasticity of 0.39
for households in California while Ito (2014) estimates values consistently less than 0.10.
Because the CPP affects the price of energy and approximately half of consumers’ rate is
related to non-energy charges, such as transmission, the response of consumers to changes
in wholesale energy prices is likely even smaller. Therefore, the slope of the demand curve
is set so that the median elasticity in each region is -.05.27

4.3

Fossil-fired generation costs and emissions

We explicitly model the major fossil-fired thermal units. Reliable data on the production
costs of thermal generation units are available due to prior cost-of-service regulation within
24

For example, in spring 2007 there were 54 hours in which California (residual) demand fell in the bin
between 6949 and 7446 MW. To aggregate, resulting emissions from our representative time period are
multiplied by 54 to generate an annualized equivalent total level of emissions.
25
The intercept is the sum of mean consumption and the product of the mean price and demand slope.
26
To obtain hourly prices in regions outside of California, we calculate the mean difference by season
between the California prices and prices in other regions. This mean difference is then applied to the hourly
California price to obtain an hourly regional price for states outside of California. Because demand in the
model is very inelastic, the results are not very sensitive to this benchmark price method.
27
Because the market is modeled as perfectly competitive, the results are relatively insensitive to the
elasticity assumption, as price is set at the marginal cost of system production and the range of prices is
relatively modest.

21

the industry. The marginal cost of a modeled generation unit is estimated to be the sum of
its fuel and variable operation and maintenance (VO&M) costs.
Generation marginal costs are derived from the costs of fuel and variable operating and
maintenance costs for each unit in our sample. Fuel costs make up the largest share of
marginal cost for thermal generation units. We calculate fuel costs for each unit as heat-rate
multiplied by regional average fuel price. The marginal cost of each unit is therefore constant
up to the capacity of the unit. We use unit average heat-rates and regional average fuel prices
taken from the Platts PowerDat dataset. Emissions rates, measured as tons CO2 /MWh, are
based upon the fuel-efficiency (heat-rate) of a plant and the CO2 intensity of the fuel burned
by that plant.
We examine the western electricity market under two different sets of conditions. We
first use actual reported natural gas prices from 2007 to calibrate the model and establish
if the simulation reasonably captures production and emissions totals over western states.
However, natural gas prices have declined sharply since 2007. This has important implications for estimates of the costs of compliance with the CPP. Therefore, after establishing
that the model accurately depicts market equilibrium outcomes using 2007 fuel prices, we
re-simulate the market using natural gas prices that are, on average $2.00/mcf lower, to
better capture current conditions. The results reported here utilize the lower natural gas
prices representative of current prices.
In some scenarios, we consider investment in new combined cycle gas turbines (CCGT).
Based upon information from the EIA, we assume that the annualized capital cost of a
standard new CCGT would be $100 KW-yr. Operating costs mcst depend upon our natural
gas price assumption and are assumed to be $48/MWh under 2007 gas prices and $32/MWh
under current gas prices.

4.4

Uncovered generation

Our hourly market data include total demand and hourly production of all fossil-fired generation monitored by the EPA’s continuous emissions monitoring system (CEMS). These
constitute almost all the units units whose emissions would be regulated under the Clean
Power Plan, i.e. covered generation. Unfortunately, we lack data on the hourly production
from other sources, namely, renewable resources, hydro-electric resources, nuclear, combined
heat and power, and other small thermal resources. We infer aggregate hourly production
from these sources from the difference between regional consumption and fossil-fired generation after accounting for net imports. These sources, which consist of production with very
22

low or zero marginal costs, are assumed to operate with the same hourly production in all of
our simulations. We do not observe imports into an individual state for a given hour. Instead
net imports are aggregated to the regional level within the western interconnection (WECC)
and approximated from data on the hourly flow over key transmission lines between regions.
Thus we have a detailed picture of the total thermal and non-thermal supply in a region,
but not of the hourly composition of the non-thermal output. We must instead infer that from
EIA data (Form 860) that provides output by source and state on a monthly basis. Using
these data we calculate the monthly average fraction of regional non-thermal generation
that comes from each non-thermal source (e.g., nuclear, renewables, etc.) and each state
in a region. We apply that fraction to the hourly regional data and simulation results to
dis-aggregate those results to the state level.
In some results we disaggregate the outcomes for supply between generation sources
covered under the clean power plan and “uncovered” sources. Covered sources include all
measured fossil generation which emit CO2 . Under CAT these are the only plants that are
directly impacted by the regulation. For the CPP, the EPA has proposed a complex formula
that gives partial credit for output from nuclear plants and also credit for output from nonhydro renewable sources. Technically such sources may be eligible to earn emissions credit
payments by virtue of their emissions rates being below the emissions rate standard. However because of our data limitations we include all non-thermal sources in our “uncovered”
category when summarizing the results below.
Similarly, we apply EIA data on annual consumption by state to calculate the fraction
of a region’s demand that is attributable to a given state. Both of these approximations
assume that the hourly distribution of regional non-thermal supply and demand amongst
states is the same as the monthly or annual average of those distributions.
Appendix Table A.9 summarizes the generation totals and emissions for each of the states
coming from covered and uncovered sources based upon EIA data and compares those data
to the results of our simulation. These simulation results assume no CO2 regulation and
therefore constitute the “business as usual” case.

5

Simulation results

In this section we present simulation results under a variety of possible policy scenarios.
In each case, the reductions required by each state are based upon the EPA’s targeted reductions for the second “building block” of their abatement estimates. These are the EPA’s
23

expected carbon savings from re-ordering the generation so that low carbon sources run more
frequently and, at least partially, displace higher carbon (e.g., coal) sources. We focus on
this building block for two reasons. First, this building block captures the largest emissions
reductions. Second, simulating the other building blocks requires further assumptions about
energy efficiency improvements and investment in future generation.28 The second building
block requirements vary widely by state, ranging from the 40% reduction in emissions intensity for Arizona to no reductions at all from Montana and Idaho. These emissions reductions
are illustrated in Appendix Figure A.1. Following the theory model, we begin by discussing
supply-side effects of regulations on the generation merit order. Then, we analyze short-run
equilibrium outcomes under each policy and incentives to form coalitions. Finally, we explore
incentives for investment in new capacity under different regulations.

5.1

Supply-side effects

We first illustrate the effects of the regulation on the market supply functions. Instead
of comparing the market supply curves for different regulations, we illustrate the market
supply curve for one regulation and then show the full marginal costs for each generation
unit under different regulations. The market supply (or merit order) under the different
regulations could be determined by “re-sorting” the generating plants along the x-axis.
Figure 2 compares the full marginal costs of fossil-fuel generation units under West-wide
CAT and rate standards to the market supply under BAU (i.e., the generating units are
sorted along the x-axis by BAU marginal costs). The generating units to the left of 23
GW are coal-fired and the generating units to the right of 23 GW are gas-fired. The CAT
standard (West-wide CAT) increases the full marginal costs of the units in proportion to
their carbon emissions. Thus CAT changes the merit order so that some gas-fired generation
is cheaper than coal-fired generation, i.e., the gas-fired generation would be used first as
demand increases.
The rate standard (West-wide standard), increases the full marginal costs of the coalfired generation because these plants have emissions rates which are worse than the standard.
However, the rate standard decreases the full marginal costs of most of the gas-fired generation because these plants have emissions rates which are better than the standard.
This figure illustrates the high correlation between the merit orders under West-wide
CAT and rate standards. This correlation illustrates the theoretical result that both CAT
28

In the west, the CPP requires an average reduction of 36% in the emissions rate. Of this, the four
building blocks contribute 4%, 15%, 9%, and 9% respectively.

24

and rate standards can eliminate the supply-side inefficiency by correcting the merit order.
However, although the relative costs of the technologies can be correct, the figure shows that
full marginal costs are too low under the rate standard.29
Figure 3 illustrates the merit order that arises if states fail to harmonize their CAT
standards. The figure illustrates the supply curve for a CAT standard (West-wide Cap) and
compares it with state-by-state CAT standards (State CATs). The state-by-state caps lead
to full marginal costs which are too high in some states—those with tight caps—and too low
in other states—those with loose caps. This heterogeneity “scrambles” the merit order and
is an additional source of inefficiency.30 Practically speaking, this can lead to very different
dispatch behavior of similar generating units, which is clearly inefficient.
Figure 4 illustrates the merit order when regional coalitions fail to coordinate policies.
This figure compares a West-wide CAT with mixed regulation in which coastal states adopt
a CAT standard and inland states adopt a rate standard. The merit order is scrambled so
effectively with mixed regulation that almost all the inland plants have lower full marginal
costs than any of the coastal plants! Of course, transmission constraints would prevent such
an extremely inefficient dispatch, so estimating the inefficiency of these scrambled merit
orders requires calculating the equilibria under the various regulations.

5.2

Short-run equilibria

There are many metrics one could use to evaluate the impacts of these regulations. We
focus on the standard economic metrics of consumer surplus, producer profits, abatement,
abatement costs, and deadweight loss.31
We next analyze short-run equilibria across different policy types in nine different scenarios.32 Scenario 0, represents no regulation, i.e. BAU, establishes a baseline level of costs
and emissions by simulating the western market without any GHG regulations. Scenarios 1
through 8 vary which states operate under CAT and rate standards.
We first investigate effects across the different policy types. The odd numbered scenarios
assume states operate under the same CAT or rate standard, and can therefore trade across
29

Again, we assume the cap is set optimally such that full marginal costs under CAT are efficient. Under
the rate standard, full marginal costs are lower than those under CAT and are often less than the unregulated
case where carbon emissions are unpriced.
30
Appendix Figure A.4 shows a similar “scrambling” of the merit order due to state-by-state rate standards.
31
Recall, we define abatement cost as the sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus, and any carbon
market revenue.
32
Below we allow investment in new generation capacity.

25

state lines to achieve the required emissions reductions. In Scenario 1, western states operate
under a single CAT standard. Scenario 3 assumes a single standard for all states. Scenario 5
models a single CAT for coastal states and a single rate standard for inland states.33 Scenario
7 assumes the opposite, coastal states have a rate standard, while inland states are regulated
with CAT.
Next, we explore the effects of policy coordination. The even numbered scenarios assume
each individual state has their own CAT or rate standard. In Scenario 2, each state has
a state-specific emissions CAT system. Scenario 4 assumes state-specific rate standards.
Scenario 6 assumes inland states have state-specific rate standards, while coastal states
operate under a single CAT. Finally, Scenario 8 assumes coastal states have different rate
standards, while inland states have a single CAT standard.
Table 1 reports equilibrium prices, profits, and changes in welfare across the different
scenarios. In Scenario 1, prices increase by roughly $20 per MWh, relative to business-asusual, under a single western-states CAT. The quantity of electricity consumed falls by 3
percent, while emissions fall by 17 percent, implying that changes in the merit order are
largely driving emission reductions.34 The equilibrium permit price, reflecting the price of
carbon, is roughly $35 per metric ton of CO2 . We note this closely matches the social cost
of carbon used by the EPA in regulatory filings.
We next calculate the change in consumer and producer surplus prior to any redistribution
of carbon permit revenue. We compute the change in consumer surplus and the producer
surplus of power plants regulated under the CPP—“covered” plants—and plants that are
not regulated under the CPP—“uncovered” plants. Consumer surplus falls by $14.14 billion
under a single western CAT system. The producer surplus of plants regulated under the
CPP falls by $2.48 billion, while profits of uncovered plants increase by roughly $6.36 billion.
Producer surplus rises for these plants because electricity prices increase and uncovered plants
are not required to pay additional carbon costs. The net impact, therefore, on producer
surplus is an increase of approximately $4 billion. Profits from transmission decrease slightly
relative to business as usual. Despite the reduction in generation, production costs increase
slightly due to changes in the merit order. The implied carbon market revenue for permit
sales exceeds $9 billion.
33

Coastal states are California, Oregon and Washington. Inland states are Arizona, Colorado, Idaho,
Montana, New Mexico, Nevada, Wyoming and Utah.
34
We note that this is in contrast to Holland, Hughes and Knittel (2009) and Holland et al. (Forthcoming) which find that, within transportation, the majority of emission reductions come from lowering fuel
consumption as opposed to shifting to lower greenhouse gas emitting fuels (ethanol). This is due, in part,
to our demand elasticity of 0.05 compared to 0.50 in their baseline simulations.

26

The abatement cost of emission reductions is $1.15 billion, resulting in an average abatement cost of $21.95 per ton of CO2 . In calculating deadweight loss, we assume the reductions
required by EPA accurately reflect the social cost of carbon. In other words, we assume the
social costs of carbon are equal to the marginal abatement costs under the most efficient form
of abatement, a west-wide CAT system.35 Therefore Scenario 1, a west-wide CAT program,
produces zero deadweight loss, by definition.36 The drop in carbon damages necessarily
exceeds abatement costs by $0.69 billion—the deadweight loss under no regulation.37
This scenario serves as a baseline to compare alternative regulation regimes. The next
regulatory regime, Scenario 2, assumes that each state operates under their own CAT system. Therefore, this scenario will not necessarily equate marginal abatement costs across
the states. Electricity prices increase slightly compared to a single cap, from $59.80 to
$68.17/MWh. By definition, emission reductions are the same, but average permit prices
increase by roughly $9/MT.38
Consumers are harmed by state-level CAT systems, given the higher prices, but firms
are better off. Profits of covered plants fall by $0.72 billion compared to $2.44 billion under
a single CAT system and producer surplus of uncovered plants increases by $9.21 billion
or about $3 billion more than under CAT. The increase in production cost is slightly less
under the multiple CAT standards, while abatement costs are slightly higher. The average
abatement cost is roughly $3.50 per metric ton greater compared to a single CAT standard.
While less efficient than a single CAT, multiple state CAT systems reduce the amount of
deadweight loss by approximately 75 percent compared to no regulation.
We next analyze rate standards. Scenario 3 imposes a single rate standard for the western
states. Under a single rate standard electricity prices rise slightly compared to no regulation.
Abatement is slightly greater than under CAT. The shadow value of emission reductions is
$47.91 per metric ton. The higher electricity prices decrease consumer surplus slightly, producer surplus decreases for covered but increases for uncovered plants. The average abatement costs increase by 16 percent compared to a single CAT system. Finally, deadweight
loss decreases by 75 percent compared to no regulation.
In our simulations, state-specific rate standards create massive inefficiencies. Average electricity prices increase to $85/MWh, an unrealistically high level compared with
35

In other words, we assume the emissions cap is optimally set.
The implied cost of carbon is $35.10 which is well within the range of estimates of the social cost of
carbon and similar to the EPA’s assumed SCC of $37/MT of CO2e .
37
The other scenarios, including no regulation, produce some deadweight loss either due to inefficient levels
of emissions or excessive abatement costs.
38
We report the weighted-average electricity price and permit price, weighted by state-level consumption.
36

27

$40.38/MWh in the unregulated case, Scenario 0. This leads to much larger emission reductions compared to first best, a drop of 75.16 million metric tons versus a drop of 52.45
million metric tons. The shadow value of emission reductions increases dramatically to approximately $287.64 per metric ton. The higher prices lead to lower consumer surplus and
higher profits compared to either no regulation or a single CAT. Average abatement costs
are nearly double those of a single CAT standard. More importantly, social welfare falls
under multiple rate standards by $1.24 billion compared to first best and by $0.55 billion
compared to no regulation ($1.24B to $0.69B).
Our next set of scenarios model either the coastal or inland states forming a CAT coalition
while the remaining states adopt state-level or a single rate standard. These simulations will
in turn help us understand the incentives these two coalitions might have to join a westernwide CAT program. Scenario 5 assumes a coastal-state-wide emissions CAT and a single rate
standard for inland states. Under this scenario average electricity prices are $53.65/MWh,
falling between the West-wide CAT and West-wide rate scenarios. Emissions fall by 49.04
MMT of CO2 , compared to 52.45 MMT under the West-wide CAT scenarios and 75.16 MMT
under the state-specific rate standards. Permit prices are $33.23/MT in the CAT market,
lower than the West-wide CAT, while the shadow value of the rate constraint is $89.40/MT,
considerably higher than under a west-wide rate. Both consumer surplus falls while producer
surplus increases for both covered and uncovered generation. There is little carbon market
revenue ($1.78B) consistent with fewer coastal emissions covered by the CAT system. Most
importantly average abatement costs are higher than a West-wide CAT despite the fact
that abatement is lower. Furthermore, a considerable amount of deadweight loss remains;
deadweight loss falls by only 50 percent relative to the unregulated case.
Scenario 6 replaces the single inland rate-standard with state-specific standards. Not
surprisingly average prices increase considerably, as does abatement. We find that such a
scenario increases deadweight loss by 13 percent, relative to the unregulated case though
average abatement costs are not as high as scenario 4 (state-specific rate standards for every
state).
Our final two scenarios assume that coastal states adopt either a single rate standard
or state-specific standards, while inland states adopt a single CAT. Given that California
currently has a cap-and-trade system in place, we do not believe our last two scenarios
are realistic, but they provide the basis for understanding the complete set of incentives.
Interestingly, we find that an inland CAT system with rate standards in the west dominates
the coastal CAT system combined with inland rate standards. That is, welfare improves
more under these scenarios than under scenarios 5 and 6.
28

We next turn to state-specific welfare changes. Table 2 calculates the welfare changes for
each state, as well as the two blocks of states discussed above, under each of the scenarios.
We assume that carbon-market revenues are returned to consumers and producers in a lumpsum fashion. This table makes clear the divergent incentives of coastal and inland states.
The coastal states prefer a single rate standard, Scenario 3, while inland states are most
harmed by such a standard. The intuition for this result is that coastal generation sources
are, on average, cleaner than inland generators. Therefore under a single rate standard, more
coastal generators are implicitly subsidized, while more inland generators are taxed, giving
coastal power plants a competitive advantage when the market operates under a single rate
standard. Notice that state-specific rate standards (Scenarios 4 and 6) do not lead to such
a competitive advantage.
Table 3 focuses on changes in producer surplus. Here the incentives across states are more
aligned, since producer surplus depends heavily on equilibrium electricity prices. Producers
in both coastal and inland states prefer state-specific rate standards, which as we have shown
leads to large increases in the price of electricity. Across Scenarios 5 through 8, each block
of states prefers to face state-specific rate standards, but we find that coastal generators
benefit, relative to business-as-usual in each of these scenarios.

5.3

Incentives to form a West-wide coalition

Our simulations suggest that efficiency is enhanced when states form regional trading markets. A natural question, then, is whether states will have the incentive to form such a
coalition? We analyze the incentives of the two blocks of states defined above: coastal and
inland states. This division is somewhat reflective of current policy discussions.
Table 4 is the normal form representation of the change in abatement cost or private
surplus (ignoring transmission revenues and carbon damages) across the two regions. CAT
adoption yields carbon market revenue and tends to benefit uncovered generation but harm
consumers and covered generators. The social-surplus perspective assesses whether the benefits outweigh the harms, and hence whether it is possible to compensate losers and to align
incentives. As shown, the inland region gains from adopting CAT, regardless of the regulation in the coast. For the coastal region, gains outweigh losses if the inland has a CAT,
but not if inland has a rate standard. Thus, the best regulation for the coast depends on
the regulation in the inland region. The “Nash equilibrium” is the efficient regulatory mechanism: CAT/CAT (i.e., Coastal CAT/Inland CAT).39 Thus it is possible according to our
39

Appendix Figure A.7 shows the state-by-state distribution of the abatement costs. Although the inland

29

calculations to compensate losers and to align incentives for a West-wide CAT coalition.
When we look at the individual sets of stakeholders, CAT/CAT is no longer an equilibrium. Table 5 presents the payoff matrix to consumers. If carbon prices were unaffected,
consumers would prefer rate standards. This generally holds except when inland states
adopt a CAT. In this case, adoption of the rate standard increases the carbon price from
$35.10 to $190 (!) in the coastal states. Since this carbon price causes higher electricity
prices, coastal consumers would prefer a CAT if inland states adopt a CAT. Nonetheless,
if consumers choose the regulatory mix, the Nash equilibrium would be Rate/Rate, i.e., a
West-wide rate-standard coalition.
These first two results imply that if left to the social planner, or to consumers, the
regulatory mechanism would be the same across the coalition: CAT/CAT if the planner and
Rate/Rate if consumers. As we have seen from Table 1, this has important implications for
economic efficiency.40
The incentives of firms differ dramatically. Table 6 represents the change in profits
across both covered and uncovered generators.41 If carbon prices were unaffected, covered
generators would generally prefer rate standards and uncovered generators would generally
prefer CAT. Thus any outcome is possible depending on the relative importance of covered
and uncovered generators. We see that there is a strong incentive to have different regulatory
mechanisms; CAT/Rate and Rate/CAT are both Nash equilibria.42
Several points are worth noting. First aggregate profits are much higher to generators
under mixed regulation. Thus a firm with generation in both regions could have an incentive
to support rate standards in one region but CAT in the other. Second, if there is a CAT
inland, then both covered and uncovered generation would benefit from a rate standard.
Similarly, if there is a rate standard inland, both covered and uncovered generation would
benefit from a CAT. Thus generators’ incentives align for the Rate/CAT equilibrium due to
states as a group always gain from adopting CAT, not all states gain. For example, ID would be harmed
more by adopting a CAT standard if the coastal states also adopt CAT than if the inland states adopted a
rate.
40
The consumer’s perspective is also illustrated in Appendix Figure A.8 for the individual states. This
figure shows the dominance of Rate/Rate from the consumer’s perspective. In particular, it illustrates the
losses for California consumers under CAT.
41
Appendix Figure A.9 illustrates changes in generator profits for individual states. Appendix Table A.10
shows profit for covered generators and Appendix Table A.11 shows profit for uncovered generators.
42
Appendix Table A.10 and Appendix Figure A.10 focus on the profits of covered generators. Once again
we find that only disparate regulation is a Nash equilibrium, but we can narrow the equilibrium to Rate/CAT,
which curiously is an unlikely outcome given that California has already established a CAT program. We find
the same unique Nash equilibrium (in pure strategies) when we look at the profits of uncovered generation
in Appendix Table A.11 and Appendix Figure A.11.

30

its exceptionally high electricity prices ($61.38). Finally, given the failure of the West-wide
coalition, generator profits are much higher in the region with a rate standard. This would
imply the potential for a first-mover advantage if either one of these regions could commit to
choosing a rate standard or a first-mover disadvantage if one of the regions has committed
to a CAT.
Combined, these results imply that there is very little incentive for formation of a Westwide CAT coalition. While the Nash equilibrium from the social planner’s perspective is a
West-wide CAT coalition, consumers prefer a West-wide rate standard coalition, and generators prefer mixed regulation. Thus incentives are not aligned across market participants
for the formation of the efficient West-wide CAT coalition.

5.4

Entry incentives

Another important dimension over which states and the EPA will need to evaluate their
compliance plans is the treatment of newly constructed fossil-fired power plants. Technically,
Section 111d of the Clean Air Act covers only existing sources. New sources are regulated
separately and will have to comply with a source-specific CO2 emissions rate standard. At
the time of this writing, the extent to which state-level plans may or may not include new
plants under their Clean Power Plan compliance strategies has not been resolved.
We examine this question by adjusting our baseline simulations in two ways. First we
anticipate demand growth by escalating hourly demand for every state by 10% over 2007
levels. Second, we allow firms in each state the option of constructing new combined cycle
gas turbines (CCGT). As described previously, these plants are assumed to cost $100 kw-yr,
with a marginal cost of $32/MWh at current gas prices. They have an assumed emissions
rate of .428 tons/MWh. We assume these costs do not differ across states.
The specification of the investment decision was described in section 4. Essentially, new
MW of CCGT capacity are added when the sum of the net revenues (net of MC) exceeds
the $100 KW-yr threshold. Capacity is added until such investments just break even. Last
we assume that under every environmental regulation scenario, the emissions goal is set
equivalent to those established in our baseline simulations without new entry.
The efficiency effects of the different scenarios with investment are shown in the supplementary online materials. Specifically, Appendix Table A.12 presents equilibrium outcomes
when new investment is included under the CPP. Appendix Table A.13 presents results when

31

new investment is excluded. In general, we see that the average abatement cost is much lower
if new investment is included in the CPP. This is true under both CAT and rate standards.43
Of course the net revenues of such investments will depend upon the regulatory treatment
of not just new sources but also of existing sources. Table 7 summarizes the total additional
new CCGT capacity that would be added in each region (coastal or inland), under different
combinations of regulatory policies and policies toward new generation. Because of demand
growth, there is new investment under every scenario. If we assume that the EPA targets are
optimal, then the scenario with all states and new units under CAT would produce the firstbest outcome. Relative to this, excluding new plants from the CAT regulation substantially
increases the amount of new CCGT capacity from about 3716 MW to 6353 MW. Conversely,
new investment is 5977 MW when new gas capacity is included under a rate standard, and
this declines to 4520 MW when new capacity is excluded.
When we examine the mix of regulations, the contrary incentives provided by the two
regulations are highlighted. In general, excluding new plants encourages investment under
CAT and discourages it under rate standards. When new plants are included, investment
is favored under rate standards relative to CAT. When the coastal states adopt CAT and
the inland states adopt rate standards, this influence is magnified. Despite an underlying
economic benefit of coastal investment, when new plants are included under the regulations
all new investment occurs in the inland states, which are operating under a rate standard.
When new plants are excluded, this influence reverses and much of the new investment
migrates back to the coastal states. However, 3543 MW of new capacity is also built in the
rate states, essentially for export back to the coastal states. Overall, under this scenario 9471
MW of new gas capacity are constructed, almost triple that of what could be considered the
first-best level.

6

Conclusion

There are many contexts in which environmental regulation and trade can interact to undermine the efficiency of both. The EPA’s Clean Power Plan is a clear and timely example of
these interactions. The CPP proposes major reductions in carbon emissions from generators
of electricity, a good that is perfectly substitutable across neighboring states. The CPP establishes state-level targets for carbon emissions rates in lbs of carbon dioxide per megawatt
43

If new investment is included in the CPP, average abatement costs are $24.62 per MT of CO2 under CAT
and $27.42 per MT of CO2 under a rate standard. If new investment is not included in the CPP, average
abatement costs are $35.60 per MT of CO2 and $31.07 per MT of CO2 under CAT and rate standards.

32

hour of electricity generated. States have a great deal of flexibility in how to achieve these
goals. Because this flexibility creates different incentives, effects on consumers and producers
within a state could be quite different depending on the type of regulation adopted both in
that particular state as well as in other states because electricity is traded regionally across
state lines. Furthermore, the states’ private incentives may be at odds with those of a social
planner.
In this paper we have focused on the two likely market-based regulatory approaches
that could be adopted by states, a mass-based (CAT) approach, and a rate standard. Our
theoretical findings imply that efficiency is most likely achieved under CAT, and that a
mix of CAT and rate standards is likely to create an inefficient “ordering” of generation
resources. Further we find that, while consumers in each state may prefer to coordinate
on rate standards, producers can prefer to coordinate on inconsistent regulations, where
different states adopt different approaches.
We investigate the importance of our theoretical findings using numerical simulations
of the electricity market in the western United States. We find lack of coordination, when
states independently pursue their own emissions targets without regard to electricity trading partners, leads to large inefficiencies. For example under state-specific caps, average
abatement costs are 16% higher than under a uniform CAT standard. Under state-specific
rate standards, average abatement costs can nearly double relative to a uniform CAT standard. Regional cooperation does little to mitigate these concerns. When two regions of the
west coordinate internally, but adopt different instruments, average abatement costs remain
17-29% higher than costs under a uniform CAT standard. Unfortunately, we find generator
incentives do not favor coordination and may lead to adoption of less efficient mixed policies.
One unresolved aspect of the CPP is whether new natural gas generation is included in
state emission rates. We examine the implications of the CPP on the construction of new
natural gas generation under a medium-term outlook where demand grows by 10% relative
to 2007 levels. We find that whether new plants are covered under the CPP can dramatically
change where new plants are built. When new plants are included in CPP compliance new
generation shifts out of CAT regions toward rate regions.
Overall, our findings indicate that despite the opportunities the CPP provides for states
to coordinate and implement compliance plans that can efficiently achieve their joint targets,
the incentives of individual states to participate in those plans are conflicted. Indeed, there
can easily be circumstances when states find it in their own interest to adopt a regulatory
approach that is contrary to those of its neighbors.

33

References
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen L. Palmer, Sophie Pan, , and Anthony Paul. 2015. “A
Proximate Mirror: Greenhouse Gas Rules and Strategic Behavior under the US Clean Air
Act.” Resources for the Future.
Bushnell, James, and Yihsu Chen. 2012. “Allocation and leakage in regional cap-andtrade markets for CO2.” Resources and Energy Economics, 34(4): 647–668.
Bushnell, James, Carla Peterman, and Catherine Wolfram. 2008. “Local Solutions
to Global Problems: Climate Change Policies and Regulatory Jurisdiction.” Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(2): 175–193.
Bushnell, James, Yihsu Chen, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins. 2014. “Downstream
regulation of CO2 emissions in California’s electricity sector.” Energy Policy, 64: 313–323.
Chen, Yihsu. 2009. “Does a regional greenhouse gas policy make sense? A case study of
carbon leakage and emissions spillover.” Energy Economics, 31(5): 667–675.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2003. “Combining rate-based and cap-and-trade emissions policies.”
Climate Policy, 3(S2): S89–S103.
Fowlie, Meredith L. 2009. “Incomplete environmental regulation, imperfect competition,
and emissions leakage.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 72–112.
Helfand, Gloria E. 1991. “Standards versus Standards: The Effects of Different Pollution
Restrictions.” The American Economic Review, 81(3): 622–634.
Holland, Stephen P. 2012. “Emissions taxes versus intensity standards: Second-best environmental policies with incomplete regulation.” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 63(3): 375 – 387.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, and Christopher R. Knittel. 2009.
“Greenhouse Gas Reductions under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 1(1): 106–46.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and
Nathan C. Parker. Forthcoming. “Some Inconvenient Truths About Climate Change
Policy: The Distributional Impacts of Transportation Policies.” Review of Economics and
Statistics.

34

Huang, Haixiao, Madhu Khanna, Hayri nal, and Xiaoguang Chen. 2013. “Stacking low carbon policies on the renewable fuels standard: Economic and greenhouse gas
implications.” Energy Policy, 56(0): 5 – 15.
Ito, Koichiro. 2014. “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence
from Nonlinear Electricity Pricing.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 537–63.
Kamerschen, David R, and David V Porter. 2004. “The demand for residential, industrial and total electricity, 1973–1998.” Energy Economics, 26(1): 87–100.
Kwoka, John E., Jr. 1983. “The Limits of Market-Oriented Regulatory Techniques: The
Case of Automotive Fuel Economy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(4): 695–704.
Newell, Richard G, William A. Pizer, and Daniel Raimi. 2012. “Carbon Markets:
Past, Present, and Future.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pizer, William A. 2005. “The case for intensity targets.” Climate Policy, 5(4): 455–462.
Reiss, Peter C, and Matthew W White. 2005. “Household electricity demand, revisited.” The Review of Economic Studies, 72(3): 853–883.
Stavins, Robert N. 2008. “Meaningful US Cap-and-Trade System to Address Climate
Change, A.” Harv. Envtl. L. Rev., 32: 293.
Taylor, Lester D. 1975. “The demand for electricity: a survey.” The Bell Journal of
Economics, 74–110.
Zilberman, David, Gal Hochman, Deepak Rajagopal, Steve Sexton, and Govinda
Timilsina. 2013. “The Impact of Biofuels on Commodity Food Prices: Assessment of
Findings.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 95(2): 275–281.

35

Tables

36

37

313.81

Emissions (MMT)

+$0.00

Deadweight Loss ($ bn.)

-$0.18

-$1.84

+$25.41

-$1.33

+$10.54

+$0.91

-$0.01

+$9.21

-$0.72

-$0.18

-$1.85

+$25.46

-$1.34

+$2.42

-$0.06

+$0.14

-$1.10

-$1.24

-$2.64

+$42.46

-$3.19

+$2.42

+$0.36

+$15.06

+$14.48

-$33.09

$ 287.64

-75.16

-30,050

$ 84.68

4
Rates

-$0.35

-$1.72

+$28.25

-$1.39

+$1.78

+$1.80

+$0.04

+$4.55

+$2.24

-$10.00

$ 89.40

$ 33.23

-49.04

-9,141

$ 53.65

5
CAT Rate

-$0.78

-$2.45

+$36.34

-$2.53

+$3.40

+$2.45

+$0.10

+$10.97

+$7.04

-$24.06

$ 187.48

$ 63.48

-69.70

-22,304

$ 72.78

6
CAT Rates

-$0.18

-$1.90

+$25.72

-$1.39

+$6.27

+$1.39

+$0.10

+$7.09

+$0.85

-$15.70

$ 190.91

$ 30.19

-54.07

-14,283

$ 61.38

7
Rate CAT

-$0.31

-$2.10

+$28.74

-$1.72

+$8.58

+$0.99

+$0.18

+$11.61

+$3.57

-$25.66

$ 331.18

$ 41.30

-59.79

-23,310

$ 74.96

8
Rates CAT

Notes: Results from Scenarios 1-8 are reported as changes relative to Scenario 0. “+” indicates an increase and “-” indicates a decrease. “Abatement
Cost” is the sum of consumer surplus, profits (covered, uncovered, and transmission), and carbon market revenue. Carbon damages assume a social
cost of carbon equal to $35.10.

-$1.84

∆ Carbon Damages ($ bn.)
-$0.69

+$21.95

Avg. Abatement Cost ($/MT)

+$1.19

-$1.15

$ 12.69

Production Costs ($ bn.)

-$0.07

Abatement Cost ($ bn.)

$ 0.14

Transmission Profit ($ bn.)

+$6.36

+$9.17

$ 13.48

Uncovered Generator Profit ($ bn.)

-$2.48

Carbon Market Rev. ($ bn.)

$ 6.47

Covered Generator Profit ($ bn.)

-$20.36

-$0.33

-$14.14

-52.70

-405

$ 41.02

3
Rate

Consumer Surplus ($ bn.)

$ 44.36

-52.45

-18,863

$ 68.17

2
CATs

$ 47.91

$ 35.10

-52.45

-13,133

$ 59.80

1
CAT

Rate Permit Price ($/MT)
$ 417.36

411,362

Electricity Quantity (GWh)

CAT Permit Price ($/MT)

$ 40.38

Electricity Price ($/MWh)

0
No Reg

Table 1: Equilibrium outcomes for business as usual and eight policy scenarios.

38
$17.21
$9.24
$165.24

UT

WY

Inland Total

$426.43

+$0.69

-$0.07

+$0.72

+$0.45

+$0.21

-$0.06

-$0.36

-$0.04

-$0.24

+$0.06

+$0.71

+$0.03

+$0.33

+$0.13

-$0.43

1
CAT

+$0.51

-$0.01

+$1.52

+$0.90

+$0.18

-$0.14

+$0.18

+$0.28

-$0.41

-$0.00

+$0.53

-$1.01

+$0.08

+$0.09

-$1.19

2
CATs

+$0.51

-$0.06

-$1.82

-$0.87

-$0.45

+$0.23

-$0.34

-$0.36

+$0.07

-$0.47

+$0.38

+$2.38

+$0.11

+$0.22

+$2.06

3
Rate

-$0.55

+$0.36

+$1.54

+$1.39

-$0.33

+$0.00

+$0.06

+$0.49

-$0.71

-$0.30

+$0.94

-$2.45

-$0.13

+$0.13

-$2.44

4
Rates

+$0.34

+$0.04

+$0.31

-$0.75

-$0.40

+$0.72

-$0.38

-$0.42

-$0.13

-$0.44

+$2.11

-$0.01

+$0.16

+$0.08

-$0.25

5
CAT Rate

-$0.09

+$0.10

+$0.73

+$0.98

-$0.39

-$0.00

+$0.01

+$0.36

-$0.49

-$0.36

+$0.63

-$0.92

+$0.13

+$0.07

-$1.13

6
CAT Rates

+$0.51

+$0.10

+$1.15

+$0.68

+$0.25

-$0.04

-$0.30

+$0.12

-$0.33

+$0.18

+$0.59

-$0.74

-$0.29

-$0.01

-$0.44

7
Rate CAT

+$0.38

+$0.18

+$2.18

+$1.01

+$0.41

-$0.04

-$0.35

+$0.18

-$0.50

+$0.23

+$1.25

-$1.98

-$0.14

+$0.09

-$1.93

8
Rates CAT

Notes: Results from Scenarios 1-8 are reported as changes relative to Scenario 0. “+” indicates an increase and “-” indicates
a decrease. Carbon damages assume a social cost of carbon equal to $35.10. Carbon damages are allocated across states based
on population.

Total

$0.14

$22.43

NV

Transmission Profits

$14.40

$27.00

CO

NM

$50.56

AZ

$10.02

$261.05

Coastal Total

MT

$54.30

WA

$14.39

$30.55

OR

ID

$176.20

CA

Social Welfare ($ bn.)

0
No Reg

Table 2: Social welfare gains across regions relative to business as usual under eight policy scenarios.

39

$0.56

$0.51

$0.99

$1.29

$8.36

NM

NV

UT

WY

Inland Total

-$1.00

-$0.69

-$0.53

+$0.17

-$0.31

-$0.19

+$0.16

-$0.37

+$0.77

+$4.88

+$1.35

+$0.67

+$2.85

1
CAT

+$1.49

-$0.24

-$0.42

+$0.26

-$0.04

+$0.75

+$0.25

-$0.22

+$1.14

+$7.00

+$2.09

+$1.07

+$3.84

2
CATs

-$2.08

-$0.85

-$0.55

+$0.20

-$0.35

-$0.41

+$0.01

-$0.50

+$0.38

+$1.12

-$0.16

+$0.07

+$1.22

3
Rate

+$13.12

+$2.05

+$1.15

+$1.50

+$0.89

+$1.34

+$0.59

+$1.75

+$3.85

+$16.42

+$4.51

+$2.76

+$9.16

4
Rates

+$3.61

-$0.55

+$0.01

+$1.15

-$0.14

-$0.18

+$0.23

+$0.14

+$2.95

+$3.18

+$1.05

+$0.51

+$1.62

5
CAT Rate

+$9.27

+$1.48

+$0.64

+$1.11

+$0.64

+$0.96

+$0.42

+$1.17

+$2.85

+$8.75

+$2.79

+$1.43

+$4.53

6
CAT Rates

+$0.23

-$0.31

-$0.16

+$0.21

-$0.28

+$0.04

+$0.23

-$0.12

+$0.63

+$7.71

+$1.84

+$1.20

+$4.66

7
Rate CAT

+$2.72

-$0.19

-$0.01

+$0.54

-$0.16

+$0.18

+$0.37

+$0.13

+$1.86

+$12.46

+$3.25

+$2.02

+$7.19

8
Rates CAT

Total
$19.95 +$3.88 +$8.49 -$0.96 +$29.54
+$6.79
+$18.01
+$7.94
+$15.18
Notes: Results from Scenarios 1-8 are reported as changes relative to Scenario 0. “+” indicates an increase and “-”
indicates a decrease. Profits in $ billion.

$0.87

MT

$2.47

AZ

$0.40

$11.59

Coastal Total

ID

$3.98

WA

$1.26

$1.97

OR

CO

$5.64

CA

0
No Reg

Table 3: Generator profits across regions for all generation (covered and uncovered) under business as
usual and eight policy scenarios.

Table 4: Abatement cost incentives in the coastal and inland west.
Inland
CAT

- $1.23

,

Rate

Coastal

CAT

- $2.04

,

Rate
+ $0.14

- $1.19

+ $0.55

,

- $0.23

+ $1.12 ,

- $2.40

Notes: “Abatement Cost” is the sum of consumer surplus, generator profits (covered and uncovered), and carbon market revenue and is measured relative to business as usual (Scenario 0) in $ billion.
“+” indicates an increase (i.e., a gain) and “-” indicates a decrease (i.e., a loss).

Table 5: Consumer surplus incentives in the coastal and inland west.
Inland
CAT

Rate

- $8.38

,

- $5.75

- $6.15

,

Rate

Coastal

CAT

- $9.74

,

- $5.96

- $0.00

,

- $3.84

- $0.32

Notes: Consumer surplus is measured relative to business as usual (Scenario 0) in $ billion.
indicates an increase and “-” indicates a decrease.

“+”

Table 6: Profit incentives for all generation (covered and uncovered) in the coastal and
inland west.
Inland
CAT

+ $4.88

Rate

Coastal

CAT

+ $7.71 ,

,

Rate
- $1.00

+ $3.18 ,

+ $0.23

+ $1.12

,

+ $3.61

- $2.08

Notes: Profit is measured relative to business as usual (Scenario 0) in $ billion.
increase and “-” indicates a decrease.

40

“+” indicates an

41

New Capacity (MW)

CAT (Mass-Based)
Rate6WDQGDUG
Coast CAT & Inland Rate
Coast Rate & Inland CAT
Coast
Inland
Total
Coast
Inland
Total
Coast
Inland
Total
Coast
Inland
Total
Included
+3,355
+361
+3,716
+4,931
+1,046
+5,977
+0
+6,081
+6,081 +10,273
-1,177
+9,095
Excluded
+5,922
+431
+6,353
+2,402
+2,118
+4,520
+5,928
+3,543
+9,471
+5,937
+1,042
+6,979
Note: Results are reported as changes relative to new capacity built under business as usual. ``+'' indicates an increase and ``-'' indicates a decrease.
Scenarios assume 10% load growth from 2006 levels.

Table 7: New capacity under four policy scenarios when new NGCC investment is included and not included under the CPP.

Figures
Figure 1: Full marginal costs under different regulatory regimes.
a.)

b.)

c.)

d.)

42

Figure 2: Merit order under different regulations: BAU and West-wide CAT and rate
standards.







0:K






1R5HJXODWLRQ
:HVWíZLGH&$7
:HVWíZLGH5DWH6WDQGDUG






6XSSO\LQ*:





Note: Generating units sorted on x-axis by marginal costs under BAU (Scenario 0).

43

120

Figure 3: Merit order under different regulations: West-wide CAT standards and state-bystate CAT standards.

0

40

$/MWh

80

Coal - West-wide Cap
Coal - State Caps
Gas - West-wide Cap
Gas - State Caps

0

20

40
Supply in GW

60

80

Note: Generating units sorted on x-axis by full-marginal costs under West-wide CAT standards (Scenario 1).

44

150

Figure 4: Merit order under different regulations: West-wide CAT standards and mixed
regulation.

0

50

$/MWh

100

Inland - West-wide C$7
Inland - Mixed Ueg UDWH
Coastal - West-wide C$7
Coastal - Mixed Ueg &$7

0

20

40
Supply in GW

60

80

Note: Generating units sorted on x-axis by full-marginal costs under West-wide CAT standards (Scenario 1). Mixed regulation has Coastal CAT standard and Inland rate standard.

45

