                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CHARTER SCHOOLS:
   A SURVEY OF RESEARCH ON THEIR CHARACTERISTICS AND EFFECTIVENESS

                                           Dennis Epple
                                          Richard Romano
                                            Ron Zimmer

                                        Working Paper 21256
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21256


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We thank Melanie Zaber for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, and Ron Zimmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Charter Schools: A Survey of Research on Their Characteristics and Effectiveness
Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, and Ron Zimmer
NBER Working Paper No. 21256
June 2015, Revised September 2015
JEL No. H4,I2,I21

                                             ABSTRACT

The charter school movement is nearing its 25th anniversary, making this an opportune time to take
stock of the movement by addressing the following questions: Where do charter schools locate? Who
do they serve? Who manages them? Who teaches in them? Most importantly, what are the effects
of charter schools on the academic performance of students who enroll in charters and on students
who remain in traditional public schools? We review research findings that shed light on these questions.


Dennis Epple                                        Ron Zimmer
Tepper School of Business                           230 Appleton Place
Carnegie Mellon University                          Peabody College
Posner Hall, Room 257B                              Vanderbilt University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                Nashville, TN
and NBER                                            37203
epple@cmu.edu                                       ronald.w.zimmer@vanderbilt.edu

Richard Romano
University of Florida
Department of Economics
Gainesville
Florida 32611
richard.romano@warrington.ufl.edu
I. Introduction
The charter school movement is nearing its 25th anniversary, making this an opportune time to
take stock of the movement by addressing questions such as: Where do charter schools locate?
Who do they serve? Who manages them? Who teaches in them? Most importantly, what are the
effects of charter schools on the academic performance of students who enroll in charters and on
students who remain in traditional public schools (TPSs)?
        Charter schools in the U.S. were first introduced in St. Paul, Minnesota in 1992. The
sponsors envisioned a new form of public schools, operating outside the cultural and regulatory
bounds of TPSs, as laboratories for educational innovation. At the outset of the charter
movement, critics argued that charter schools would drain public resources away from charter
schools and raised concerns as to whether charter schools would serve all populations, including
minorities, lower-ability and special-needs populations (Frankenberg and Lee, 2003; Fiske and
Ladd, 2000; Cobb and Glass, 1999). Supporters, in contrast, argued that given the greater
freedom from regulations, charter schools would be innovative and create competitive pressure
on all schools to improve, while at the same time improving racial integration by letting families
choose schools outside of neighborhoods where housing is racially segregated and by promoting
fuller and richer integration in classrooms within schools where all students have chosen to
attend (Kolderie, 2004; Finn, et al., 2000; Nathan, 1998).
        These debates are not new, as most of these same arguments occur over the use of
vouchers. In contrast to attitudes toward vouchers, however, the public view of charter schools is
largely favorable, with opinion polls showing that public support of charter schools has grown
over time. The 2014 PDK/Gallup Poll of public attitudes toward public schools (2014, p.19)
finds 70% of respondents favor the idea of charter schools,2 double the proportion reporting a
favorable view in 2002. At the same time, however, public understanding of charter schools is
muddled, with 48% believing that charter schools are free to teach religion, 57% believing that
charter schools can charge tuition, 68% believing that charter schools can choose students on the
basis of ability, and only 50% knowing that charter schools are public schools.
        Our review proceeds as follows. In Section II we summarize the defining characteristics
of charter schools and provide an overview of the charter authorization process, charter funding,


2
 Phrasing of the question matters somewhat; the proportion favoring charters falls from 70% to 63% when the
question does not refer to charters as public schools.

                                                       1
and types of charter organizations. Section III provides a largely descriptive summary of the
geographic distribution of charter schools, comparisons of demographic characteristics of charter
and TPS students including evidence on cream skimming, and comparison of characteristics of
charter and TPS teachers. To set the stage for review of evidence on charter effectiveness, we
detail in Section IV the methodological challenges in evaluating charter effectiveness and discuss
strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches that have been utilized. Section V then
summarizes the evidence on charter effectiveness. In Section VI we discuss research that seeks
to go inside the black box to investigate how effectiveness varies with charter school educational
models, teacher characteristics, and other factors. Evidence on the response of TPSs to
competition from charter schools is reviewed in Section VII. A brief conclusion is provided in
Section VIII.
II. What is a Charter School?
A charter school is a public school chartered under the auspices of a state government. While
charter laws vary across states, two defining characteristics are: 1) charter schools cannot charge
tuition; and 2) charter schools are not permitted to impose admission requirements and, if
oversubscribed, must select from their applicants by lottery.
         For charter schools to operate within a state, the state government must pass legislation
determining how charter schools will be financed and delineating procedures for chartering of
schools. At present (August 2015), 41 states plus the District of Columbia permit charter schools
to operate.3 States delegate power to grant charters to “authorizers.” There is considerable
variation across states in delegation of this power, with several states designating more than one
authorizer. In 2010/11, charters could be authorized by local school districts in 31 states, the state
education agency in 21, an independent charter board in 7, a higher education institution in 9, a
municipal government office in 2, and a non-for-profit organization in 1. Sixteen states
designated only one authorizer while the remainder designated two or more National Alliance for




3  A total of 42 states plus the District of Columbia have passed Charter School Laws at some point in time. In
Washington State, the state Supreme Court recently declared the law unconstitutional. In Mississippi, the charter law
expired in 2009, but a new charter law was passed in 2013 and two schools were authorized in August 2015.
http://www.charterschoolboard.ms.gov/Pages/default.aspx Hence, we count Mississippi among the 41 states
permitting charter schools in 2015. Due to lags in in data availability, we sometimes rely on data from earlier years
in this review. Depending on the year, the number of states with charter schools may be reported as 40, 41, or 42.
We note the year for which data are reported in all instances.

                                                         2
Public Charter Schools (NAPCS).4 In some states, a request for authorization to create a charter
school goes first to the local school district in which the charter would locate, with potential for
appeal to the state education agency if the district declines to grant a charter.
        Charter laws typically specify that a charter school receive a specified payment from the
local district for each district student who attends the charter school. The payment per student
averaged 80% of local district expenditure per student in 2009/10, with the percentage being
lower, 72%, in urban areas (NAPCS). However, these differences do not necessarily take into
account the fact that charter schools often rely on local school districts for certain services,
including busing. In addition, the composition of student populations may differ between the two
types of schools. For example, charter schools typically serve fewer special needs students,
which are more costly to educate. Batdorff, et. al. (2014) investigate funding for each state with
the objective of taking account of differences in student composition to compare funding charter
schools receive to the amount district schools would have received to educate the same students.
They found that the average charter school student in the US is funded 28.4% below the average
traditional public school student, a differential of $3,814. Figure 1, drawn from the Batdorff, et
al. data, shows charter funding as a percentage of district funding levels by state for FY2011. As
is evident from the figure, the percentage varies widely across states, ranging from a low near
40% in Louisiana to virtual parity in Tennessee. Batdorff, et al. (2014) also provide an analysis
of sources of funding disparities in FY2011 aggregated to the national level. As detailed in their
Figure M20, they find that, on average, charter schools obtain 25% less funding per student than
TPS funding per student. Expressed in dollars inflation-adjusted to year 2007, this is $2,998 per
student. 5 Detailing the sources of the difference, they find that charters receive $506 less federal
revenue per student than TPSs and $484 more state funding per student than TPSs. Hence,
combining federal and state funding, the net difference between charters and TPSs is quite small.
Strikingly, they find that funding from local governments sources is $3,449 less for charters than
for TPSs. Charters received $492 more per student than TPSs from indeterminate sources than
TPSs—state records were inadequate to determine the exact funding source. Even if these
indeterminate funds were entirely from local governments, the disparity in local funding between



4
  We make frequent use of the extensive database on charter schools maintained by the NACPS:
http://dashboard.publiccharters.org/dashboard/home
5
  To adjust to current year 2015 dollar values, these figures should be multiplied by 11%.

                                                      3
charters and TPSs would be sufficient to account for the overall 25% funding differential. They
find lack of public funding for facilities to be an important source of the public funding disparity,
but differences in policies with respect to local funding go well beyond differences in facilities
funding. Previous research has found that charters appeal to philanthropic organizations for
financial support, particularly for funding facilities (Nelson, Muir, & Drown, 2000; Farrell, et al.
2012). Battdorf et. al. (2014) find that funding from “other” (including philanthropic) sources is
relatively small and comparable in magnitude for charters and TPSs—on the order of 5% of per
student revenue for both.
         Charter operators may be part of an Education Management Organization (EMO), a
Charter Management Organization (CMO), or freestanding. Both EMOs and CMOs operate
multiple schools, the key distinction being that the former are for-profit and the latter non-profit.
CMOs have also been more successful in raising philanthropic support than TPSs, EMOs, or
freestanding charter schools. This support has added to the controversy surrounding charter
schools as many opponents see private organizations having too much influence in the future of
public schools (Reckhow, 2013).
         It is natural to expect that successful charter school models will be “franchised,” and this
is in fact the case.6 From 2007/08 to 2010/11, the percentage of charter schools that were
freestanding declined from 78% to 68%, while the percentage in CMOs grew from 12% to 20%,
and the percentage in EMOs increased from 10% to 12% (NAPCS). EMO student share is
greater than school share. In 2010/11 (NAPCS) 61% of charter students were in freestanding
charters, 19% in CMOs, and 20% in EMOs (NAPCS).
         Information about the extent of CMO operations is provided in recent studies by Farrell,
Wohlstetter and Smith (2012) and Furgeson, et al. (2012) using broadly similar definitions.7
III.     Location and Clientele
Figure 2 shows the nationwide growth in number of students served by charter schools and
charter school share of total public school enrollment. While charter school share is still

6
  “Success” in this context means ability to attract students and secure adequate funding while also succeeding in
obtaining renewal of charters from the relevant charter authorizers. We discuss in a subsequent section the evidence
on academic performance of charter schools.
7
  They identified 40 such CMOs operating a total of 292 schools in 14 states, located primarily in Texas, California,
Arizona, Ohio, Illinois, New York, and the District of Columbia. They note that, with a broader definition—any
non-profit operating two or more schools—there are roughly 130 CMOs serving on the order of 250,000 students. In
contrast, with the exception of the for-profit organization of Edison schools (e.g., Gill, et al., 2005), EMOs appear to
be less studied and accurate counts are not as readily available.

                                                           4
relatively small, 4.5%, charter enrollment has increased rapidly, roughly quadrupling from 2000
through 2012. In this section, we compare charter and TPSs and provide evidence about changes
over time. We will frequently reference Table 1, which provides a national comparison on a
broad range of characteristics including enrollment, location, and demographics.8
A. Where do charter schools locate?
i. Variation across states: Figure 3a shows the large variation across states in charter school share
of public school enrollment. In this figure, states are ordered from highest to lowest based on
charter share of enrollment within state. Eleven states have charter shares of 5% or higher;
Arizona leads with a 12% share. In Figure 3b, states are ordered by state share of national charter
enrollment. We see that California alone has 20% of all U.S. charter enrollment, followed by
Florida and Texas with 9% each, Arizona with 7%, Michigan with 6%, and Ohio and
Pennsylvania each with 5%. These seven states account for 61% of all U.S. charter school
enrollment.
ii. Variation across city, suburban, and rural districts: We see from Table 1 that charter school
enrollments are more heavily concentrated in urban areas relative to TPS enrollment share, with
much lower concentrations in suburban and rural areas. We next detail variation across the 30
metropolitan areas with the largest charter shares of metropolitan area charter enrollment in
2010/11. Figure 4a shows the national charter share for each of these metropolitan areas, while
Figure 4b shows the share of the local market served by charters in each of these 30 metropolitan
areas. From Figure 4a, we see that, in seven of these metropolitan areas, charter schools serve
10% or more of the metropolitan area public student population. From Figure 4b, we see that
seven of these metro areas each have more than 3% of national charter enrollment with Los
Angeles leading with 6.5% of U.S. charter students. Strikingly, these 30 metro areas together
comprise 63% of total U.S. charter enrollment. Focusing on central city districts, we see in
Figure 4c that New Orleans charters have by far the largest charter share of any central city
district,9 followed in order by Washington, DC, Detroit, and Kansas City, all having a central
city district charter share of 35% or more. From Figure 4d, we see that six of these cities each
have more than 2% of national charter enrollment; Los Angeles leads with 5% of US charter


8
  Except where indicated, the data are for the 2010-11 academic year—the most recent year for which all variables
in the table are available.
9
  The city of New Orleans abolished traditional public schools effective with the 2014/15 academic year with public
education in the city now offered entirely by charter schools.

                                                         5
students, followed by Detroit, Philadelphia, New York City, Chicago, and Houston. These 30
cities together serve 34% of U.S. charter students. Thus, while charter schools currently serve
less than 5% of the U.S. public school population, these figures show the variation across
locations in charter enrollment and highlights the salient role that charter schools play in some
U.S. educational markets.
       Econometric research has investigated charter school location. Glomm, Harris, and Lo
(2005) study charter school location in Michigan, finding that charters are located in
communities with diverse populations as measured by heterogeneity in race and adult education.
Bifulco and Buerger (2012) investigate charter school location in New York. They find, as in
Glomm, et al. (2005), that charters tend to be located in districts where the population is diverse,
while also finding that charters tend to locate where expenditure per student is high, teacher costs
are low, and public school achievement is relatively low. In both of the preceding papers, the
authors are careful to emphasize that the analysis is reduced-form and leaves open the issue of
causality. While not focused on charter school location per se, Imberman (2011) instruments for
charter location, using measures of building availability in order to estimate causal effects of
charter schools on outcomes of students in public schools. His first-stage regression results
demonstrate the important role of building availability on charter school location. (Imberman’s
results regarding impacts on student achievement are discussed later in our review of “indirect
effects.”) Recent research has sought to develop structural models of charter school entry and
choice. Mehta (2012) models charter school entry in North Carolina, abstracting from
heterogeneity in student demographic characteristics. Using panel data for Washington, D.C.
schools for the period from 2002 through 2003, Ferreyra and Kosenok (2013) estimate an
equilibrium model of charter entry decisions and household choice among schools. They find
heterogeneity in household preferences, with African American and Hispanic households having
higher preference for charters than whites, and with poor households favoring charters more than
those with higher incomes. They also find high fixed costs to be a deterrent to entry in areas
where charters would attract enrollment.
B. Student Selection: Who do charter schools serve?
By law, charter schools are required to select students by lottery when they are over-subscribed.
In this sense, charter schools cannot selectively admit students. This does not imply that student
composition of charter schools will replicate the composition of public schools. Charter school

                                                 6
student body composition will be affected by charter school location. Furthermore, charter
schools may selectively market themselves to families. In addition, charter and TPSs may differ
in appeal to differing clienteles, leading to differences in school composition. In this section, we
review and assess differences in characteristics of charter and public school students.
           Comparisons using national data for 2010/11 in Table 1 show that charter shares of
students served by grade level (elementary and high school) are roughly the same as share of
overall student population served. Charter schools, on average, are smaller than TPSs. Charter
middle schools are about 80% the size of TPS middle schools, and charter high schools are about
half the size of traditional public high schools. Class sizes by grade level for the most common
modes of instruction are shown in Table 1.10 For these school configurations, class sizes are
relatively similar between charter and TPSs. There are other school configurations, not shown in
the table, that serve smaller shares of the student population. In schools that combine across
grade levels, for example, charter schools have substantially higher student/teacher ratios than
TPSs, though it is not clear to what extent this reflects differences in grade levels served in
combined schools. Overall, it is clear that the smaller average class sizes observed in the past for
charters relative to TPSs no longer prevails.
           We next turn to comparison of the demographic composition of charter and TPS students
at varying levels of geographic disaggregation.
i) National, State, Metropolitan and District Comparisons: Following (Powell, et al., 1997;
Fitzgerald, et al., 1998; RPP, 2000; Miron and Nelson, 2002; Frankenberg, Siegel-Hawley, &
Wang, 2010), we begin by comparing average characteristics of students in charter and TPS
schools at varying degrees of geographic disaggregation. We then turn to a review of findings
with respect to student selection into and retention in charter schools that use strategies to take
account of the demographic variation across charter school locations, competitors, and other
factors.
           The proportion of students reported as eligible for free or reduced-price lunch (FRL) in
charter schools has grown markedly over time, as shown in Figure 5a, from roughly 30% in 2001
to 50% in 2010. As shown in Table 1, the proportion of FRL students is now nearly the same in



10
  In self-contained classes, a given group of students is instructed in multiple subjects by the same teacher while in
departmentalized classes different subjects are taught by different teachers. Self-contained classes are relatively rare
outside of primary grades.

                                                           7
charters (51%) and TPSs (48%). This increase may reflect a growing proportion of poor students
in charter schools, and/or an increase in charter school participation in the National School
Lunch Program.
       Charter school composition by race and, ethnicity has changed over time, as shown in
Figure 5b. The most noteworthy change is the growth in percent of Hispanic students in charter
schools, which increased from 19% to 27% between 2001 and 2010. The proportion of charter
students that are African-American declined by approximately 4% over this period, and the
proportion white declined by approximately 5%. Overall, as seen in Table 1, charter enrollment
share of minority students is higher than TPSs, and the share of white students is correspondingly
lower. The charter share of African-American students stood at 29% in 2010-2011, almost
double the share of African-American students in TPSs. The share of Hispanic student was 27%,
roughly 5 percentage points higher than in TPSs.
       While sector-wide comparisons of the proportion of charter and TPS students in
particular subgroups are useful to describe the population being served, they provide little
information about the extent to which individual schools are integrated. In other words, the fact
that the entire sector (charter or TPS) in a district serves a wide range of student populations does
not tell us anything about integration. A district where the TPSs have equal shares of students
from each race might have schools that are highly integrated (i.e., each school has a mix of
students that looks like the district-wide average), or it might have schools that are fully
segregated (e.g., one third of the schools are 100% white, one-third are 100% black, and one-
third are 100% Hispanic).
       Table 2 provides a summary at the national level of segregation by race and FRL status.
The first row shows that the proportion of schools with more than 80% one race is approximately
38% in charters and 41% in TPSs. Likewise, the second row shows that the proportion with more
than 60% one race or ethnicity is also relatively similar in the two sectors, at 65% in charters and
67% in TPSs. By these measures, segregation is relatively high in both charters and TPSs. These
figures are far from the full story. The third row shows that the proportion of charter schools with
more than 80% white students is 14.5%, while the proportion of TPSs schools with more than
80% white is 31%. The proportion of charters with more than 80% nonwhite is 41%, roughly
double that for TPSs. The final three rows of Table 2 show concentrations with respect to
poverty. More than one third of charter schools have at least 80% of students eligible for FRL as

                                                  8
compare to slightly less than one fourth for TPSs. Approximately 60% of charters have at least
half of their student eligible for FRL as compared to 54% of TPSs. In summary, then, charters
and public schools exhibit substantial and similar degrees of racial and, ethnic segregation, but
schools with a high degree of segregation are more likely to be charters if predominantly
nonwhite and are more likely to be TPSs if predominantly white. Charter schools also exhibit
more segregation by poverty than TPSs.
       We next investigate segregation across central city school districts. Figure 6a shows the
proportion of schools with more than 80% FRL students for the 30 cities with highest charter
enrollment. The proportions are strikingly high in some cities. For example, in Chicago and New
Orleans, 90% of charter schools have more than 80% students on FRL. In 19 of the 30 cities, the
proportion of charters with greater than 80% FRL students is higher than the proportion of TPSs
with greater than 80% FRL students. The reverse is true in the remaining 11 cities.
       Using a similar approach, we investigate segregation by race or ethnicity. Figure 6b
shows the proportion of schools with more than 80% of students with one race for the 30 cities
with highest charter enrollment. Again, this proportion is strikingly high in some cities, led by
New Orleans with 92% and Detroit with 87%. The figure shows the proportions in charters and
TPSs to be relatively similar for most of these cities. A similar conclusion emerges in Figure 6c
which uses a 60% rather than 80% concentration by one race or ethnicity. Continuing the
investigation of segregation by race and ethnicity, we show in Figure 6d the proportions of
schools with more than 80% non-white students and in Figure 6e the proportions of schools with
more than 80% white students. From Figure 6d, we see that, in most of the 30 cities, the
proportion of charters schools with more than 80% non-white is greater than the proportion of
TPSs with more than 80% non-white students. Figure 6e shows, not surprisingly, that within
these cities, few schools in either sector have more than 80% white students. Figures 6f and 6g
tell a similar story when segregation is measured with more than 60% non-white and 60% white
respectively.
       It is important to note that there are exceptions to the general pattern summarized above.
St. Paul, Minnesota is one such exception. Figure 6d shows that the proportion of schools greater
than 80% non-white is approximately the same for charters and TPSs in St. Paul, MN, while
Figure 6e shows that the proportion of schools more than 80% white is markedly higher in
charters than TPSs. Reports by the Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity (IMO), (2013) and by

                                                 9
its predecessor, the Institute on Race and Poverty (2008, 2012), have highlighted the racial
segregation of charter schools relative to TPSs in Minneapolis-St. Paul area. The IMO (2013)
report points to charters locating in mixed-race suburbs and attracting predominantly white
students as increasing white segregation in charters and, thereby, increasing non-white
segregation in TPSs. Understanding why this phenomenon is occurring in Minneapolis-St. Paul
area is an important research issue.
         Turning to the metropolitan level, we see in Figure 7a, that the proportion of schools with
greater than 80% FRL is generally higher in charters than in TPSs. However, in some low
poverty metro areas (e.g., Sacramento, Oxnard/Venture, Orlando, Salt Lake City), charter FRL
share is lower than TPS FRL share. The proportion of charter schools with greater than 80%
non-white is greater than in TPSs in almost all the metropolitan areas shown in Figure 7b. By
contrast, as shown in Figure 7c, the proportion of charters with greater than 80% white is
generally lower than in TPSs.
         We next discuss comparisons at a finer grained geography. Table 3 from the CREDO
study compares the demographic composition of charters to that of traditional public feeder
schools from which charter students are drawn. From the table, we see that proportion of FRL
students is 54% for both feeders and charters, both being 5 percentage points higher than in the
universe of TPSs.11 We see in Table 1 that charter schools serve a much higher proportion of
African American students than do TPSs, 29% vs 17%. Charters also serve a higher proportion
of Hispanic students (27%) than do TPSs (23%), but they serve a smaller proportion than their
feeder school counterparts (34%). The latter suggests that charter schools locate in areas that
have a relatively high proportion of Hispanic students, but, in those locations, they draw a
smaller fraction of Hispanics than their TPS counterparts.
         Another measure of clientele served is academic performance. Charter school students
nationwide have lower NAEP reading and math scores than TPS students in both 4th and 8th
grades, and lower science scores in 8th grades. A central research question is whether the lower
achievement of charter school students is a result of student selection, relative educational
quality, or both. We discuss in the next subsection evidence on student selection into charter



11
  Charter school participation in the National School Lunch Program in charters may be less extensive than TPS
participation. If so, the actual proportion of poor students in charter schools may be higher than reflected in reported
FRL eligibility.

                                                          10
schools and, in Section IV, the extent and nature of achievement differentials that might be
attributable to differences in quality of education in the two sectors.
         Still another domain for comparing clienteles served is special needs students. As shown
in Table 1, enrollment shares nationwide of limited English proficiency are substantially higher
in charters than TPSs, while enrollment shares of special needs students are lower in charters
than in TPSs. Relative to the neighborhoods in which they locate, Table 3 indicates that charters
schools serve a smaller proportion of English language learners than their feeder school
counterparts, 9% vs. 13%, and a smaller proportion of special education students, 8% vs. 11%.12
Given the higher proportion English language learners served nationwide in charters than in
TPSs, this suggests, as with Hispanic students, that charters locate in areas with high proportions
of LEP students but, in those neighborhoods, they attract a smaller proportion of LEP students
than their public school counterparts.
ii) Within-school diversity of charters relative to public schools: The above analyses show
differences in populations served by charter relative to TPSs. These differences arise both from
charter school location and selection into charter schools conditional on location. It is clearly of
interest to disentangle the two. To accomplish this, research has examined the movement of
students from TPSs to charter schools using longitudinal student-level data. This method allows
researchers to track students as they move from school to school and examine whether students
who exit TPSs to charter schools move to schools with a greater or lower concentration of
students of the same race or, ethnicity. In addition, using the same approach, researchers can
examine whether below- or above-average achieving students are exiting TPSs. In both cases,
the approach provides a more refined counterfactual than making sector-wide comparisons.
However, this method does not provide a comprehensive picture of the student sorting resulting
from charter schools, because it includes only the charter students who enter charter schools after
having previously been enrolled in TPSs; it does not identify a counterfactual for students who




12
   Note that the results from CREDO in Table 3 show a lower overall proportion of English Language Learners than
shown by the LEP data in Table 1. Two potential reasons are the following. The former are for 2010/11 whereas the
latter are for 2007/08. The other is source of data. As explained in footnote 14 of the CREDO report: “Data on
English language learners and special education students is available by state for all public schools from the
National Center for Education Statistics, but it is not disaggregated to the school level to allow for computations by
charter designation. For the 27 states, CREDO collected these data at the school level from each state education
department and compiled the proportions for charter schools in those states.”

                                                          11
enroll in charter schools beginning in kindergarten.13 Nonetheless, this addition to the picture of
the changing peer environments of individual students who move to charter schools is valuable
in capturing the effects of charters at the neighborhood level whereas comparisons at higher
levels of aggregation do not capture the enormous local variation in schools, and comparisons at
the neighborhood level after charter entry do not fully capture the effects of charters on school
composition relative to that prevailing prior to charter entry. Only a handful of studies have used
this approach, partially because it requires longitudinal student-level data, which can be difficult
to obtain. When this approach has been used, the results for the segregation analysis have been
mixed across the racial groups, but less so for the cream skimming question.
         In an early study, Booker, Zimmer, and Buddin (2005) examined the effect of charter
schools on the stratification of students in terms of both ability and race using data from
California and Texas. In both states, African-American students transferred to charter schools
with higher concentrations of black students than the schools they attended previously. In Texas,
white students also moved to charter schools with higher concentrations of whites than at their
TPSs, but the opposite was true in California. Hispanic charter students in both states had fewer
Hispanic peers than they had in their prior TPSs. In terms of measured ability, transfer students
had lower test scores than the average student at their TPSs. These findings support the
inferences discussed earlier from the evidence in Tables 1 and 3. In both states, charters attracted
a disproportionate share of students with low test scores relative to the TPSs the students exited.
In another early study using longitudinal student-level data, Bifulco and Ladd (2007) examined
data from North Carolina focusing on racial distribution and found that charters have increased
the racial isolation of black and white students. On average, black charter students left schools
that were 53 percent black for charters that were 72 percent black. Similarly, white charter
students left TPSs that were 72 percent white to charters that were 82 percent white.14 Both black
and white charter students had more peers from college educated parents than at their previous
TPS, but the percentage increase in college educated parents was about 6 times larger for whites

13
   In fact, in evaluating the effect on racial segregation, a very appealing approach would be to use lottery data and
examine the racial makeup of the school a lottery “loser” attends and compare that to the racial makeup of schools
lottery “winners” attend. This analysis would include not only students switching schools mid-stream (e.g., a
student who switches from a TPS in 2nd grade and attend a charter school in 3rd grade), but also include students who
start out in a charter school in the entry grade. At this point, no study has conducted this type of evaluation.
14
   As we note previously, this is the kind of impact that IMO (2013) sees in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area, though
without the strong identification strategy of the student-level longitudinal approach employed by Bifulco and Ladd
(2007).

                                                         12
than for blacks. On net, black students transferred to charters with lower average test scores than
their previous schools, while white students transferred to charters with higher average test
scores than their previous public schools. In a more recent study in North Carolina, Ladd et.al.
(2014) noted that while charter schools once served disproportionally black students, that has
changed in recent years and has been increasingly serving white students. This suggests that the
dynamics of who charter schools serve may evolve over time.
           In probably the most geographically comprehensive study to date, Zimmer et.al. (2009)
used longitudinal student-level data to examine how charters affected peer composition in five
urban districts and two states. They found modest effects of charters on the racial mix of schools.
In some locations, black and white students tended to attend charters with a higher concentration
of students of their same race than at their previous TPS, but these differences were generally
small. Overall, across the seven jurisdictions, the average increase in the Black concentration
experienced by a Black transfer student was 3.8 percent, versus an average increase of 1.3
percent in the White concentration experienced by transferring white students, and an average
decline of 5.9 percent in the Hispanic concentration experienced by transferring Hispanic
students.15
           The study also looked at the ability distribution of students transferring to charter schools.
In most cases, the charter students were near or slightly below the test score average for the TPS
that they previously attended. Compared to their immediate peers in the TPSs they exited,
students transferring to charter schools had slightly higher test scores in two of seven locations,
while in the other five locations the scores of the transferring students were identical to or lower
than those of their TPS peers. Same-race comparisons indicate lower prior scores for charter
students in five of seven sites among African-Americans and in four of seven sites among
Hispanics. For White students the pattern was slightly different: In four of seven sites, white
students entering charter schools had higher prior achievement than their white peers in both
subjects, and in one other site they had higher scores in one of two subjects. These results for
white students had little effect on the overall averages because white students constituted a
minority of charter students in every location, and less than one-quarter of charter students in the
four locations where their scores were consistently higher than those of their white peers.



15
     These averages give equal weight to each jurisdiction rather than weighting by the number of students or schools.

                                                           13
Garcia, McIlroy, and Barber (2008) extended this research on cream skimming by adding a
somewhat nuanced comparison while examining Arizona charter schools. They compared the
achievement levels of students exiting TPSs to enroll in charter schools with those of students
exiting TPSs to enroll in other types of schools, such as other TPSs. Overall, they find that
students who transfer from TPSs to charter schools have lower prior achievement levels than
students transferring to other TPSs.
       Two other studies that examine the racial mix of students are worth noting. The first of
these studies surveyed parents about the choice to attend a school and compared their answer to
their actual revealed preferences by the choice they made (Weiher and Tedin, 2002). They found
that the parents reported similar values on school attributes irrespective of race and SES. In
practice, however, parents’ choices were often at odds with their avowed preferences. While 60
percent of parents ranked high school test scores as a primary factor in choosing a school, the
majority of these parents picked a charter school with lower average test scores than the TPS that
their student left. Similarly, few parents mentioned race as a factor in choosing a school, but
parents tended to pick schools with higher concentrations of students in their racial group than at
their previous school. These results may suggest that race plays a role in choices families make.
However, in a more recent study, Butler, et al. (2013) used the U.S. Department of Education’s
Early Childhood Longitudinal Program data (which includes a rich set of observable
characteristics) and examined educational enrollment choices families make across a large array
of schools, including charter schools, and found that once a rich set of variables are included,
race was not driving decisions to attend charter schools, but socioeconomic characteristics did.
In addition to concerns around issues of race and possible cream skimming, critics have raised
questions about whether all students have access to charter schools, including special education
students. As we saw in Table 3, charter schools do serve fewer special education students than
their TPS feeder-school counterparts. Investigation of this phenomenon has been undertaken for
two school districts, New York (Winters, 2013) and Denver (Winters, 2014). In Denver, Winters
finds that the gap begins in elementary school, with a 1.7% difference in Kindergarten. This gap
arises because fewer IEP students apply to charter schools. The gap then grows to 7.2% by fifth
grade. Two features underlie this growth. Charters are less likely that TPSs to classify a student
as IEP and more likely to declassify a student from IEP status. This accounts for half the growth
in the percentage gap. Accounting for the other half of the growth, non IEP students switching

                                                 14
schools are more likely to move to a charter than a TPS, increasing the proportion of non-IEP
students. Winters finds that differences in application rates lead to a 4.4% gap in 5th grade. This
gap subsequently declines to 3.4% as more IEP students enter than exit charter schools. Winters’
(2013) findings for elementary schools in New York City point to differential application rates at
the kindergarten level coupled with differences between charters and TPSs in classification of
IEP students as the factors giving rise to the gap in New York City. Difference in exit rates of
IEP students between charters and TPSs play little role in either Denver or New York City,
suggesting that the gap is not due to charter schools “counseling out” IEP students. Winters finds
no significant differences across students with different types of disabilities in propensity to
apply to charters versus TPSs in Denver, but substantial differences in New York City. For
example, almost all students with autism apply to TPSs in New York City.
       As Winters emphasizes, these findings suggest the need for research to clarify the reasons
for differential rates of application of special-needs student to charters relative to TPSs. It
remains to be determined whether the gap arises because of actual or perceived differences
between charters and TPSs in services for IEP students, because parents are concerned that a
special needs child is more likely to be reclassified in a charter, or other factors influencing
parental decisions. Study of reasons for differences in rates of IEP classification and
declassification is also needed. The role of finance policies also warrants further study. As
Bifulco and Buerger (2012) emphasize, there are substantial differences across states in the
degree to which funding to charters varies with IEP or LEP status or with other student
characteristics that affect costs of education. Also, further investigation is needed to determine
whether the findings for Denver and New York apply more broadly.
       These issues have been explored a bit further with a couple of studies, but with not the
same focus on the implications for student achievement. Instead, these studies focus on student
moves and why they are made. In the first of these studies, Hanushek, Kain, Rivkin, and Branch
(2007) use Texas student-level longitudinal data to track student moves between schools of
varying quality and make the case that students exiting charter schools are motivated by school
quality. More specifically, the authors found that higher achieving charter schools have lower
exit rates than lower achieving charter schools, and the authors argue that much of the student
mobility in charter schools is motivated to improve their educational situation.



                                                  15
       In a more recent study, Zimmer and Guarino (2013) explore this issue with a different
angle to examine whether they can find any empirical evidence of charter schools pushing out
low-performing students. Some critics argue that charter schools may have an incentive to push
out these students to raise their academic profile and to reduce costs (Ravitch, undated). Using
longitudinal student-level data from an anonymous district, the authors examine the achievement
levels of students exiting charter schools relative to students exiting TPSs. First using an
informal descriptive model, they did find that the academic performance of students exiting
charter schools as measured by test scores is slightly less than students remaining in charter
schools, but they also found this to be true in TPSs. In a formal linear probability model
controlling for observable student characteristics, the authors find that low-performing students
were no more likely to exit charter schools than TPSs. The authors note that this does not prove
charter schools are not pushing out low performing students as they cannot distinguish the
reasons students leave a particular school, but the evidence they provide is not supportive of the
claim. They acknowledge their analysis is of only one location and argue that researchers should
explore the validity of the claims in a larger set of locations.
       While the research reviewed above has made major headway on the issue of cream
skimming, important open issues remain. Disruptive behavior has been found to be a significant
channel by which students generate adverse impacts on the learning of classroom peers (Carrell
and Hoekstra, 2010). To the extent the data permit, it would be of interest in future work to
investigate whether there are differences in behavioral measures (infractions, suspensions,
absenteeism, tardiness) between students who apply for charter schools and those who do not,
and whether students who exit charters exhibit more or fewer behavioral problems than those
who remain. It would also be of interest to investigate treatment effects of charter schools on
behavioral measures, as, for example, in the Engberg, et al. (2014) study of magnet schools.
       Synthesizing the findings on charter school demographic composition, we read the
evidence as follows. Charter schools tend to locate in urban areas with high concentrations of
minority and low-income students. This, rather than selection conditional on location, is the
primary factor giving rise to the high degree of segregation by race/ethnicity and by FRL status
that characterizes the majority of charter schools. The evidence further indicates, however, that
household school choice decisions following charter school entry tend to perpetuate and
sometimes accentuate such segregation. This is not to suggest that charter school authorizers

                                                  16
would grant a charter to an applicant seeking to exploit opportunities to increase segregation, but
increased segregation could be seen as a side effect of entry for charter schools striving towards
desirable educational objectives. We return to this issue later in our discussion of school
specialization.
C. Teachers in charter schools
Charter school teachers differ in their characteristics and in facets of their employment. Here we
present comparative descriptive statistics about charter school teachers, while discussing
research that seeks to explain differences in Section VI. Table 4 summarizes a number of
differences between teachers in charter schools and TPSs, also providing corresponding values
for private schools when available. All values are drawn from the 2011/12 Schools and Staffing
Survey, a nationally representative sample conducted by the National Center for Education
Statistics. We highlight some comparisons of charter school teachers to those in TPSs. We leave
to the reader examination of differences with respect to private schools.
       Minority teachers make up a substantially larger proportion of teachers in charter schools
than in TPSs, perhaps reflecting the frequent urbanicity and concentration of minorities in many
charter schools. Gender differences are minor. Research has emphasized the relative
youthfulness of charter school teachers and their relative lack of teaching experience. More than
a quarter of charter school teachers have less than 4 years of teaching experience. Moreover, the
average tenure of teachers in charter schools is just 3.6 years as compared to 8.1 years in TPSs.
This relates to teacher turnover in charter schools, a major issue to which we return. Charter
school teachers have less training; 52.3% have a bachelor’s degree as their most advanced
degree, while the corresponding percentage in TPSs is 39.4, this because 56.8% of TPS teachers
have a more advanced degree. Charter school teachers earn substantially less and a higher
percentage have part of their earnings linked to student performance, though not a large
proportion of earnings. Charter school teachers are required to work modestly longer hours. As
we saw in Table 1, average class sizes are broadly comparable between charter and TPSs.
Other data on charter school teachers are not systematically collected, but various studies clarify
other differences between charter school teachers and TPS teachers. Charter school teachers are
frequently not certified or not certified in the area in which they teach, while states require TPS
teachers to be certified. This is why many TPS teachers have master’s degrees, which is required
for certification in many states. In 2011, of the then 41 states that authorized charter schools,

                                                 17
only 23 of them had the same certification requirements for charter school teachers as for TPS
teachers.16 Fourteen states of the latter do not require that 100 percent of charter teachers be
certified, the minimum percentage ranging from 30 to 90. The remaining states do not require
certification, though the charter authorizer might impose requirements. It should be noted that
NCLB requires teachers of core subjects in all public schools, including charters, to be “highly
qualified,” which has likely induced more certification in charter schools. Podgursky and Ballou
(2001) provide early data for 1997-98 from a survey they conducted of teachers in seven states
that had charter schools.17 The proportion of charter schools that had more than 50% of teachers
not certified was about 18.5%, with virtually no such TPSs. Stuit and Smith (2009) and Cannata
and Penaloza (2012) provide more recent data. Stuit and Smith analyze data from the 2003-04
Schools and Staffing Survey and Cannata and Penaloza develop data for 2007-08 for charters in
eight states, matched to TPSs by state, geographic area, student racial and socio-economic
composition, and size. Stuit and Smith report that 14.5% of teachers in charters had no
certification, the corresponding percentage in TPSs equal to 1.5. Matching does not reduce this
gap; Cannata and Penaloza found 18.7% of charter teachers held less than full certification as
compared to 3.2% in the matched TPSs. In the ‘No Excuses’ charter schools in Boston studied in
Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011), 56.7% of high-school teachers are licensed to teach in their
assignment relative to 88.8% in Boston TPSs.
         The data on whether teachers attended highly selective colleges are mixed. Baker and
Dickerson (2006) use data from 18 states and the District of Columbia from the 1999 SASS.
Using Barron’s college selectivity rankings, they report that 12.1% of charter teachers graduated
from the top two selectivity groups, the percentage in TPSs equal to 8.1. In a more recent study
with broader geographic coverage, Stuit and Smith (2009) report virtually no difference, with
about 25% graduating from a selective undergraduate institution. In their matched sample for
eight states, Cannata and Penzola (2012) find that charter school teachers attend somewhat less
selective colleges. TPS teachers are also more likely to earn their degrees from education
departments (Stuit and Smith, 2009).



16
   Here we are paraphrasing Exstrom’s (2012) summary on certification requirements, which she derives from
NCES (2011).
17
   The survey is not necessarily representative as they examined states with charter laws supporting relatively strong
autonomy and due to possible selection in response.

                                                         18
       Unionization of charter school teachers is drastically lower than in TPSs. In Podursky and
Ballou’s (2001) early sample only 8% of charter school teachers engaged in collective
bargaining. Stuit and Smith (2009) report 39% of charter teachers are unionized, while 95.4% of
TPS teachers are in unions. NAPCS reports that only 12.3% of charter school teachers were
unionized in 2009-10. Among those that were unionized, 64% were unionized by state law.
Tenure is much rarer in charter schools than in TPSs. Podursky and Ballou (2001) report that
only 15% of the charter schools they studied awarded tenure and 63% of teachers were on one-
year contracts. Turnover of charter school teachers is substantial and substantially higher than in
TPSs. For example, 25% of teachers in charter schools left their school in 2003-04 in the Stuit
and Smith (2009) data, while the comparable percentage in TPSs was 14.
       Whether these differences can affect the performance of charter schools is an open
question. In section V, we examine the evidence of the effectiveness of charter schools,
including whether operational features affect school outcomes. But first, in the next section we
examine the challenges of estimating these effects.
IV.    Evaluating Charter Schools: Methodological Issues
Among the various aspects of the charter debate, none is more contentious than whether charter
schools are having a positive effect on student achievement. As previously noted, advocates
argue that charter schools could not only have a direct effect on students attending charter
schools, but could have systemic effects on students attending TPSs through competitive
pressure—i.e., because TPSs now have to compete for students, they will work harder and
smarter in educating students. In this section, we lay the groundwork for discussion of charter
school effectiveness by discussing alternative empirical approaches and their strengths and
weaknesses.
       In the case of direct effects, an analysis is complicated by the fact that students and their
families choose to attend charter schools. This choice may imply these students are different as
they may be more engaged students and families than a typical student attending a TPS.
Alternatively, students attending charter schools could be students who have not had success in
traditional settings and are trying charter school as a last resort. Therefore, any observed
differences in performance between students in charter and TPSs may not result from weaker or
superior educational services in charter schools, but result from different unobserved
characteristics of students. If these unobserved characteristics are not accounted for in a research

                                                 19
study, they can create a “selection bias” and could lead researchers and policymakers to invalid
conclusions.
         The most obvious and strongest approach for dealing with the selection bias is to assign
students randomly to charter and TPSs from a pool of all students. However, such random
assignment has not occurred. This is not surprising since randomly assigning students in such a
way would run counter to the reform itself as part of the theory behind charter schools is to have
students match their needs and interest to the offerings of the schools. Forcing a student to attend
a randomly assigned school would break this link. In lieu of a pure randomized design,
researchers have often used one of four approaches: 1) lottery based design (which simulates
randomized design), 2) fixed effect approaches, 3) matching procedures, 4) OLS regression
designs, and 5) instrumental variable (IV) approaches.
         Among these approaches, many argue that the lottery based design is the most rigorous as
it relies upon lottery assignment of oversubscribed schools as a natural experiment proxying
random assignment to schools. As such, however, these evaluations answer a narrower question:
Do outcomes improve for students who enroll in oversubscribed schools? The efficacy of the
lottery schools is found by comparing the subsequent outcomes of lottery “winners” who attend
the oversubscribed school with those of “losers” who are denied admission and attend another
school. However, the results would only have inferences to oversubscribed schools. In fact, one
would expect schools with wait lists to be the best schools, so the results may offer little insights
into the performance of undersubscribed schools (Zimmer and Engberg, 2014).18 In addition,
many students who enter an oversubscribed school may enter the school outside of the lottery
including a sibling exception and a lottery analysis may not have inferences about these students.
Furthermore, Tuttle, Gleason, and Clark (2012) raise challenges to employing the approach
correctly as often schools do not keep careful records of students who entered a school through a
lottery or outside of lottery as one example of a challenge.
         A further concern is attrition, which can come in two forms. First, a student assigned to a
charter school via a lottery may attend less than the full set of grades offered at a charter school

18
   It should also be noted that researchers often employ a “lottery fixed effect” in these analyses as there is not one
lottery for all charter schools, but often a lottery for each charter school and the lottery fixed effect is designed to
control for differences across lotteries, including the number of students on the wait list. However, the lottery fixed
effect approach weights charter schools with longer wait lists more than charter schools with shorter wait lists,
which makes the results less generalizable as the results may be driven by a select number of charter schools with
long wait lists (Reardon, 2009).

                                                           20
(e.g., a student assigned to a charter high school may only attend 9th grade and then transfer out)
or may not attend at all. Furthermore, a “lottery loser” could end up in undersubscribed charter
school or could enter a charter school at a later date. Second, a student could exit the data set
altogether as a student might end up attending a private school, move outside of the jurisdiction
of the data set (e.g., move out of a district), or dropout of school. To the degree that either form
of attrition is non-random, it can create bias.
       There are two ways to address the first form of attrition. First, a researcher could do an
intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis, in which a student, for research purposes, maintains his or her
original assignment to a charter school or TPS regardless of the type of school a student actually
attends. This approach maintains the random assignment, which guards against bias, but answers
the policy question of what impact does randomly assigning a student to a charter school (but not
necessarily attendance) have on student outcomes. Obviously, this is a less important question
than the impact actual attendance at a charter school has on outcomes. Therefore, researchers, in
addition or as alternative to doing an ITT analysis, often conduct a treatment-on-treated (TOT)
analysis, in which a researcher employs an IV approach using the random assignment as an
instrument. This analysis focuses on the question of the impact actual attendance has on student
outcomes, but has the drawback of reduced breadth of inferences that comes with an IV approach
(which we will describe later). So there is a tradeoff of the two approaches with the ITT
approach having greater breadth of inferences, but answering a less policy relevant question,
while the TOT approach answers a more policy relevant question, but has less breadth of
inferences.
       For the second form of attrition in which students disappear from the analysis, neither an
ITT or TOT analysis will alleviate the possible bias. The concern is that students attriting out of a
data set may be very different than students who remain. For instance, in analysis of magnet
schools, Engberg, et al. (2014) found that more affluent students exited the data set of the urban
district they were examining as many students exited for a suburban district or private school if
they did not get into a magnet school via the lottery. In that case, the authors use a bounding
technique to regain an unbiased estimate, but the approach provides a less precise estimate.
While some lottery studies do not provide explicit discussion of the attrition issue,
Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2011) provide evidence that differential attrition of lottery winners and



                                                  21
losers is small, and Dobbie and Fryer (2011b) provide evidence that their results are robust to
correction for potential differential attrition.
         When lottery based analyses are not possible, a fixed-effect approach with student-level
longitudinal data is often used. A fixed-effect approach minimizes the problem of selection bias
by comparing the academic gains of individual students over time switching between a TPS and
a charter school (i.e., “switchers”). An advantage of this method over the lottery approach is that
it applies to schools with and without waiting lists for admission. However, some researchers
have raised concerns with this approach (Hoxby and Murarka, 2007; Ballou, Teasley, and
Zeidner, 2007). These critics note that the fixed-effect approach does not provide an estimate for
students who attend charter schools for the duration of the analysis (i.e., “non-switchers”) as the
analysis requires a comparison of student outcomes in both contexts. Switchers may differ from
non-switchers in important ways, so the results may not be applicable for students who are
continuously enrolled in a charter school. Researchers also wonder about the motivation of
students switching into charter school midway through their educational careers. For instance,
Hoxby and Murarka (2007) argue that a fixed-effect approach cannot account for the possibility
that students who, for example, perform poorly on a test may be especially likely to transfer to a
charter school the following year. The dip in the performance could be a real dip caused by poor
educational instruction, a disruption in a student’s life unrelated to a school, or it could be just
noise in test scores.19 Regardless of the reason for the dip, the fixed-effect approach could
produce biased estimates. Even absent bias, studies that rely on student-level fixed effects
answer a different—but also narrow question: Are student outcomes for students who switch
between a TPS and a charter schools better while the student attends a charter school versus a
TPS?
         A recent set of studies by CREDO, a research center at Stanford headed by Margaret
Raymond, used an alternative approach to the fixed effect and lottery approaches (CREDO,
2009; CREDO, 2013a). These studies, which have been cited often both by researchers and
stakeholders in the charter debate, used what they term a virtual control records (VCR) approach,
which is a matching procedure where a “virtual” match for each charter student is found in a


19
  All tests have some level of noise in their measurement, and some students will score lower or higher on a single
administration of a test than the average score they would receive if they took multiple, similar tests. Thus, a student
could score poorly on a particular test in one year and then the next year score higher as they bounce back to a score
more reflective of their learning.

                                                          22
TPS. These students are matched based on known demographic attributes, grade in school,
eligibility or participation in special support programs (including free and reduced lunch
programs, English language learner status and special education status), and a baseline test result.
Much like the fixed-effect approach, the VCR approach has the advantage over lottery based
studies in that a broad set of charter schools can be included, not just oversubscribed schools.
However, as with the fixed-effect approach, the internal validity of the analysis requires stronger
assumptions than in lottery studies as the approach assumes that students that have similar
observed characteristics and baseline test scores also have similar unobservable characteristics.
Relative to the fixed-effect approach, the VCR approach has the advantage of including a broad
set of students as the analysis is not restricted to only students switching between schools. It
includes all students who have a baseline test score in a charter school. However, the need to
have a baseline test score implies a potential limitation in the question the analysis can answer,
as it cannot examine the accumulated impact for many students who first attend a charter school
prior to baseline tested grade. For instance, if a student enters a charter school in Kindergarten
and the first year a student is tested is 3rd grade, which would be the baseline test score used for
matching students between charter and TPSs, the analysis will estimate the differential gain or
loss between charters and TPSs from this baseline test score to test scores in later grades (e.g., 4th
grade, 5th grade). If charter schools are the most or least beneficial to students during these early
grades, the analysis would miss that part of the charter school contribution.
        A fourth approach is the most basic approach—an OLS regression model with school
type as the independent variable of interest and controlling for observed student characteristics.
Like the matching approach, this approach could be more inclusive of schools and students in the
analysis and could lead to valid estimates if the researcher has a large set of observable
characteristics including characteristics associated with student and family motivation. But
having a baseline test score would be an essential control variable for the analysis and therefore
faces the same challenge as the matching approach of using a baseline test score. Together, this
suggests, much like the matching approach, the OLS approach has strong assumptions. Later,
when we aggregate the findings from previous research in summary tables, we will combine the
matching and OLS research design studies into one category and only highlight those studies that
have received the most attention.



                                                 23
        A fifth and final approach, which is less frequently used in examining effectiveness of
charter schools (relative to the fixed-effect and lottery-based approaches), is an instrumental
variable (IV) approach. An IV approach uses an “instrument” to control for the choices students
and their families make and reduces the selection bias in estimating the effects of charter schools
on student outcomes. A valid instrument must impact the choice of a charter versus TPS but
must not itself affect the educational outcome. While an IV approach could have advantages
relative to the lottery-based design and fixed-effect approaches as it may be more inclusive of
students and schools, it is often difficult to find an “instrument” that is correlated with the choice
families make and uncorrelated with ultimate educational outcomes. Another limitation of the IV
approach is that the effect only applies to individuals who are at the margin on the instrument
used (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin, 1996). For example, in the context of charter schools, distance
to a charter school has been used as an instrument. This may be a valid instrument, but the results
only apply to individuals on the margin based on distance from a charter. From a policy
perspective, we would like to know the charter effect for the broader population, but the IV
estimates do not provide this. So again, this approach answers the question of effectiveness for a
narrow population. This approach has often been used when the outcome measure is not a
repeated outcome measured both during and after treatment, such as test score, but often a single
measured outcome that only occurs after treatment, such as graduation rates or college
attendance.
        These methodological considerations suggest that differences in findings across studies
could result from differences in research approaches in addition to alternative policy settings in
which charter schools are examined. We will discuss this point further as we synthesize findings
across the existing literature.
V. Effectiveness of Charter Schools
In the last decade or so, there has been a rapid expansion of the number of studies that have
examined the direct effects of charter schools; and, at this point, it would be hard to provide an
accurate account of all the studies. However, only a subset of these studies has tried to address
the selection bias inherent in estimating a direct effect. Nevertheless, the number of studies with
rigorous research designs is numerous and there are too many to summarize individually.
Therefore, we synthesize the findings by research designs using tables highlighting the more
prominent studies as well as studies that have looked at unique outcomes. We synthesize by

                                                  24
research design because, as we noted above, each research design is answering somewhat
narrowly defined and different questions with different inferences. It should be noted that these
studies have typically estimated average effects across all schools. While these researchers have
recognized that there can be wide variation of performance across schools, they have not
generally provided estimates of the variance in performance.
A. Achievement Effects
We first synthesize across fixed-effect studies as this approach was used by the earliest and most
often cited studies (Zimmer, et al., 2003; Bifulco and Ladd, 2006; Sass, 2005; Hanushek, Kain,
and Rivkin, 2007; Booker, et al., 2007; Imberman, 2011) and has been the most widely used
approach for estimating charter effects. In Table 5, we synthesize the effects across the fixed
effect studies. Across the various geographic locations,20 researchers have generally found no
overall average effect, small positive, or even small negative average effects. Digging deeper
into some of these studies, researchers have often found that student achievement for charter
schools in their initial years are often negative, but student achievement improve as these schools
mature (Bifulco & Ladd, 2006; Sass, 2006; Booker, et al., 2007; Hanushek, et al., 2007; Ni &
Rorrer, 2012; Zimmer, et al., 2012). This suggests that policymakers should not expect charter
schools to have a positive impact overnight, and it may take time for these schools to have an
impact, if ever.
           As previously mentioned, some have argued that the assumptions of the fixed-effect
model are too strong and studies relying upon lotteries to assign students randomly to a charter
and TPSs are more conclusive (Hoxby & Murarka, 2007). Based on this argument, along with
the Institute Educational Science’ (IES) emphasis on randomized control trials when funding
research, a number of lottery-based studies have recently emerged after the wave of fixed-effect
studies. As Table 6 suggests, these studies have been much more supportive of charter schools
with nearly all of these studies finding positive effects—in some cases, quite large effects
(Hoxby and Rockoff, 2004; Hoxby, Kang, & Murarka, 2009; Abdulkadiroglu, et al., 2010; Curto
and Fryer, 2011; Tuttle, et al., 2013; Wong, et al., 2014)—with only one finding no effect, a
study by Mathematica of charter middle schools (Gleason, et al., 2010). However, even this
study, while finding no positive effects on average across all schools, found some positive effects
for urban charter middle schools. Therefore, many advocates for charter schools fixate on the

20
     By our count, the fixed effect approach has been used in studies evaluating charter schools in at least 12 states.

                                                             25
lottery-based studies arguing that these studies have stronger research design, but generally fail
to note that these studies have weaker external validity than fixed-effect studies or observational
studies in general.
         Because both fixed-effect and the lottery-based approaches received a fair amount of
criticism, two recent studies by CREDO used the VCR matching procedure discussed in the
previous section (CREDO, 2009; CREDO, 2013a). In these studies, CREDO tried to address the
external validity weaknesses of lottery-based and the fixed-effect studies by including all
schools, not just oversubscribed schools of a lottery-based study, and a larger set of students, not
just the switchers of a fixed-effect study. While we previously noted that the VCR approach
examines the effect of charter schools relative to a baseline test, which limits the ability to study
impacts in the early grades, these studies were unique in that they included longitudinal student-
level data from multiple states. The two CREDO studies included 16 and 27 states,21
respectively. To our knowledge, the only other studies that can make a claim of using data from
multiple states are studies using OLS regression approaches, a RAND study using a fixed-effect
approach (Zimmer, et al., 2009, Zimmer, et al., 2012), and the Mathematica charter middle
school study (Gleason, et al., 2010) using the lottery-based approach.22
         CREDO presented results in a unique way, reporting the proportion of charter schools
that outperformed their locally matched TPS, which made their findings easier to interpret for a
lay audience, including the media. CREDO found in the 2009 study that 17 percent of charter
schools outperformed TPSs in math, but this number grew to 29 percent in the 2013 study. On a
similar note, CREDO found that 31 percent performed worse than their TPSs counterpart in the
2009 study, but only 19 percent in the 2013 study. While this suggests some improvement
between the timeframes of the studies, the 2013 study’s overall national estimate of charter
schools suggests little average impact with no statistically significant difference in math and a
slight positive effect in reading of 0.01 of a standard deviation. In general, these results have
been interpreted in two ways. The more optimistic view is that overall performance of charter
schools is improving over time. The more negative view is that many students’ performance in


21
   The 2009 study includes 15 states plus the District of Columbia, while the 2013 study actually included 25 states
plus the District of Columbia and New York City.
22
   Mathematica also had a national study of charter schools managed by charter management organizations (CMOs)
(Tuttle, et al., 2013) and a study of schools managed by the individual CMO of KIPP, but these studies were not
meant to be representative of charter schools in general.

                                                         26
many charter schools are still lagging behind students in TPSs and, overall, the results across the
two studies do not show a pattern of systematic improvement.
        In Table 7, we summarize the matching studies as well as the national OLS regression
studies. While these studies are often thought to impose stronger assumptions for controlling for
selection bias, and therefore raise more internal validity concerns among researchers, they have
disproportionally received national attention. For instance, the 2004 AFT study by Howard
Nelson was highlighted in front page story in the New York Times.23 Because this study used
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) data which do not track individual
students over time, many researchers criticized not only this study,24 but criticized the New York
Times for reporting what many believed to be a study with weak controls for selection bias
(Carnoy, et al., 2006). In fact, a full page advertisement appeared in the New York Times shortly
after the story came out criticizing both the study and the New York Times reporting.25 Within
weeks, Hoxby (2004) used an OLS approach using school-level proficiency data across states
comparing the performance of charter schools to nearby TPSs. While many viewed this design
as an improvement, many argued that these results were also suspect and left many policymakers
and observers confused.26 In the end, many argued for stronger approaches when examining
charter schools.
        The most recent set of papers have examined charter schools in Texas (Baude, et al.,
2014) and North Carolina (Ladd, et al., 2014) with a variant of the OLS approach using value
added models. Baude and colleagues argued that using the value added approach as opposed to a
fixed effect or lottery-based approach represents an improvement because any competitive
effects on the quality of TPSs (which will weaken these schools as counterfactuals) will be
amplified as these methods base their comparisons solely on those TPSs from which the charter
school students are drawn even though these public schools likely face the strongest competitive
pressures. Both papers focus on the evolution of charter schools over time, and both find that
while charter schools generally lagged behind TPSs in the early years of the movement in each
state, eventually, charter schools either tend to meet or surpass the performance of TPSs.27 In

23
   http://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/17/education/17charter.html
24
   http://educationnext.org/grayladywheezing/
25
   https://www.edreform.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/NY-Times-Ad-Ed-Week-Version.pdf
26
   http://www.ecs.org/html/Document.asp?chouseid=5588
27
   Ladd et al (2104) also employed a fixed effect model, which showed no effect for students switching between
sectors.

                                                        27
addition, Ladd and colleagues found have higher parental satisfaction for parents in charter
schools.
         Comparing the results across the studies using lottery-based and observational
approaches of OLS, matching and fixed effects, the studies using lottery-based approaches are
much more positive. As previously noted, one could argue that the lottery-based findings should
be the only ones trusted as lottery-based approach employs an approach that best mimics a
randomized design providing a stronger guard against self-selection.28 However, there are a
number of reasons why the set of findings from the lottery-based approach and observational
approaches could differ beyond the rigor of the approach. First, many of the locations studied in
the two sets of approaches do not overlap. Because each state has its own charter laws and the
local environments can affect the adoption of charter schools, the performance of charter schools
could vary from location to location. Therefore, both sets of results could be right with results
varying not because of the research approach, but because of the location. In one case in which
the location overlapped across the different approaches, the results for the VCR approach were
similar to the results from the lottery-based approach (CREDO, 2013b). Second, the two sets of
studies could be evaluating two very different sets of charter schools and even different sets of
students within the same charter schools (Zimmer and Engberg, 2013). As noted previously,
while the fixed effect and matching approaches tend to include all charter schools with tested
students, a lottery-based approach only uses oversubscribed schools and only students who enter
these via a lottery. In addition to the CREDO (2013b) study, others have addressed these issues
by using both lottery-based and observational approaches for the same set of schools and found
substantively similar results (Abdulkadiroglu, et al., 2011; Furgeson, et al., 2012; Tuttle, et al.,
2013).29 This suggests that differences in schools rather than differences in methodologies
underlie the differences in findings. Evidence in this regard is provided by Abdulkadiroglu, et al.
(2011) in their demonstration that the observational approach for their lottery sample gives


28
   An alternative explanation is that charter schools are more likely to be oversubscribed if they locate in areas where
the TPSs are low quality. Therefore, part of the explanation for the strong performance could be that the nearby
TPS are really poor performing (Deming, 2014). This does not suggest that the results are wrong in these analyses, it
just raises questions of whether the results would hold if charter schools were scaled up to different locations with
higher performing nearby TPSs.
29
   At the very least, Zimmer and Engberg (2013) advocate that researchers using lottery-based analysis should
examine whether students in undersubscribed schools or enter an oversubscribed schools outside of lottery have
similar observable characteristics and value added gains in test scores as a check to see whether there are red flags of
making inferences beyond the population examined.

                                                          28
comparable findings to their lottery estimates. They go on to note that the observational approach
suggests that “…the charter schools in our lottery study are among the best in Boston.
Observational estimates of the effect of time spent in charter schools that were not included in
the lottery study are economically and statistically significant, but only about half as large as the
corresponding estimates for lottery-sample schools.” It is fair to say that researchers have not
come to consensus on charter school effectiveness because these differences in findings. An
interpretation that fits the evidence is that some charter schools, including especially the over-
subscribed schools, are in fact much more effective with respect to student achievement than
there counterpart TPSs, while the majority of charter schools are not superior, and some are
inferior, to their counterpart TPSs.
         Differences in findings may also arise from peer effects associated with student selection.
While the requirement for oversubscribed schools to choose students by lottery precludes
selective admission by charters, charters may induce self-selection by adopting a more
challenging curriculum, more demanding standards for conduct, longer school days, more
stringent graduation requirements, or other policies that attract more able and motivated students.
It is natural to wonder, for example, whether charter schools with “No Excuses” policies may
induce such favorable selection. As summarized in, Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011, p 704): “No
Excuses schools are characterized by small size, frequent testing, a long school day and year,
selective teacher hiring, and a strong student work, ethic. Other features include an emphasis on
discipline and comportment, teacher-led whole-class instruction, and the absence of computer-
aided instruction.” Charter schools in Boston studied by Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011) had 35%
more hours of middle-school instruction per year than Boston Public Schools (BPS), and 26%
more hours of high-school instruction. Evidence of more stringent graduation requirements is
provided in Angrist, et al. (2013). Boston charter high schools students in their study have 7.6
percentage point higher 12 grade repetition than their lotteried-out counterparts.30
         As noted previously, and as Angrist et al. (2013) highlight in a thorough discussion and
analysis, there are three broad channels by which selection could give rise to differential



30
  This grade repetition appears to be concentrated almost entirely among male students: The four-year male
graduation rate from charter high schools studied by Angrist, et al. (2013) is 22.5 percentage points lower (p=.03)
than lotteried out counterparts, with that differential falling to 2.2 percentage points (p=.82) after five years. The
corresponding values for female students are 4.2 and 1.3, with neither being significant.

                                                           29
performance between charter and TPSs.31 The most obvious channel is if charter schools attract
more academically able students than TPSs. A second is if less able students exit charter schools
at a higher rate than in TPSs. A third is if peers in charter schools generate greater positive
spillovers than in TPS counterparts. Lottery studies effectively address the first channel by
exploiting random selection of students. The random selection exploited in lottery studies also
addresses the second channel effectively if students who ever attended a charter school are
thereafter counted as charter school students, as in the Angrist et al. (2013) analysis of Boston
charter high schools.
        The third channel may, however, remain, even in lottery studies. Students who are not
selected in charter school lotteries may attend schools with less beneficial peer attributes than
those who are selected. This channel does not invalidate the estimated impact of charter schools
in lottery studies, but gains achieved via peer effects have different policy implications than
gains achieved through superior delivery of education. Investigating the potential role of peer
effects, Angrist, et al. (2013) find, after eliminating transition grades, a 15 percentage point
higher switch rate out of charter schools (p=.08) as compared to switches made by lottery losers.
The compositional effect of this differential switching gives rise to a .13 differential in both
baseline math (p=.07) and baseline reading (p=.07) scores in the first post-lottery year. The
differential declines in subsequent years. Angrist, et al. (2013) go on to investigate whether the
peer-effect benefits of this differential in peer baseline achievement can account for the superior
academic outcomes in the charter schools. They conclude it does not. The same conclusion is
reached for charter middle schools in Boston by Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011).
                 A recent Mathematica study summarized by Nichols-Barrer, et al. (2014)
undertakes a detailed assessment of the potential role of peer characteristics and potential peer
effects in 19 KIPP middle schools. They find that students admitted to KIPP schools are
observationally similar to students in nearby public middle schools. Similar patterns of attrition
are also found for both types of schools, with lower achieving students being more likely to leave
both types of schools. However, KIPP schools have lower replacement rates and replace with
higher achieving students. They conclude that, taking even the high end of peer effect estimates


31
  These issues are also explored by Baude ,et al. (2014) and Ladd, et al. (2014). Ladd and colleagues argue that the
recent improvement of charter schools in North Carolina is the result of increased quality of students attracted and
recruited to charter schools, which they argue leads to improved peer effects. In contrast, Baude and colleagues
argue that peer effects have not played a major role in school improvement in Texas.

                                                         30
from the literature, the resulting differential in peer achievement is not nearly large enough to
account for the differential in academic outcomes between KIPP middle schools and their TPS
middle-school counterparts.
        As noted by Nichols-Barrer, et al. (2014), peer spillovers might arise from bringing
together highly motivated students that select into charter schools, and such peer benefits might
not be captured by peer mean achievement. It is also plausible that concentrating such students
together in schools, as occurs among lottery winners, would result in beneficial peer effects not
realized by comparably motivated lottery losers. If peer motivation does convey spillover
benefits, it is possible that No Excuses charter schools adversely affect non-charter TPSs by
drawing the most motivated students out of TPSs. It should be noted, however, that the
equivalence found by Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011) between the lottery approach and the
observational approach provides evidence against this peer-effect argument. Assuming more
motivated students select charter schools, the observational approach, which cannot match on
unobserved motivation, will then have a less motivated control group than the lottery losers.
Hence, the achievement difference between lottery winners and equally motivated lottery losers
should be smaller than the difference between lottery winners and the less motivated
observational control group. The fact that no such difference is found suggests that unobserved
motivation may not be a major factor. Devising additional research strategies to investigate the
potential for peer spillover effects that might arise from unobserved motivation remains an
important research issue for the lottery approach.


        An alternative approach is directly to evaluate the no-excuses model by implementing it
in in existing public schools. While, to our knowledge, this has not been done by those who
operate no-excuses charter schools, 32 a remarkable set of experiments has been undertaken to
investigate whether implementing changes deemed best practices from charter school into public
schools can deliver the achievement gains found in no-excuses charter schools. In an experiment
in Houston, five practices identified by Dobbie and Fryer (2013) were introduced into 20 low-



32
  KIPP contracted with Denver Public Schools in 2004 to operate a school that had been closed by the state due to
poor academic performance. KIPP withdrew in 2007 citing inability to find a qualified leader for the school. See
Sherry (2007) and also an interview with KIPP spokesman Steve Mancini: http://www.cpr.org/news/story/denvers-
cole-college-prep-close.


                                                        31
performing Houston schools in a randomized trial. As summarized by Fryer (2014), the five
practices were “…increased time, better human capital, more student-level differentiation,
frequent use of data to alter the scope and sequence of classroom instruction, and a culture of
high expectations.” In particular, the following were among changes that were implemented:
Time in school was increased by 21%, 19 of 20 principals were replaced and 46% of teachers left
or were removed, tutoring software was provided along with extra tutoring support to students
determined to be of high need, more frequent assessment examinations were employed to
evaluate student progress and identify students needing extra help, and an effort was made to
inculcate high expectations including having schools and parent signing contracts analogous to
those used in no-excuses charter schools.
         Analyzing the results, Fryer (2014) finds statistically significant annual gains in math of
.15 of a standard deviation and small, statistically insignificant gains in reading.33 Lower impacts
on reading than math are not unusual in lottery studies of charters, though significant positive
effects are often found, e.g. Abdulkadiroglu, et al. (2011). Fryer goes on to describe and analyze
interventions similar in spirit that were conducted in Denver and Chicago. In Denver, there were
seven schools in the treatment group, and estimated impacts are comparable to those in Houston.
In Chicago, there were 29 schools, but selection was not by randomization. Using a matching
approach, Fryer estimates treatment effects in math about one-third the size found in Houston
and small reading gains on the order of those found in Houston.
    Fryer provides a cautionary summary of the daunting challenges to be overcome in broader
implementation of these changes in TPSs. For example, in the 20 treatment schools in Houston,
as noted 46% of teachers left or were removed and 19 of 20 principals were replaced, with then
300 candidates interviewed in the process of replacing those who were removed. Fryer also
points to fidelity of implementation as an ongoing challenge, noting the difficulties often
encountered in efforts to scale up interventions. Nonetheless, the Houston experiment is
encouraging with respect to potential gains from injecting charter best practices into low-
performing TPSs.


33
   Fryer notes two issues that potentially affect the results. He observes (p. 36) that publicity in advance of the
experiment might have induced selective attrition in advance of the experimental treatment that is not captured in the
analysis. He also notes (p. 37) that students in the treated elementary schools are 1.4% more likely than the control
schools to be missing a test score, and he indicates that the bounding approach of Lee (2009) (trimming the 1.4% of
the treatment group with the highest annual gains) systematically alters the results.

                                                         32
B. Effects on Other Outcomes
In some cases, researchers have moved beyond examining test scores alone and are examining
other outcomes, for example alternative student measures while the students are attending charter
schools including behavioral outcomes (like risky health choices) or attendance outcomes
(Imberman, 2011; Wong, et al., 2014). Other researchers have examined long-term outcomes
including high-school graduation rates as well as college preparation, attendance, persistence,
and type (two-year versus four-year colleges) and, recently, earnings (Booker, et al., 2009;
Booker, et al., 2011; Furgeson, et al., 2012; Angrist, et al., 2013; Dobbie and Fryer, 2013;
Booker, et al., 2014). These studies have used a variety of approaches including fixed effects (for
outcomes measured multiple times like attendance and behavioral), matching procedures, IVs
(using proximity to charter schools as an instrument), and lotteries, each having strengths and
weakness as previously discussed. However, across these approaches, unlike the test score
results, the findings, summarized in Table 8, have been more consistently positive.
       Coupling the overall results of the achievement and alternative-outcomes literatures
together, it could be argued that while charter schools are not having a consistent effect on test
scores, there is emerging research suggesting that they are having more consistent positive
effects on alternative outcomes, which is consistent with some research of vouchers. For
example, Wolf, et al. (2010) found no statistically significant effect on test scores for
Washington, D.C. voucher recipients, but did find effects on high school graduation. In some
cases, researchers have found this within their charter studies. Imberman (2011), using a fixed-
effect approach in an anonymous district, found little effect on test scores, but large effects on
attendance and behavioral outcomes. Similarly, Zimmer et. al. (2009) found little effect on test
scores, but found positive and substantial effects on high school graduation and attending college
in Chicago. It is too soon to know whether this pattern will hold up as other researchers examine
these outcomes in other places and over time. However, if it does, this may explain why charter
schools continue to be popular, even with a lack of consistent evidence that charter schools
outperform students in TPSs. It may be that families have goals for their child beyond improving
test scores and families see charter schools as a means of achieving these goals, even if they do
not achieve the goal of improving test scores.




                                                 33
VI. Inside the Black Box
Controlling for differences in students, it is of obvious interest to explain differences in
educational outcomes between charter school students and those attending other schools.
A. Charter School Teachers
We first examine research on charter schools and teachers. While identifying effective teachers
and measuring their relative productivity is challenging and controversial, that teachers affect
educational outcomes is unquestioned. The relative autonomy charter schools have in hiring,
rewarding, utilizing, and firing teachers is touted by charter proponents as a key advantage
relative to TPSs. As noted previously, charter schools are usually not bound by unions, nor must
they follow state regulations like those governing awarding of tenure. Charter schools usually
face reduced teacher certification constraints if any. On the other hand, charter schools
frequently serve students that may be more difficult to teach, locate where it is less desirable to
live, lack state-of-the-art facilities, and may face tighter budget constraints.
       In Section III we provided some descriptive statistics about charter school teachers.
Among other differences relative to TPS teachers, charter school teachers are younger, less
experienced, less educated, less credentialed, and they earn less. We discuss research that seeks
to explain differences in observable characteristics of charter school teachers. The linkage
between observable teacher characteristics and effectiveness of teachers is, however, mixed. Of
the 34 “high quality estimates” of the effect of a master’s degree on student performance,
Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) report that 91% of the estimates are insignificant and the remaining
9% find a negative effect. Of the 37 high quality estimates on teacher experience, 56% find no
statistically significant effect, though 41% find a significantly positive effect. As summarized in
Hanushek and Rivkin (2006), further investigation has found that teachers develop their skills
very quickly, mainly in the first year, this nonlinearity in experience effects on teacher
effectiveness likely explaining the mixed result. Of the 17 high quality estimates on teacher
salary, 82% find no significant effect, though the remaining studies find a significantly positive
effect. An alternative approach to using teacher characteristics in assessing their effectiveness is
to estimate teacher effectiveness directly as a fixed effect on student scores. This approach has
been applied in some analyses of charter schools. Thus, we also discuss this research, including a
summary of the technique and issues in applying it.



                                                  34
        The stock of teachers in charter schools depends on who is hired and who continues,
whether by choice or dismissal. As noted in Section III, teacher turnover in charter schools is
substantial if not extreme. We first discuss research that regards the stock of teacher
characteristics in charter schools. Next we discuss research concerned with the characteristics of
teachers that continue to teach. Last, we discuss research on teachers that move to charter
schools from TPS schools.
        Much of the research investigating differences in charters and TPS teachers relies on a
version of a regression with a teacher characteristic as the dependent variable, a dummy variable
if the teacher is in a charter school, and with a set of other explanatory variables like
characteristics of the school including student characteristics. Some issues to keep in mind in
evaluating this research are as follows. Giving a causal interpretation to the charter school effect
is open to question since charter school entry is endogenous. If, for example, charter school entry
is more probable in areas where the local teachers are relatively ineffective (e.g., gaining
approval is easier), then the charter school may need to hire from a weaker pool of teachers to
staff its classes. Of course, researchers take steps to address this kind of issue.
        A second issue is that the “charter effect” is likely to combine supply-side and demand-
side effects. If, for example, teachers that are less effective in increasing test scores are present
in charter schools it could be because charter schools value this trait less and/or because highly
effective teachers are averse to working in charter schools. Again, research has paid some
attention to this confluence, but a lack of economic modelling that frames the empirical research
makes it difficult to interpret the estimates.
        A third issue is that an estimated charter effect on their teachers is arguably a residual
effect, suggesting some element of charter schools that remains unexplained. With this view, the
ideal would be to have a model that controls for practices and specific characteristics of schools
that fully explains equilibrium teacher characteristics with then no residual effect of working in a
charter school. This is the “black box issue” applied to teachers. The research generally seeks to
identify charter effects independent of specific practices and school characteristics, but residual
effects remain large. It is also possible that some teachers simply have an aversion (or
preference) to work in a charter school, e.g., as a result of their political views.
        Baker and Dickerson (2006) examine whether teaching in a charter school predicts
teachers that come from more highly ranked undergraduate institutions. The hypothesis is that

                                                  35
the flexibility in hiring that charter schools have (e.g., not having to satisfy certification
requirements) and in retaining teachers (e.g., through their salary policies) will lead them to
employ teachers from better undergraduate institutions. Data on teachers is for 18 states and
Washington DC from the 1999 SASS, including TPSs, charter schools, Catholic schools, and
private non-Catholic schools, specifically, members of the National Association for Independent
Schools (NAIS). Key factors that are investigated are whether the state requires 100% or less
certification of charter school teachers, a ranking of the autonomy of charter schools in the state
developed by the Center for Education Reform, and the relative supply of graduates from highly
ranked schools by state. College rankings are based on Barron’s, where the variable used in their
analysis are dichotomous with “highly competitive” or “most competitive” considered as
selective colleges.
         Logit estimation predicts whether a teacher went to a selective college using dummy
variables for the type of school and other controls. These equations are specified separately for
states that require 100% vs. less than 100% certification for charter teachers.34 Results from SUR
logit regressions for states that require 100% certification and those that do not are as follows.
The estimates imply that the odds a charter-school teacher will have attended a selective college
is twice that of a TPS teacher35 and highly significant in states that do not require 100%
certification, and 1.3 times as high and significant at the 10% level in states that do. The
analogous estimates for NAIS schools are highly significant and, respectively, equal to 4.7 and
3.3. The “state high quality supply share,” which measures the state supply of graduates from
selective colleges has a large and significant coefficient. Catholic schools are not significantly
different from TPSs in hiring teachers from selective colleges, with point estimates less than 1.
Rural and percent in poverty in the school are usually significant with point estimates less than 1.
Evidence on the effect of salary is mixed, with average salary either not significant or increasing
the probability of a teacher having a degree from a selective college.
         The analysis provides evidence that barriers to hiring teachers in TPSs from selective
colleges play a role in limiting their presence. While the analysis considers both supply- and


34
   Regressions are also conducted separating by the ranking of autonomy of charter schools, and by states for some
states. Regressions that, alternatively, use interactions are also run. Similar results obtain to those we report.
35
   An odds ratio is a ratio of probabilities. For example, if a charter teacher attends a selective college with
probability .2 and a TPS teacher with probability .1, the odds of a charter teacher attending a selective college are
twice as high as for a TPS teacher.

                                                          36
demand-side factors to some degree, it cannot well identify the preference of graduates from
selective colleges to work in certain types of schools relative to school demands to hire them. As
we noted in Section III, the more recent evidence on charter school teachers indicates the same
or fewer graduates from relatively selective colleges. One can only speculate as to why these
changes have occurred.
          Cannata and Penaloza (2012) examine supply- and demand-side factors determining
charter school teacher characteristics, and how these vary across charter schools that are
managed differently. Part of the analysis concerns identifying which teachers actively chose their
school rather than essentially taking the only available job. A related question investigated is
whether charter school teachers have more of a choice as to where they work as compared to
TPS teachers. Identifying teachers that have made a real choice about where to work arguably
permits more credible investigation about what characteristics of the school determined their
choice.
          The authors surveyed teachers during the 2007-08 school year in 59 charter schools and
59 matched TPSs in California, Colorado, Delaware, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New
Mexico, and Wisconsin. A total of 1,015 charter school teachers and 1,300 traditional public
schools teachers were surveyed. Schools were matched on being in the same state, geographic
proximity, grade-range served, racial-ethnic composition, socio-economic status, and size.
Despite the latter matching, charter schools were still substantially different, with fewer students
per school and a significantly higher proportion of black students. Among the surveyed charter
schools, 19% are operated by Best Academy (an EMO that operates in multiple states), 8% were
operated by other for-profit and not-for-profit charter management organizations, and 73% were
independent charters.
          The survey had teachers report whether they “chose this school over positions at other
schools because they wanted to teach here,” or “this was the only opening for which I was
qualified” or “I was assigned to this school.” Those that answered “yes” to the first choice are
considered to have made an “active choice.” Teachers that made an “active choice” were asked
further questions about what influenced their choice, assigning a number from a 5-point scale to
21 school characteristics (e.g., “principal support” or “like-minded educators”), while also listing
the top three characteristics that determined their choice. Part of the analysis regresses whether
the teacher made an active choice on teacher and school characteristics, including a charter

                                                  37
dummy variable, or using dummy variables for the three charter affiliation types. For teachers
that made an active choice, their rankings of school characteristics are regressed on the same set
of explanatory variables. Estimation is also done using propensity scores as another explanatory
variable (using a regression of charter on school characteristics), as an additional control for
school characteristics.
       Mean analysis supports what has generally been found, that charter teachers are less
experienced, less likely to be certified, are less likely to have graduate degrees, are more likely to
be black, and are more likely to have become teachers while changing job type. Selectivity of the
college attended is here lower in charter schools. However, there are important differences across
the categories of charter affiliation. Only Best Academy teachers attended significantly less
selective colleges. Best Academy teachers were also significantly less likely to be black.
Regarding having made an active choice, no statistical difference in the means between TPSs
and all charter schools is found. However, in the estimation controlling for teacher and school
characteristics, charter school teachers were more likely to have made an active choice. This is
driven mainly by the non-affiliated charter schools, with the coefficient estimate on active choice
for Best Academy charter teachers insignificant. Prior experience, being black (or other minority,
non-Hispanic), and teaching in a school with a higher percent of FRL students significantly
predict active choice.
       School characteristics like “principal support” that an actively choosing teacher ranked as
among the top three in choosing their job are assigned a 1 in logit regressions on school and
teacher characteristics and a dummy variable for either charter school or a set of dummy
variables for the three different charter school affiliations. Charter teachers significantly favored
“agreeing with the school’s mission” and “autonomy over teaching” relative to TPS teachers, and
significantly cared less about “close to where I live,” “positive reputation,” and “job security.”
Again, though, these preference differences are explained by teachers in non-affiliated and other-
affiliation schools, with no significant differences expressed by teachers in the Best Academy
schools (in the regressions without propensity scores).
       The salient take-away from the paper is as the authors express: “… the data suggest that
charter school teachers are a diverse group and the variation between different types of charter
schools may be just as important as the difference between teachers in charter and traditional



                                                 38
public schools (p. 16).” In particular, the evidence is that the “Best Academy” teachers are very
different from other charter school teachers.
           Cowen and Winters (2013) and Carruthers (2012) use value-added estimation of teacher
effectiveness in their analyses of charter school teachers. The key application to teachers of the
value-added approach estimates teacher effectiveness semi-parametrically using teacher fixed
effects. We briefly describe the approach, borrowing heavily from Hanushek and Rivkin (2006),
and then go on to discuss its application to charter schools.36
           With multiple years of data, the approach regresses student scores on past score or scores,
student characteristics, time variant peer student characteristics in the classroom and school,
other time variant school characteristics (e.g., per student expenditure), and a teacher fixed
effect. The teacher fixed effect estimates the achievement (score) gain attributable to the teacher
if certain conditions are met, providing an overall measure of teacher effectiveness. Thus, the
approach is silent about observable characteristics of teachers that might determine or be
correlated with effectiveness, but provides a summary measure.
           To provide an unbiased estimate, the approach assumes that teacher effects are constant
across students and settings, though the fixed effect could be interacted with say previous student
score if value added to the test depends on the student’s baseline. It also assumes that any
unobservable classroom/school characteristics are random, obviously a strong assumption. If, for
example, highly motivated students are able to get into relatively effective teachers’ classes, then
estimates of teacher effectiveness will be biased. Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) discuss some
techniques to alleviate concerns about nonrandomness.
           The multi-year specification controls for random measurement error and random
classroom variation of unobservables. School fixed effects are sometimes used, thus controlling
for time invariant unobserved school impacts, identification then within schools. With school
fixed effects, however, the distribution of teacher effectiveness in schools must remain constant
since the effectiveness estimate is relative to peer teachers. The multi-year approach also
assumes teacher effectiveness is time invariant, which is reasonable for relatively short periods
especially with more experienced teachers.
           Estimates using the approach indicate large differences in teacher effectiveness.
Comparing, for example, teachers at the 5th to the 95th effectiveness percentile, Hanushek (1992)

36
     See Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) for references and a more complete discussion.

                                                         39
finds that a good teacher increases average student learning of low-income minority students by
one grade level relative to a bad teacher. Kane and Staiger (2008) provide experimental support
for the approach by showing that value-added estimates of teacher effectiveness prior to their
random assignment of teachers to classrooms provided unbiased estimates of teacher effects and
explained “just over half of the teacher-level variation in average student achievement during the
experiment (p. 3).”
        While their focus is on the relative pattern of teacher attrition in charters versus TPSs,
Cowen and Winter’s (2013) value-added estimates of teacher effectiveness are of interest in their
own right. They use a rich data set containing scores in Florida on reading and math on the
required standardized (FCAT) exam for all grade-school students for the years 2002-3 through
2008-9. They also have data on all teachers in charter schools and TPSs, and can well connect
students to their teachers. Grade school students take the exam in 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade, and they
use the 4th and 5th grade scores to estimate teacher effectiveness, with a rich set of control
variables including the student’s 3rd grade score. Estimates with a school fixed effect are highly
correlated with estimates without the school fixed effect. Using multiple-year lagged scores has
minor effects on the effectiveness estimates, this suggesting nonrandom student classroom
assignment may not be introducing bias. They estimate teacher effectiveness separately for
teachers with less than four years of experience and for more experienced teachers.
        Their estimated probability density of effectiveness of TPS teachers in Florida is
rightward shifted relative to charter teachers in both reading and math, more so in math. The
relatively higher effectiveness of TPS teachers is statistically significant, with mean difference
about one-tenth of a standard deviation. They state: “we caution readers against an unrestrained
interpretation of these results as evidence that TPS teachers vastly exceed charter teachers,”
noting that there is the “possibility that TPS teachers are simply more effective instructors for the
standardized statewide exam (p. 27).” Their caveat notwithstanding, they provide interesting
evidence that charter teachers are less effective, consistent with the research finding less
experienced and less educated teachers in charter schools. We discuss Carruthers (2012) value-
added evidence below as it pertains to the subset of teachers that move to charter schools from
TPSs.
        As reported above, teacher turnover in charter schools is significant and significantly
higher than in TPSs. Stuit and Smith (2009) use data from 2003-04 Schools and Staffing Survey

                                                  40
administered by NCES and the 2004-05 Teacher Follow-Up Survey to investigate differences in
teacher turnover between charter schools and TPSs, and what explains these differences.
Variation in school policies, teacher characteristics, school characteristics including management
of charter schools, and labor-market conditions are considered. Turnover can be moving to a new
school or leaving the profession. Sixteen states are in the sample, with 1,753,390 TPS teachers in
45,820 schools and 35,570 charter school teachers in 1,900 schools.
       Overall, 25% of charter teachers turned over after 2003-04, compared to 14% in TPSs. In
charter schools, 14% left the profession, while 7% in TPSs left the profession. They perform
multinomial logit regression, with “stayed in the school” as the reference choice and “moved to a
new school” and “left the profession” the alternative choices. In addition to a dummy variable for
being a charter school teacher, they include interactions for whether the charter school is new
(has been operation for three years or less), whether it is managed by an EMO, and whether it
has converted from a TPS or is a “start-up” charter schools. Controls for teacher and school
characteristics, and for a variety of “organizational conditions” are also included, the latter
consisting of 11 variables including, unionization, a dichotomous hours-per-week measure, and
principal and teacher involvement and control measures obtained from surveying them.
       We summarize some of the findings focusing on the logit estimated odds ratio of leaving
the profession versus staying at one’s school. The estimated odds of a teacher leaving a charter
school that is not new, is not a conversion charter, and is not managed by an EMO are 3.3 times
higher than for a TPS teacher and significant at the 1% level. The estimated odds for a
conversion charter school is significantly lower, but remains well above that for a TPS. Whether
the charter school is managed by an EMO or is new does not have a significant effect on
predicted turnover. The estimated effects on moving to another school are in the same direction
with the same charter characteristics significant (though of somewhat different magnitudes).
Variables that are significant in increasing the probability of leaving the profession are being
under 30 or over 50, being uncertified, teaching in a secondary school, working more than 60
hours per week, and reporting being dissatisfied with one’s school. Variables that significantly
reduce the probability of leaving the profession are having an education degree, teaching in a
large school, and having the principal have substantial power over hiring. Some variables not
found to be significant are being a minority teacher, having attended a selective college, teaching
in an urban school, and teacher reporting of having administrative support, being involved in

                                                 41
instructional decision making, the cooperative atmosphere among teachers, and satisfaction with
salary.
          While there are a number of differences between charter TPS schools and observable
characteristics of teachers that are significant in predicting leaving the profession, the “residual”
associated with being a charter school teacher (in any kind of charter school) remains quite high.
Of interest is explaining the remaining large difference in turnover, including identifying
differences in forced changes versus differences in teacher choices. The follow-up survey
provides some insight into this.
          The follow-up survey was administered to a sample of teachers in 2004-05 with questions
that varied depending on whether the teacher left the profession or continued to teach in some
school. The authors classify reasons teachers reported for leaving the profession into three
categories, “life changes,” “voluntary attrition,” or “involuntary attrition,” the only choice in the
latter category being “school staffing action.” Examples of explanation for leaving the profession
in the second category are “for better salary or benefits” and “dissatisfied with teaching as a
career.” Significantly more teachers reported leaving the profession in TPSs due to life changes
than teachers in charter schools, and the reverse for both voluntary and involuntary reasons. For
charter-school teachers, 14.9% reported leaving the profession due to a school staffing action,
while only 5.9% of TPS teacher reported the same, the difference highly significant. As the
authors point out, this might provide evidence of charter schools having more power to get rid of
less effective teachers, but might also be due to more frequent closing of charter schools and
efforts to comply with new restrictions imposed by NCLB. Charter school teachers also reported
significantly more frequently “dissatisfaction with previous school” as a (voluntary) reason for
leaving the profession. Overall, the evidence is that a mixture of voluntary and forced actions
explains the higher frequency of charter school teachers leaving the profession. “Laid off or
involuntarily transferred” was reported as a reason for moving schools significantly more often
by TPS teachers, as was “opportunity for a better teaching assignment” and “did not have enough
autonomy.” The responses explaining moving suggest TPS teachers have more opportunity to
continue to teach. Stuit and Smith’s analysis is informative and provocative, but direct evidence
about whether charter schools are relatively able to retain more effective and/or get rid of less
effective teachers is not provided.



                                                 42
        Cowen and Winter (2013) employ their estimates of teacher effectiveness to this end.
They perform multinomial logit analysis predicting whether teachers stay in their school, transfer
within their district, transfer between districts, or exit teaching in Florida. In addition to controls
for numerous observable teacher and school characteristics (including salary), they include their
estimate of teacher effectiveness (based on both math and reading scores in separate regressions),
a charter-school dummy variable, and the latter interacted with the effectiveness estimate. They
find that less effective teachers exit teaching in Florida with significantly higher probability and
teachers exit charter schools with significantly higher probability, the former arguably consistent
with findings on observables and the latter consistent with all the evidence. We should add that
the regressions control for teacher experience and its square, so the exit of teachers estimated to
be relatively ineffective is independent of experience effects. The most important finding,
though, is that the interaction coefficient in regressions using both the reading- and math-based
effectiveness measures is not significant and with point estimates very close to 0. Thus, they find
no evidence that charter schools are better or worse than TPSs in improving the effectiveness of
their teacher pool. Whether this reflects equal efficaciousness, attrition beyond control, or some
combination of offsets is an open question.
        The last research we discuss examines the flow of teachers into charter schools.
Carruthers (2012) focuses on the effectiveness of teachers that leave TPSs for charter schools,
while Jackson (2012) is most concerned with the effects of charter school competition on TPS
teachers. We first discuss Carruthers (2012). She uses a rich panel data set on teachers, students,
and schools for the years 1997-2009 in North Carolina. Her data on student scores allows only
value-added estimation of teacher effectiveness for those initially in TPS schools.
        Carruthers’s initial analysis focuses on teacher observables. Mobile teachers (any that
move out of TPS schools) are less experienced and have degrees from less selective colleges.
Teachers that move to charter schools have yet weaker credentials, are more likely to be
unlicensed, and are more likely to be black. Multinomial logit is conducted to predict when
teachers move out of their TPS, with the alternatives to staying being move to a charter school,
move to another TPS, move temporarily out of sample, or move permanently out of sample,
controlling for teacher characteristics and characteristics of the sending schools. Relative to
staying, teachers that have high licensing scores, attended selective colleges, have less than three
years of experience, and are nonwhite are more likely to move to charter schools. Movers to

                                                  43
charter schools are more likely to come from schools that are more nonwhite and schools where
students are performing below grade level, relative to those that stay. Females are less likely to
make this move. This methodology cannot, however, investigate how charter schools draw
teachers relative to similar TPS schools (because the default option is to remain in a school).
The next analysis then examines how moving from a TPS to a charter school, relative to moving
to a non-charter school, predicts various teacher measures, controlling for characteristics of the
sending and receiving school. Relative to moving to a similar TPS, charter schools draw from
other TPS schools less experienced teachers, fewer teachers that attended selective colleges,
fewer teachers holding graduate degrees, and teachers with lower scores on licensing exams.
However, if we examine just licensed teachers, the latter findings are attenuated and reversed for
licensing scores. Also, teachers that have been working for more than 25 years are more likely to
move to charter schools than another TPS, and, especially, if they are licensed.
       Motivated by the mixed evidence on observable teacher characteristics, Carruthers turns
to effectiveness estimated by the value-added approach. Having scores for students of teachers in
TPS schools, she estimates teacher effectiveness as a fixed effect on student math and reading
scores (in separate regressions), controlling for student characteristics and peer school
characteristics; and, in part of the analysis, for school fixed effects. The means of the fixed
effects of teachers moving to charter schools are lower than for all TPS teachers and for teachers
that move to other TPSs (which is also lower than the mean of all teachers). To control for
characteristics of the sending and receiving school, she runs regressions like the previous ones
but now predicting estimated teacher effectiveness, with moving anywhere compared to moving
to a charter school. The regressions that use teacher effectiveness estimated without school fixed
effects show that teachers that move to charter schools are significantly less effective than those
that move at all, and the latter are already less effective than all initial TPS teachers. This could,
however, reflect a bias in teacher effectiveness since it could be that teachers are moving to
charters from schools with less motivated students. But the analysis with school fixed effects in
estimating effectiveness find similar results, though charter schools drawing less effective
teachers (than other TPS) is only significant for effectiveness measured using reading (not math)
scores. Another finding in the analysis estimating teacher effectiveness is that first-year teachers
are less effective, consistent with other research. This estimation also provides a baseline to
interpret the quantitative estimates: “Thus the difference between a teacher moving to the charter

                                                  44
sector and a teacher moving elsewhere is 38-47 percent of the effectiveness gap between new
and more experienced teachers (p. 253).”
         As the author points out, it is possible that charter schools hire relatively effective new
teachers as the analysis regards only teachers that move from TPSs. However, 36.1% of charter
school teachers in her data did teach initially in TPS schools, and other evidence (e.g., Cowen
and Winters, 2013) does not indicate offsetting hiring practices. Again, whether differences in
teacher effectiveness in charter schools is explained by demand or supply factors remains an
open question.
         Jackson (2012) focuses on the labor-market effects of entry of charter schools, but he also
provides evidence of the effectiveness of teachers that leave TPSs to teach in charter schools. His
data is also from North Carolina for the years 1995 to 2005. He estimates teacher effectiveness
of TPS teachers using fixed effects in the value-added model, but also does so using a vector of
observable teacher characteristics in place of the fixed effect. The “predicted effectiveness” of
teachers equals the coefficient-estimate weighted teacher characteristics used to explain student
test scores. The predicted effectiveness approach has the advantage of allowing an estimate of
teacher effectiveness for those not in the data used in estimation.37 Jackson finds that switching
from a TPS to a charter school predicts observable teacher characteristics as in Carruthers (e.g.,
less experience), but also significantly predicts a lower “predicted effectiveness.” This provides a
nice complement to Carruthers’s findings.
         Jackson’s main analysis uses difference-in-difference to examine the causal effect of
local charter-school competition on TPS teachers. He presents evidence supporting the notion
that teacher markets are localized. He regresses TPS school-level teacher variables (e.g., log of
average salary) on school and time fixed effects and a dummy variable for the presence of least
one nearby charter school (e.g., with 10 miles) that serves the same grade level. Thus,
identification is within school. He finds significant positive effects on TPS teacher salaries,
especially in hard-to-staff schools (in the top quarter of ethnic minority and percent minority).

37
  Jackson uses only data from the period (1995-1998) prior to charter school entry in his fixed effects estimation of
teacher effectiveness to avoid potential biases from charter school entry. Entry of charter schools might lead to
selection of new teachers into TPS schools. It also possible that entry of charter schools induces teachers facing
competition to work harder, thus affecting their fixed effect estimate. This, then, limits substantially the data on
teacher effectiveness that can be used in the subsequent analyses since there are no estimates for teachers that enter
the data after the estimation period, which does not hold for the “predicted effect” alternative. On the other hand,
the “predicted effect” measure of teacher effectiveness relies on observables that at least individually have not
generally been good predictors of student scores as discussed above.

                                                          45
Turnover at TPSs facing competition is not increased. The interpretation given to the findings is
that supply and demand effects cancel as TPSs strive to retain teachers, but both forces imply
higher salaries in TPSs. Teacher quality, measured by their predicted value, declines slightly at
hard-to-staff TPSs, mainly explained by reduced teacher experience.38 This paper provides
appealing evidence on the equilibrium effects of charter competition in the teacher labor market.
            The evidence from Florida and North Carolina is that charter schools as a group have
somewhat less effective teachers and are no better in improving their teaching pool. This is
consistent with the evidence on the overall effectiveness of charter schools in these states (Sass,
2006 and Bifulco and Ladd, 2006). While this aggregate evidence suggests charter schools face
challenges in outperforming TPSs, this may well reflect newness of the charter school
movement. Moreover, the value-added evidence and the evidence on observable teacher
characteristics indicate large variation in teachers in charter schools. No-excuses charter schools
in Boston hire relatively more TFA teachers and alumni (Angrist, et al., 2013). In their study of
effectiveness of New York City charter schools, Dobbie and Fryer (2013) find “…input
measures associated with a traditional resource-based model of education—class size, per pupil
expenditure, the fraction of teachers with no teaching certification, and the fraction of teachers
with an advanced degree—are not correlated with school effectiveness in our sample.” Thus,
their evidence for charters accords with evidence regarding teachers summarized in Hanushek
and Rivkin (2006). They find instead that the most important of nine human capital measures is
frequent teacher feedback. They report “the typical teacher at a high-achieving elementary
school receives feedback 15.89 times per semester, compared to 10.23 times at other charter
schools. The typical teacher at a high-achieving middle school receives feedback 16.50 times per
semester, over twice as much as teachers at other charter schools.” More research is needed on
teachers in charter schools that employ alternative educational models to add understanding of
how differences in management of charter schools impacts teacher effectiveness. It is of interest
to investigate this as well in the context of the value-added approach.
            Regressions show that teacher characteristics in schools vary with the environment,
independent of charter status. But the charter effect remains important. This suggests there is
much more to explain about what makes charter school teachers different.



38
     This effect is short lived.

                                                   46
         Some effort has been made to examine demand-side versus supply-side effects on charter
school teachers, but regressions that are run are reduced forms. This clouds interpretation of the
coefficients. Developing models that lead to structural estimation are likely to help understand
differences in charter school teachers, which are likely to differ substantially across the variety of
quasi-markets in which they operate. Thus, modelling charter schools to guide estimation is an
important, though challenging, undertaking to advance understanding of charter school teachers.
B. Non-Teacher Differences
While the average effects on educational outcomes across all charter schools within or across
locations are important from a policy standpoint, they may not tell the full story as these effects
could vary by policy environment, or by types of charter schools, or even school by school as
operational features and practices vary. As we have already noted, findings across geographic
locations vary, which may be a function of the policies in place across locations. For instance,
some states have very liberal policies in terms of setting up charter schools, while others have
much more conservative laws. Most studies have not examined charter schools across multiple
locations. Therefore, individual studies have generally not tried to draw conclusions about the
effect of variation of charter policies. Only the 2009 CREDO study has tried to bridge this gap
and the results suggest that charter schools perform poorly in states in which charter schools
operate under a cap limiting the number of charter schools or have multiple possible authorizers.
In contrast, states where charter schools have an appeal process for adverse decision on an
application have stronger charter school performance. These conclusions should be viewed as
initial insights as the differences in effects were small and the policy variable could only vary
across 16 states.39
         A few studies have examined whether charter school type or the operational features
affects outcomes. For instance, using student-level data from California, Buddin and Zimmer
(2005) examined whether there were differential effects across conversion and startup charter
schools and classroom-based versus non-classroom-based charter schools, which often use
online curriculum. The research showed some differences between conversion and startup


39
   Two studies have explored the charter authorizer issue further. The first study examined charter schools in
Minnesota in which there are four possible types of authorizers and found no differential effects, but did find greater
variation among charter schools authorized by non-profits (Carlson, Lavery, and Witte, 2012). The second study
examined charter schools in Ohio in which there are again four possible authorizers and found that charter schools
authorized by non-profit had lower achievement gains (Zimmer, et al., 2014).

                                                          47
charter schools, but the differences were generally small. However, the differences were much
larger between classroom-based and non-classroom-based charter schools with the non-
classroom-based charter schools having lower achievement. This result is consistent with a study
of Ohio charter schools that found virtual schools performing poorly relative to TPSs and other
charter schools (Zimmer, et al., 2009). It is consistent at well with findings for Pennsylvania,
which has among the highest proportion of online charter students. The CREDO (2011) report on
Pennsylvania charter schools found that all eight cyber schools then operating performed
significantly and substantially worse on both mathematics and reading than TPSs.40
         While some of the authors in these studies cautioned against drawing strong conclusions
of these virtual/non-classroom-based schools as they note that these schools typically serve
unique students, it does raise some concerns about the rapid expansion of these types of schools
in a number of states. In addition, as a major conclusion, the same authors emphasized that
charter schools should not be thought of as a monolithic group.41
         As the above discussion indicates, charter school performance can vary by type of school
and possibly by policy environment. It is also possible that charter schools’ performance may
vary from school to school. By design, charter schools are given a great deal of autonomy, which
may result in some schools doing quite well, while other schools may flounder. Studying
educational practices poses challenges of classification, measurement, and causality. A small set
of studies have collected information about the educational operation and practices of individual
charter schools and tried to identify factors that led to improved performance. In some cases,
researchers were not been able to identify many effective operational strategies or practices,
which may be the result of small sample sizes and the challenges of identify nuanced differences
in operations and practices (Zimmer and Buddin, 2007; Tuttle, et al., 2013). However, other

40
   Perhaps in response to negative findings, Pennsylvania in 2013 rejected all eight applications for new cyber
charters (Chute, 2013).
41
   There have also been evaluations of different types of CMOs and of CMOs as a whole. Mathematica evaluated
the performance of CMOs using a matching strategy with student-level data and found no statistically significant
effect overall for test scores or graduation, but did find a great deal of variation across CMOs (Furgeson, et al.,
2012). In a second Mathematica study of KIPP schools, which is a well-known CMO operator, Tuttle, et al. (2013)
used a lottery-based approach in evaluating 13 middle schools and found strong positive effects in math, but no
statistically significant effect in reading. The authors then employed observational approaches and found consistent
results with these same 13 schools. Bolstered by the consistency of the results across the approaches, the authors
then applied the same observational approaches to 41 KIPP schools and found strong positive effects for KIPP
schools across multiple subjects. Again, these results suggest that charter schools should not be viewed as
monolithic group.


                                                         48
studies have found positive effects for factors such as teachers’ focus on academic achievement
(Berends, et al, 2010), intensive coaching of teachers (Furgeson, et al., 2012), strong behavioral
policies (Angrist, et al. 2013; Dobbie and Fryer, 2011; Furgeson, et al. 2012; Tuttle, et al, 2013),
increased instructional time, high dosage tutoring, frequent teacher feedback, using data to guide
instruction (Dobbie and Fryer, 2011), and a general philosophy of “no excuse’ policies, which
includes strict discipline (Angrist, et al. 2013). Given that an original impetus for charter schools
was for these schools to be incubators of effective educational operations and practices, more
studies need to open the “black box” of these schools to identify key features that other schools
could adopt.
     The above discussion highlights the importance of school specialization, which is closely
related to questions of validity of research approaches. If a single educational model were the
best model for all students, then internal validity would imply external validity. But students
differ, and there are likely to be gains from specializing educational models to fit the differing
interests and capabilities of students. The greater the extent of such beneficial specialization, the
more challenging is the issue of external validity as findings from a given sub-population would
tend to apply more narrowly.42
     While specialization along some dimensions (e.g., curriculum) is likely to be important, the
potential for beneficial specialization does not imply that schools should differ on all dimensions.
It is quite possible that some “best practices” should be part of all educational models, perhaps
some or all of the elements highlighted by Dobbie and Fryer (2011) and the related no-excuses
approach.
     It is also possible that educationally beneficial specialization can run counter to other social
objectives. Two hypothetical examples illustrate. Suppose that a charter school provider
develops an educational approach for minority students that provides superior educational
outcomes to those provided by the alternative TPSs. This might lead to increased racial or ethnic
segregation. Suppose that TPSs provide superior services and opportunities for special needs
students. This might give rise to disproportionate attendance of special needs students in TPSs.
In these hypothetical scenarios, specialization enhances educational outcomes but increases


42
  Recall that instances in which lottery-based and observational approaches have been applied to the same set of
schools, similar impacts have been found. This favors external validity for those studies rather than gains associated
with charter school specialization to unobserved characteristics of students in their self-selected applicant pools
(Abdulkadiroglu, et al., 2011; Furgeson, et al., 2012; Tuttle, et al., 2013).

                                                          49
segregation. In comparison of charters and TPSs, charter entry that increases segregation is often
treated as negative evidence, per se, against charters. The extent to which beneficial
specialization implies increased segregation has been little explored, but grappling with this
difficult issue may well be unavoidable as expansion of the charter school sector continues.
VII. Competitive Effects
While competitive effects of charters on TPSs have received less attention than direct effects of
charters on their students, competitive effects may be as important, if not more important.
Despite recent growth, the charter school share remains comparatively small, with notable
exceptions in some cities (Figure 4c). Even if the recent pace of growth continues, it will be
many years before the charter sector school grows sufficiently to have large widespread direct
effects. Meanwhile, there is potential for charter schools to have substantial effects on the
broader educational system via innovation and through competitive forces. We have discussed
charter school innovations that might prove beneficial in application in TPSs. We now turn to
review of research assessing charter impacts on TPSs via competitive pressures.43
A. Financial Impacts
Financial impacts are among the most visible impacts of charters on TPSs. Charter schools draw
students from TPSs, and, in doing so, they draw resources from TPSs. The channels of these
financial impacts on TPSs may include payment from TPSs to charters as well as changes in
state and federal funding from programs that link funding to enrollments. There has been
relatively limited research providing systematic evidence of how TPSs adapt to the loss of
finances associated with charter school growth. There are, however, studies that enumerate
impacts and challenges of adjustment. A report of the Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity
(2013) summarizes financial impacts on Minneapolis-St. Paul. Schafft, et al. (2014) study
funding and financial impacts in Pennsylvania. Bifulco and Reback (2014) provide instructive
case studies of TPSs’ financial adaptation to enrollment declines in Albany and in Buffalo New
York.




43
   We should also note that if charter schools do indeed create competitive effects, these indirect effects could be the
threat to the estimates of the direct effect we discussed in the previous section. More specifically, if charter schools
are creating competitive effects for TPSs, then the TPSs would no longer serve as a good counterfactual. The
performance of TPS students would be inflated by the fact that the achievement of students improved as a result of
TPS competing with charter schools.

                                                          50
        From this research, the follow issues emerge. First, as charter schools draw enrollments
from TPSs, the latter confront the painful task of closing schools to reduce the resulting excess
school capacity while also confronting the challenges of attempting to reduce administrative and
teaching staff levels. Teacher employment and tenure contracts often specify that any layoffs
must be in reverse order of seniority. This and the higher pay received by senior relative to junior
teachers imply that reduction in number of teachers is proportionately larger than the reduction in
expenditures for teachers. Adjustment problems are often aggravated by the fact that a charter
school does not draw students from a single TPS school. Rather, a given charter will draw some
students from multiple TPS schools, resulting in declining class sizes in multiple TPS schools.
Hence, closing one or more schools to address district excess capacity then entails reassignment
of many students. Students forced by school closings to change schools may be more likely to
contemplate non-district options than they would if they were not required to relocate (Epple, et
al., 2014). Second, charter schools create uncertainty. For example, if a charter school closes on
short notice, the TPS district school must absorb those students.
    District administrators find themselves grappling with these financial impacts while, at the
same time, attempting to maintain or increase quality so as to avoid loss of more students. If
fixed costs imply TPS cost per student rises as students leave for charters, per student payment to
charters will rise as well if, as is typically the case, charter funding per student is tied to district
per student funding. This may stimulate a vicious (from the district perspective) cycle in which
rising payments per student induce charter school entry, further district enrollment losses occur,
district cost per student and associated charter payment per student rise, and so on. An alternative
perspective is that this dynamic increases the urgency with which TPSs reduce costs in response
to enrollment losses. Moreover, fixed costs aside, the typical lower per student funding in charter
schools (Figure 1) implies district saving that could be used to increase TPS funding. Another
dimension in which a TPSs district may be impacted is in market evaluation of the district’s
creditworthiness. Moody’s (2013) highlighted potential adverse impacts of charters on credit
ratings of struggling urban districts. There is no doubt that competitive pressures on TPS
finances from charter schools are intense in urban districts experiencing rapid charter growth.
These financial impacts and district responses are worthy of more study.




                                                    51
B. Challenges in Estimating Competitive Impacts on Effectiveness of TPSs
Estimating the impact of competition from charters on educational effectiveness of TPS is
difficult for two reasons, one of which is conceptual and the other methodological. The
conceptual challenge has two parts. First, it is difficult to establish good proxies for competitive
pressure. The current literature generally assumes we know how a competitive threat is perceived
by relevant actors. While the vast majority of research has used proximity to charter schools as
proxy for whether a TPS feels competitive pressure, it may be more complicated. Competitive
pressure may only occur when charter schools gain a significant portion of the “market share” of
students. Or, pressure may only occur if there is a view that charter schools are outperforming a
TPS, which hurts the reputation of a TPS. Or, the individual charter school may need to take a
significant share of student from an individual TPS. Or, it could be a combination of all of the
above.
         The second conceptual challenge is associated with the complexity of providing
education in general as education is provided through multiple layers, including teachers within
classrooms who are managed by principals who are in turn provided resources and instructional
and curriculum guidelines by the district. While actors in any single layer may feel competitive
pressure, it might not ultimately affect the performance of students if the other layers are not
equally motivated to improve. Alternatively, it might only matter that particular layers feel
competitive pressures. For instance, a perceived competitive threat by teachers may be the only
thing that matters because they are at the front lines of providing education. Or, it could be that
the key to improving school-wide performance is to motivate the principal. Or, it might not
matter whether principals or teachers feel competitive pressure if many of the curriculum,
instructional, and staffing decisions are made at the district level. In addition, each of these actors
within these layers may perceive competitive threats differently, and each may have a different
ability to react to these threats.
         Adding to the complexity of drawing conclusions across studies is the real possibility that
charter schools have different competitive effects in different types of environments. For
instance, a growing trend among districts nationwide is to offer intra-district choice through open
enrollment, whereby families can choose among all schools within the district, or through
magnet schools. Other districts use a more traditional enrollment assignment based on
geographic residency. Charter schools may have very different competitive effects in these

                                                  52
environments. For districts with preexisting school choice, an already competitive market may
diminish the competitive pressure created by charter schools. In contrast, the introduction of
charter schools in a noncompetitive market with no choice program could have a much more
dramatic effect. In addition, some districts may have growing enrollments and existing schools
may be overcrowded. Here, charter schools could serve as a “release valve” for these districts.
Other districts may have declining enrollments and the loss of additional students to charter
schools could exert real fiscal pressure on existing schools. These observations suggest that
developing theoretical models could help to guide empirical research on competitive effects.
       The challenges we described so far do not include the methodological challenges, which
are significant. If a researcher examines whether the performance of TPSs changes when charter
schools are introduced nearby, they may not know whether any change in performance is a result
of changing student population or changing performance. For instance, a charter school could be
introduced into a neighborhood and begin attracting students away from a nearby TPS. If the
students choosing a charter school are disproportionally low performing, than the average test
scores for students within TPS may improve, not because the quality of education of the TPS is
improving, but because the school has less low performing students. In addition, there may be
observable and unobservable characteristics of students and individual TPSs that should be
accounted for when examining competitive effects. Furthermore, charter schools do not locate at
random. Instead, they may locate in neighborhoods for a variety of reasons, including operators’
perception of how well they can compete with TPSs based on both observable and unobservable
characteristics of TPSs.
       Researcher can address some of these methodological challenges by using student-level
longitudinal data. Longitudinal data can help control for changing population of students within a
TPS by actually tracking the students moving in and out of a TPS. Furthermore, longitudinal data
can help control for both observable and unobservable differences of students and schools by
using a combination of student-and school-fixed effects known as spell effects, which compares
the performance of the same students in the same school over time. However, many researchers
have not had access to these types of data and have used school-level data instead. In our review,
we will focus primarily on studies that have used longitudinal data. Nevertheless, there is some
question of whether longitudinal data fully addresses all of the methodological challenges,



                                                53
especially the non-random location of charter schools. Therefore, it is our view that the analysis
on the question of competitive effects is not as strong as research on some of the other questions.
C. Competitive Impacts of Charters on TPS Effectiveness
The earliest (and some of the most cited) works on competitive effects actually used school-level
data. The first was a study by Caroline Hoxby (2003) in which she examined whether the share
of charter students in a district affects tests scores in Michigan TPSs. She found positive effects.
In a second study, also using Michigan data, but using distance to authorizers as instrument for
charter location, Bettinger (2005) found no evidence that competition from a nearby charter
improved test scores in TPSs. Several more recent studies have used longitudinal student-level
data generally employing a combination of student and school fixed effects for the identification
strategy. We summarize these studies, including their research design in Table 9.44



           Among the studies listed in Table 9, Imberman’s (2007) made the strongest attempt to
address the non-random location of charter schools by his use of longitudinal student-level data
and his analysis of a variety of outcomes (i.e., behavior, attendance, test scores). He also used a
variety of approaches including school fixed-effects, school fixed-effects combined with school-
specific time-trends, and instrumental variables. The results varied based on the approach, with
the fixed effect showing positive effects in some cases (depending on the measure of the
outcome), while the IV approach showed negative effects. As part of his analysis, Imberman
makes the case that the IV approach is the most trusted approach and suggests that charter
schools could actually have a negative impact on TPSs because they change the peer
environments within schools and reduce the resources within schools. At the very least, his
analysis underscores the importance of the identification strategy for estimating competitive
effects.
           In a unique study, Cremata and Raymond (2014) examine competitive effects in
Washington, D.C. However, they approach the question with a different conceptual framework.

44
  Among these studies, Zimmer and Buddin (2009) is a bit more nuanced in approach as they examined competitive
effects using both principal surveys and student-level test score data in California. The survey results showed that
TPS principals felt little pressure from charters to improve performance or modify practices. The student
achievement analysis employed both student and school fixed effects and used an array of alternative measures for
school competition including distance to nearest charter school, a charter school within 2.5 miles, number of charter
schools within 2.5 miles, and percentage of students lost to charter schools. No evidence that charter competition
was improving the test score performance of students in nearby TPSs was found.

                                                         54
Much like some of the previous research, they include measures such as market share and
attrition from TPS to charter schools as a proxy for competitive pressure, but they also factor in
the quality of the charter school in their analysis. They argue that a TPS may be much more
responsive if they are experiencing competition from a high quality charter school versus a low
quality charter school. They find that charter school quality is important as TPSs improve (as
measured by reading and math test scores) when they face competitive pressure from higher
quality charter schools. Therefore, competitive pressure may not be entirely a function of losing
students or market share to a charter school, but losing students and market share to high quality
charter schools. The Washington D.C. setting is noteworthy in that DC is second only to New
Orleans among central city districts in market penetration of charters (Figure 3c). During the
four-year period of the Cremata and Raymond study, 2005/06 to 2008/09, the charter share in
DC grew from 27% to 41%. This large and growing presence of charters is arguably the kind of
setting in which charter competitive effects are likely to be manifest.
       Finally, in a different twist on the debate surround competitive effects, three papers have
recently emerged that not only look at the impact of charter schools on enrollment patterns in
TPSs, but also in private schools. Toma, Zimmer, and Jones (2006) and Chakrabarti and Roy
(2010) exclusively focused on Michigan, while Buddin (2012) conducted a national evaluation.
In each case, the researchers examined how enrollment patterns of TPSs and private schools are
affected as charter school enrollment changes either within the same district or same county.
Across all studies (although to different degrees) the researchers found that private schools
disproportionally lose students to charter schools relative to TPSs. This may imply that charter
schools actually exert stronger competitive effects on private schools than TPSs as private
schools are so financially sensitive to losing students and their tuition dollars.
       In aggregate, the current body of evidence on the competitive effects of charter schools is
mixed, which may be disappointing to the advocates of charter schools. However, while charter
schools have large shares in some districts as seen in Figure 4c, charters do not represent a large
share of enrollment in most districts. Where charters have small shares, it may be unrealistic to
expect charter schools to exert much of a competitive effect. In addition, many of these studies
examine the effects of charter schools from nearly a decade ago. Much has changed since then,
especially in some urban areas, and it could be charter schools are now exerting more pressure
on TPSs. From this perspective, the Cremata and Raymond (2014) discussed above may be

                                                  55
indicative of the kind of competitive effects charters have when charter presence is large and
growing.


VIII. Summary and Conclusions
Since their inception in the early 1990’s, charter schools have grown to serve roughly 5% of U.S.
public school students. Charters are located disproportionately in urban areas. Charter school
penetration varies greatly across states and localities. Seven states account for 61% of total
charter enrollments; 30 metropolitan areas account for 63% of total charter enrollments. The
concern that charter schools would induce white flight from public schools has proven to be
largely unfounded; the charter sector enrolls higher proportions of African-American and
Hispanic students than TPSs. Charters enroll proportionately fewer special needs students than
TPSs, which raises some concerns about the accessibility of these schools to all students. Class
sizes in charter schools are comparable to those in TPSs. On the whole, teachers in charter
schools are less experienced, are less credentialed, are less white, and have fewer advanced
degrees. They are paid less, their jobs are less secure, and they turnover with higher frequency.
Value added estimation of teacher effectiveness in Florida and North Carolina shows charter
school teachers to be weaker in increasing test scores. Research explaining differences in
teachers is in an early stage, and the relevance of differences in teachers to educational outcomes
in charter schools is an open question.
       The effectiveness of charter schools is far from uniform. Lottery studies of
oversubscribed charter schools generally find favorable effects on achievement, often very large
effects. The “No Excuses” model, in particular, has been found to deliver large gains. The
invention of this educational model is arguably the most important innovation that can be
credited to the charter movement. Whether this model can be implemented and can yield
comparable gains in non-selective TPSs remains very much an open issue. A recent experiment
in the Houston school district suggests that this may be possible, while also illustrating the
tremendous challenges facing such implementation. At the opposite end of the quality spectrum,
online “cyber” schools appear to be a failed innovation, delivering markedly poorer achievement
outcomes than TPSs.
       Taken as a whole, the evidence suggests that, accounting for differences in population
served, charter schools are not, on average, producing student achievement gains any better than

                                                 56
TPSs. However, policy prescriptions to withdraw support for charter schools, rationalized by this
mediocre average performance, fail to recognize that a substantial number of charters
significantly outperform the average TPS. The evidence also suggests that individual charter
schools seem to improve as they mature and the charter school sector as a whole is improving
over time, largely from closure of underperforming schools. This research points to the important
role that charter authorizers can play in weeding out ineffective charter schools, a role that many
charter authorizers have yet to embrace. On a more positive note, Rrecent findings also suggest
that charter school performance on behavioral and attainment (years of schooling) outcomes may
be stronger than achievement outcomes. Finally, research on the impacts of charter schools on
the academic performance of TPS through competitive pressures has generally found modest
effects, though one recent study provides evidence that TPSs produce larger achievement gains
when confronted with competition from high quality charter schools.
        .It is common to end a review such as this with the admonition that more research is
needed, and this is surely true. As this review indicates, however, research has already
contributed a great deal to our knowledge about charter schools. Given the variation in charter
schools, research that focuses on specific educational practices and their environments may have
the most potential to be informative. While the charter movement is now nearing its 25th year,
roughly half of the current charter share of public school enrollments has been garnered in the
past seven years. In this respect, it is still far from mature. Polls indicate that the charter
movement has gained widespread support among the public. If charter schools continue to grow,
their direct and indirect effects may become more important. Increased stability of the charter
sector itself may have significant impacts, e.g., by providing more stable employment
opportunities for principals and teachers. Continuing to collect and analyze data on charter
schools is crucial. It remains to be seen whether, as it continues to mature, the charter movement
will fulfill fully the as yet unrealized aspirations of its founders.




                                                   57
             Table 1: Selected Charter School and Student Statistics, 2010/11*
                                                          Charter        Traditional Public
                                                 41 states and DC
Number of States Authorizing Charter Schools
                                                    (Year 2015)
Enrollment (Number)                                      1,805,002               47,419,367
Enrollment Share of TPE**                                    3.7%                    96.3%
Expenditure per Student***                         $        10,011 $                 14,014
Demographics (as % of enrollment)
    African American                                        29.2%                    15.5%
    Hispanic                                                27.2%                    22.9%
    White non-Hispanic                                      36.0%                    53.0%
    Other                                                    7.6%                     8.7%
FRL (as % of enrollment)****                                50.6%                    47.8%
Location*****
    % urban                                                 55.8%                    28.3%
    % suburban                                              28.9%                    46.8%
    % rural                                                 15.2%                    24.9%
Charter Grades:
    K-8 as % of TPE                                          3.8%                    96.2%
    High School as % of TPE                                  3.5%                    96.5%
Students per Teacher******
    Primary Self-Contained                                    22.5                     21.6
    Primary Departmentalized                                  26.9                     26.2
    Middle Self-Contained                                     21.9                     16.7
    Middle Departmentalized                                   24.0                     25.5
    HS Self-Contained                                         23.7                     17.6
    HS Departmentalized                                       22.2                     24.2
    Combined Self-Contained                                   22.6                     15.3
    Combined per School:                                      22.7                     18.2
Students per School:
    K-8                                                      366.0                    460.6
    High School                                              324.2                    624.1
NAEP Proficiency
    Fourth Grade Reading                                    29.0%                    33.0%
    Fourth Grade Math                                       34.0%                    40.0%
    Eighth Grade Reading                                    27.0%                    32.0%
    Eighth Grade Math                                       31.0%                    34.0%
    Eighth Grade Science                                    24.0%                    31.0%
Limited English Proficiency (2007/08)                       16.5%                    11.2%
Special Education                                           11.9%                    12.4%
*Data from National Alliance for Public Charter Schools (http://dashboard.publiccharters.org/dashboard/home) and 2010/11 school year
except where noted
**Total Public Enrollment=charter enrollment+ traditional public enrollment
***Data from University of Arkansas EdReform 2014 Report, which uses "nationalized" data from 40 metropolitan areas in 30 states
(and the District of Columbia). Figures in 2014 dollars.
****Eligible for Free or Reduced Price Lunch
*****Percent is by enrollment (not schools)


                                                          58
                  Table 2: Segregation and Poverty in Public Charter Schools
                                                      Charter    Non-charter
                  More than 80% single race/ethnicity  38.3%           41.1%
                  More than 60% single race/ethnicity  64.6%           67.2%

                  More than 80% white                             14.5%               30.7%
                  More than 80% non-white                         40.6%               21.8%
                  More than 60% white                             29.1%               48.2%
                  More than 60% non-white                         50.7%               32.3%

                  More than 80% FRL                               36.5%               23.6%
                  More than 60% FRL                               42.5%               35.8%
                  Less than 20% FRL                                8.4%               12.6%
            *Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education
            Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey,
            2010-11.”



  Table 3: Demographic Comparison of Students in TPS, Feeders, and Charters, 2010/11*
                                                   Feeders                    Charters
 Number of schools                                  29,797                        5,068
 Average enrollment (per school)                       677                          336
 Total students enrolled                        20,172,202                    1,704,418
 Students in poverty                                  54%                          54%
 English Language Learners                            13%                           9%
 Special Education Students                           11%                           8%
 White                                                40%                          35%
 Black                                                17%                          29%
 Hispanic                                             34%                          28%
 Asian/Pacific Islander                                5%                           3%
 Native American                                       1%                           1%
*Data from Center for Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) study of 27 representative states: Cremata, E., Davis, D.,
Dickey, K., Lawyer, K., Negassi, Y., Raymond, M., & Woodworth, J.. National charter school study. CREDO.
http://credo.stanford.edu/documents/NCSS%202013%20Final%20Draft.pdf, 2013.




                                                            59
   Table 4: Teacher Characteristics in Traditional Public, Charter, and Private Schools, 2011/12*

                                                              Traditional
                                                                                       Charter                Private
                                                                Public
Percent White, Non-Hispanic                                        82.3                  69.9                  88.3
Percent Black, Non-Hispanic                                         6.6                 11.8**                  3.6
Percent Hispanic                                                    7.6                  13.1                   5.2
Percent Male                                                       23.6                  25.1                  25.9
Average Age                                                        42.6                  37.4                  43.8
Percent Younger than 30                                            14.7                   31                   16.7
Average Teaching Experience (Years)                                 14                   8.7                   14.2
Average Years at Current School                                     8.1                   3.6                   8.3
Percent Less than 4 Years' Teaching Experience                     10.7                  26.3                  16.1
Percent Highest Degree=Bachelor's                                  39.4                  52.3                  48.5
Percent Regular Full Time                                          92.8                   91                   79.2
Required Hours (Typical Week)                                      30.7                   32                   38.3
Total Hours per Week                                               52.2                  53.5                  52.1
Average School Year Earnings                                      $55,400              $46,300                $41,900
Percent Teachers Receiving Supplemental
Comp for Student Performance/Average                           4.0/$1,400            15.8/$1,300           .5**/$1,100**
Amount
Percent Any Professional Development                               99.0                  98.3                   N/A
*All values from Goldring, R., Gray, L., and Bitterman, A. “Characteristics of Public and Private Elementary and Secondary
School Teachers in the U.S.: Results From the 2011-12 Schools and Staffing Survey, First Look,” National Center for Education
Statistics 2013-314, Department of Education, August 2013.

**CV   of estimate between 30 and 50 percent.




                                                             60
                      Table 5: Summary of Student Fixed Effect Estimates
     Study           Location        Research                            Average
                                      Design                             Impact
  Zimmer et al.       California      Fixed      No reading effect for elementary students; small negative
     (2003)                           Effects    effect in math.

                                                 No math effect for secondary students; small positive
                                                 effects in reading
  Solomon &            Arizona        Fixed      Positive reading effect for elementary students attending
  Goldschmidt                         Effects    charter schools for three years compared to students
    (2004)                                       attending TPSs for three years

                                                 Negative reading effects for secondary students attending
                                                 charter schools for three years compared to students
                                                 attending TPSs for three years
Buddin & Zimmer     Los Angeles &     Fixed      No math or reading effect for Los Angeles elementary
     (2006)           San Diego       Effects    students; small negative effects for San Diego elementary
                                                 students in math and reading

                                                 Mixed small effects across locations for secondary students
      Sass             Florida         Fixed     Small negative math and reading effects in grades 3-10.
     (2006)                           Effects
 Bifulco & Ladd     North Carolina     Fixed     Negative math and reading effects in grades 4-8
     (2006)                           Effects
  Booker et al.         Texas          Fixed     Negative math and reading effects in grades 4-8
     (2007)                           Effects
Hanushek, Kain, &       Texas         Various    Negative combined reading and math effects in grades 4-8
  Rivkin (2007)                       Models
                                     including
                                       Fixed
                                      Effects*
  Zimmer et al.        Chicago         Fixed     Chicago: no effect in math; small negative effect in
  (2009; 2012)                        Effects    reading.
                       Denver
                                                 Denver: moderate positive effect in math; no effect in
                                                 reading.
                     Milwaukee
                                                 Milwaukee: small positive effect in math; no effect in
                                                 reading.
                     Philadelphia
                                                 Philadelphia: no effect in math or reading.
                        Ohio
                                                 Ohio: moderately large negative effect in math; small
                                                 negative effect in reading.
                      San Diego
                                                 San Diego: no effect in math or reading.
                        Texas
                                                 Texas: moderately large negative effect in math; small
                                                 negative effect in reading.
   Imberman          Anonymous         Fixed     No math, reading, or language arts effects.
     (2011)           District        Effect &
                                        IV#




                                                 61
        Nicotera,         Indianapolis     Fixed       Results vary by whether the analysis uses spring to spring
      Mendiburo, &                         Effects     test score gains analysis or fall to spring test score gains.
      Berends (2011)
                                                       Strong positive math effects and no effect in reading for the
                                                       spring to spring analysis.

                                                       Strong positive math and reading effects for the fall to
                                                       spring analysis.
       Ni & Rorrer           Utah        Two           Both approaches show small negative effects in math and
         (2012)                          Approaches:   language arts in grades 1-6; no effect in language arts
                                         (1)HLM        grades7-11.
                                         (2) GMM
                                         with Fixed
                                         Effects
*
    While other approaches are used in these papers, we focused on fixed effect results here.




                                                       62
                      Table 6: Summary of Estimates from Lottery Based Analyses

     Study             Location               Research                             Average
                                               Design                              Impact
   Hoxby and             Chicago       Random assignment based      Positive effects in math of 6 to 7
    Rockoff                                 on lottery data         percentage points and in reading of 5 to 6
     (2004)                                                         percentage points.
 Hoxby, Kang, &       New York City    Random assignment based      Small positive effect in both math and
 Murarka (2009)                              on lottery data        reading.
Abdulkadiroglu, et       Boston        Random assignment based      Moderately large positive effects in
   al. (2010)                          on lottery data along with   English and large effects in math.
                                        observational analyses
Dobbie and Fryer         Harlem        Random assignment based      Very large math and ELA positive effects
    (2010)            Children Zone          on lottery data        both in elementary and middle school
                                                                    grades
 Curto and Fryer      SEED schools     Random assignment based      Moderate to large effects in math and
     (2011)              in D.C.            on lottery data         reading.
  Gleason et al.         National      Random assignment based      Null average effects for student
     (2010)             Sample of           on lottery data         achievement and behavioral outcomes.
                      Middle Schools                                Did find a positive effect for low-income,
                                                                    low performing students, but negative
                                                                    effects for more advantaged students.
Wong, et al. (2014)    Los Angeles     Random assignment based      Improved math English test scores, greater
                                            on lottery data         school retention, and lower rates of
                                                                    engaging in ≥1 very risky behaviors, but
                                                                    no difference in risky behaviors, such as
                                                                    any recent use of alcohol, tobacco, or
                                                                    drugs.




                                                    63
       Table 7: Summary of Results from Matching and OLS Regression Approaches
    Study           Location             Research                                Average
                                          Design                                 Impact
     AFT             National     OLS Regression of cross       Average fourth-grade achievement was
    (2004)                            sectional data            higher for TPSs than in charter schools,
                                                                both for students overall and for low-
                                                                income students.
    Hoxby            National      OLS Regression of cross      Charter students were 3% more likely than
    (2004)                        sectional data using TPSs     non-charter students in nearby schools to be
                                 located near charter schools   proficient in reading and 2% more likely to
                                   as the comparison group      reach proficient levels in mathematics.
    CREDO            16 states       Matching Approach          Across all states, 17 percent of charter
     (2009)                                                     schools outperformed TPSs in math; 31
                                                                percent performed worse than their TPSs
                                                                counterpart.
Furgeson, et. al.   Twenty-two      Matching Approach           Evaluated as a group, the 22 CMOs had
    (2012)          anonymous                                   positive but not statistically significant test
                    CMOs from                                   score impacts for all four academic subjects
                      several                                   that were evaluated. Impacts varied greatly
                       states                                   across CMOs. For example, in math 10
                                                                CMOs had significant positive impacts and 4
                                                                had significant negative impacts. Larger
                                                                CMOs tended to have more favorable
                                                                impacts.
    CREDO            27 states      Matching Approach           Across all states, 29 percent of charter
     (2013)                                                     schools outperformed TPSs in math; 19
                                                                percent performed worse than their TPSs
                                                                counterpart. Overall average impact of no
                                                                effect in math and slight positive effect in
                                                                reading.
  Baude et al.        Texas         Value-Added Model           In recent years, charter schools have
    (2014)                                                      improved performance with moderate to
                                                                large effect sizes in math and reading,
                                                                respectively.
  Ladd et al.         North      Value-Added Model as well      In the value added model, which is the
   (2014)            Carolina     as Fixed Effect Approach      approach the authors emphasize, the results
                                                                suggest that, as a whole, charter schools have
                                                                improved performance over time. The
                                                                authors also suggest that charter schools are
                                                                leading to higher parental satisfaction where
                                                                the authors use a demographic adjusted
                                                                proportion of parents who keep their children
                                                                in the school the next year relative to similar
                                                                parents whose children are in TPSs.




                                                  64
                Table 8: Summary of Results of Analyses of Non-Cognitive Outcomes
  Study          Location        Research                   Research                        Average
                                 Outcomes                    Design                         Impact
Booker et al.    Chicago &   Examined high school     Probit model with the       Increased probability of
  (2011)          Florida    graduation and college   restriction that all        graduating high school and
                             attendance of students   students previous           attending college of 7 to 15
                             attending charter high   attended a charter school   percentage points, depending
                             schools                  in 8th grade. Also          upon location and outcome
                                                      controlled for
                                                      observable
                                                      characteristics and
                                                      conducted a bivariate
                                                      probit approach using
                                                      proximity as an
                                                      instrument.
 Imberman        Anonymous   Examine the effect of    Fixed Effect                Schools that begin as charters
   (2011)         District   behavioral and                                       (startups) generate large
                             attendance outcome as                                improvements in discipline
                             measure of                                           and attendance, while no such
                             noncognitive skill                                   effect was observed for
                             formation                                            conversion charter schools.
Furgeson et.     Anonymous   Examined high school     Graduation data were        Combined data for 6 CMO’s
al. (2012)       CMOs        graduation and college   obtained for 6 CMO’s.       showed positive but
                             attendance in Charter    College attendance data     insignificant effects on
                             Management               were obtained for 4         college attendance. Evaluated
                             Organizations            CMO’s. Method               separately, 3 CMO’s had
                             (CMOs)                   entailed comparison of      large significant positive
                                                      charter students to         impacts on college
                                                      matched students in         attendance, 2 an insignificant
                                                      home district of each       positive effect, and 1 a large
                                                      charter school.             significant negative effect.
                                                                                  Combined data for 4 CMO’s
                                                                                  showed positive but
                                                                                  insignificant effects college
                                                                                  attendance. Evaluated
                                                                                  separately, 2 CMO’s had
                                                                                  large significant positive
                                                                                  impacts on college attendance
                                                                                  and 2 had insignificant
                                                                                  effects.
 Angrist, et       Boston    Examined post-           Random assignment           Positive impacts on measures
  al., 2013                  secondary outcomes       based on lottery data       of college preparation (such
                                                                                  as SAT scores), no
                                                                                  statistically significant impact
                                                                                  on high school graduation,
                                                                                  and an effect of shifting
                                                                                  students from two-year
                                                                                  colleges into four-year
                                                                                  colleges



                                                      65
 Dobbie &         Promise     The effects of high-    Random assignment           The study found a 14.1
  Fryer,        Academy in    performing charter      based on lottery data       percentage points increased
  (2013)        the Harlem    schools on human                                    likelihood to enroll in college
                 Children's   capital, risky                                      and females         are     12.1
                   Zone       behaviors, and health                               percentage points less likely
                              outcomes                                            to be pregnant in their teens,
                                                                                  and males are 4.3 percentage
                                                                                  points less likely to be
                                                                                  incarcerated. The study found
                                                                                  no impact on self-reported
                                                                                  health.
 Booker, et     Chicago &     Evaluate high school    Probit and OLS models       Increased probability of
 al. (2014)      Florida      graduation, college     (depending upon             graduating      high     school,
                              attendance, labor       whether it was              attending      college,      and
                              outcomes                dichotomous our             persisting in collage of 7 to 13
                                                      continuous outcome)         percentage points, depending
                                                      with the restriction that   upon location and outcome.
                                                      all students previous       In addition, the analysis was
                                                      attended a charter school   the first to examine labor
                                                      in 8th grade. Also          outcomes and found an
                                                      controlled for              advantage of about 12 percent
                                                      observable                  for students who attended a
                                                      characteristics and         charter school.
                                                      conducted a bivariate
                                                      probit and IV approach
                                                      using proximity as an
                                                      instrument.
Wong, et. al.   Los           Examined risky          Random assignment           No significant difference in
(2014)          Angeles       behaviors.              based on lottery data for   behaviors denoted risky (e.g.,
                                                      three high-performing       alcohol, tobacco, drug use).
                                                      charter schools. ITT        Significantly lower incidence
                                                      analysis excluding          in charter sample of
                                                      applicants to the three     behaviors denoted very risky
                                                      focus schools who went      (e.g., binge drinking,
                                                      to an alternative high-     substance use at school, gang
                                                      performing charter          participation).
                                                      school in 9th grade.




                                                      66
                         Table 9: Summary of Competitive Effects
   Study           Location                      Research                                      Average
                                                  Design                                       Impact
    Hoxby          Michigan       Use a competition proxy of the share of        Mostly positive effects across
    (2003)                        charter students in a district affects tests   subjects and grades.
                                  scores. For the analysis, uses a
                                  difference-in-differences approach.
   Bettinger       Michigan       Use a competition proxy of number of           No effects.
    (2005)                        charter schools within 5 miles and uses
                                  difference-in-differences approach as
                                  well an instrumental variable approach.
Bifulco & Ladd   North Carolina   Use a competition proxy of charter             No effect in math or reading.
    (2006)                        schools within 2.5 miles radius using a
                                  student fixed effect model.
     Sass           Florida       Use a competition proxy of charter             Positive effect on math, no effect
    (2006)                        schools within 2.5 miles radius. The           on reading.
                                  author uses a combination school and
                                  student fixed effect model.
 Booker et al.       Texas        Use a competition proxy of charter             Positive math and reading effect.
   (2008)                         schools within 5 miles radius. The
                                  authors use a combination school and
                                  student fixed effect model.
 Zimmer and        California     Use various competition proxies                No effect on student achievement
   Buddin                         including number of charter schools            and very little changes in
   (2009)                         within 2.5 miles as well as the number of      operation and practice of TPSs in
                                  students lost to charter schools. The          reaction to charter schools.
                                  authors use a combination school and
                                  student fixed effect model. The authors
                                  also surveyed TPS to examine changes in
                                  practices as a response to charter schools.
 Zimmer et al.   Chicago Denver   Use a competition proxy of charter             No effect except a small positive
    (2009)         Milwaukee      schools within 5 miles radius. The             effect in both math and reading in
                  Philadelphia    authors use a combination school and           Texas.
                      Ohio        student fixed effect model.
                   San Diego
                     Texas
  Imberman        Large urban     Used a variety of approaches including         The results varied based on the
    (2011)         anonymous      school fixed-effects, school fixed-effects     approach, with the fixed effect
                     district     combined with school-specific time-            showing positive effects in some
                                  trends, and instrumental variables.            cases, while the IV approach
                                                                                 showed negative effects.
   Winters       New York City    Use a competition proxy of percent of          Mostly positive math and reading
   (2012)                         students who left TPS for a charter            effects.
                                  school. The author uses a student fixed-
                                  effect approach.
     Nisar         Milwaukee      Use a competition proxy of charter             Positive      math   and   reading
    (2012)                        schools within 2.5 miles radius using a        effects.
                                  student fixed effect model.
 Cremata and      Washington,     As a proxy for competition, include            Positive math and reading
  Raymond            D.C.         measures such as market share and              competitive effects when TPSs
   (2014)                         attrition from TPS to charter schools as a     face competitive pressure from
                                  proxy for competitive pressure, but they       higher quality charter schools.
                                  also factor in the quality of the charter
                                  school in their analysis.

                                                 67
                 Figure 1: Charter Funding Per Student as a
                      Percent of TPS Funding, FY 2011
 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

    0%




Batdorff, Maloney, May, Speakman, Wolf, Cheng (2014). Charter school funding: Inequity Expands.
www.uaedreform.org/charter-funding-inequity-expands/


                       Figure 2: Charter Enrollment Growth
  2,500,000                                                                                                   5.0%
                                                                                                              4.5%
  2,000,000                                                                                                   4.0%
                                                                                                              3.5%
  1,500,000                                                                                                   3.0%
                                                                                                              2.5%
  1,000,000                                                                                                   2.0%
                                                                                                              1.5%
    500,000                                                                                                   1.0%
                                                                                                              0.5%
          -                                                                                                   0.0%




                                     Total Charter Students             Charter Share of TPE


Data from National Alliance for Public Charter Schools (http://dashboard.publiccharters.org/dashboard/home)



                                                             68
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            69
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”

*Metro Areas consist of the MSAs surrounding the cities listed, with districts matched to MSA by zip code as defined by the U.S.
Department of Labor.




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”

*Metro Areas consist of the MSAs surrounding the cities listed, with districts matched to MSA by zip code as defined by the U.S.
Department of Labor.




                                                              70
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”

                                                            71
                  Figure 5a: Percentage of Charter School
                 Students Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price
                                    Lunch
 60%


 50%


 40%


 30%


 20%


 10%


   0%
         1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11

Data from National Alliance for Public Charter Schools (http://dashboard.publiccharters.org/dashboard/home)

                    Figure 5b: Percentages of Charter School
                        Students by Race and Ethnicity
 45%
 40%
 35%
 30%
 25%
 20%
 15%
 10%
   5%
   0%
         1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11

                      African American              Hispanic           Other           White Non-Hispanic

Data from National Alliance for Public Charter Schools (http://dashboard.publiccharters.org/dashboard/home)




                                                             72
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            73
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            74
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            75
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            76
Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




Figures calculated from the Common Core of Data: National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core of Data, “Public
Elementary/Secondary School Universe Survey, 2010-11.”




                                                            77
                                           References

Abdulkadiroğlu, A., Angrist, J. D., Dynarski, S. M., Kane, T. J., & Pathak, P. A. (2011).
      Accountability and flexibility in public schools: Evidence from Boston's charters and
      pilots. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 699-748.

Angrist, J. D., Cohodes, S. R., Dynarski, S. M., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. D. (2013). Charter
       schools and the road to college readiness: The effects on college preparation,
       attendance and choice. Boston: Boston Foundation and New Schools Venture Fund.

Angrist, J. Imbens, G., & Rubin, D. (1996). “Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental
       Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(23), 222-455.

Angrist, J. D., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. R. (2013). Explaining charter school effectiveness.
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 5(4): 1-27.

Baker, Bruce, and Dickerson, Jill, “Charter Schools, Teacher Labor Market Deregulation, and
       Teacher Quality: Evidence From the Schools and Staffing Survey,” Education Policy,
       20(5), November 2006, 752-778.

Ballou, D., Teasley, B., & Zeidner, T. (2007). Charter Schools in Idaho, in M.Berends, M.G.
       Springer, & H.J. Walberg, eds., Charter school outcomes (pp. 221-241). New York: L.
       Erlbaum Associates.

Batdorff, M., Maloney, L., May, J., Speakman, S., Wolf, P., Cheng, A., (2014). Charter School
       Funding: Inequity Increases. University of Arkansas.

Baude, P.L., Casey, M., Hanushek, E.A., & Rivkin, S.G. (2014) “The Evolution of Charter
       School Quality” NBER Working Paper: 20645.

Berends, M., Goldring, E., Stien, M., & Cravens, X. (2010). Instructional Conditions in Charter
      Schools and Students’ Mathematics Achievement Gains. American Journal of Education.
      116: 303-335.

Bettinger, E.P. (2005). The Effect of Charter Schools on Charter Students and Public Schools.
       Economics of Education Review 24(2):133–47.

Bifulco, R., & Ladd, H. F. (2006). The impact of charter schools on student achievement:
       Evidence from North Carolina. Journal of Education Finance and Policy, 1(1), 50–90.

Bifulco, R., & .Ladd, H.F. (2007). School Choice, Racial Segregation, and Test-Score Gaps:
       Evidence from North Carolina's Charter School Program, Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 26(1), 31-56.

Bifulco, Robert and Christian Buerger (2012). “The Influence of Finance and Accountability
       Policies on Charter School Locations,” Working Paper, Syracuse University.



                                                78
Bifulco, Robert and Randall Reback, "Fiscal Impacts of Charter Schools: Lessons for New
       York", Education Finance and Policy 9(1), Winter 2014.

Booker, K., Gill, B., Sass, T., & Zimmer, R. (2014) “Charter High School’s Effect on
      Educational Attainment and Earnings”Available at: http://www.mathematica-
      mpr.com/~/media/publications/PDFs/education/charter_long-term_wp.pdf

Booker, T. K., Gilpatric, S. M., Gronberg, T. J., & Jansen, D. W. (2007). The impact of charter
      school student attendance on student performance. Journal of Public Economics, 91(5–
      6), 849–876.

Booker, T. K., Gilpatric, S. M., Gronberg, T. J., & Jansen, D. W. (2008). The Effect of Charter
      Schools on traditional Public School Students in Texas: Are Children Who Stay Behind
      Left Behind?

Booker, K., Sass, T., Gill, B., & Zimmer, R. (2009). Achievement and Attainment in Chicago
      Charter Schools. RAND Technical Report, Retrieved July 16, 2014 from:
      http://lbr.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/technical_reports/2009/RAND_TR585-1.pdf

Booker, K., Sass, T., Gill, B., & Zimmer, R. (2011). The effects of charter high schools on
      educational attainment. Journal of Labor Economics, 29(2), 377–415.

Booker, K., Zimmer, R., & Buddin, R. (2005). The effect of charter schools on school peer
      composition. RAND Working Paper: WR-306-EDU. Retrieved January 3, 2013, from
      http://www.ncspe.org/publications_files/RAND_WR306.pdf

Butler, J.S., Carr, D., Toma, E.F, & Zimmer, R. (2013.) School Attributes and Distance:
        Tradeoffs in the School Choice Decision. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.
        32(4): 785-806.

Buddin, R. (2012). The Impact of Charter Schools on Public and Private School Enrollments
      Cato Institute Policy Analysis No. 707. Available at SSRN:
      http://ssrn.com/abstract=2226597

Buddin, R. & Zimmer, R. (2005). “Student Achievement in Charter Schools: A Complex
      Picture,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24: (2), 351–371.

Cannata, Marisa, and Penaloza, Roberto, “Who Are Charter School Teachers? Comparing
      Teacher Characteristics, Job Choices, and Job Preferences,” education policy analysis
      archives, 20(29), September 2012, 1-25.

Carlson, D., Lavery, L., & Witte, J.F. (2012). Charter School Authorizers and Student
       Achievement. Economics of Education Review 31(2): 254-267.



                                               79
Carnoy, M., Jacobsen, R., Mishel, L., & Rothstein, R. (2006). “Worth the price? Weighing the
      evidence on charter schools?” Education, Finance, and Policy. 151-161.

Carrell, Scott E. and Mark L. Hoekstra, “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed
        to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids,” American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics 2010, 2:1, 211–228.

Carruthers, Celeste, “The Qualifications and Classroom Performance of Teachers Moving to
       Charter Schools,” Education Finance and Policy, 2012, 233-268.

Chakrabarti R., & Roy, J., (2010) Do Charter Schools Crowd Out Private School Enrollment?
      Evidence from Michigan, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 472.

Chute, Eleanor, “Pennsylvania withholds OK for 8 cyber charter schools,” Pittsburgh Post-
       Gazette, January 29, 2013.

Cobb, C. D. and G. V. Glass. (1999). “Ethnic Segregation in Arizona Charter Schools.”
      Education Policy Analysis Archives, 7(1).

Cowen, Joshua, and Winters, Marcus, “Do Charters Retain Teachers Differently? Evidence From
      Elementary Schools in Florida,” Education Finance and Policy, 2013, 14-42.

CREDO. (2009). National Charter School Study.
    http://credo.stanford.edu/documents/NCSS%202013%20Final%20Draft.pdf

CREDO. (21011). Charter School Performance Pennsylvania.
    http://credo.stanford.edu/reports/PA%20State%20Report_20110404_FINAL.pdf

CREDO. (2103a). National Charter School Study.
    http://credo.stanford.edu/documents/NCSS%202013%20Final%20Draft.pdf

CREDO (2013b). Charter School Performance in New York City.
    http://www.nyccharterschools.org/sites/default/files/resources/CredoReport2013.pdf

Cremata, E.J. & Raymond, M. (2014). The Competitive Effects of Charter Schools: Evidence
      from the District of Columbia. Paper Presented at Association of Education, Finance,
      and Policy conference and available at:
      http://www.aefpweb.org/annualconference/download-39th

Curto, V.E., & Fryer, R.G. Jr. (2011). “Estimating the Returns to Urban Boarding Schools:
       Evidence from SEED.” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper
       16746.



                                              80
David, D., & Raymond, M. (2012). Choices for studying choice: Assessing charter school
       effectiveness using two quasi-experimental methods. Economics of Education Review,
       31, 225-236.

Deming, D. (2014). “Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of School Effectiveness.”
      2014. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 104(5): 406-411.

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G., Jr. (2013). The medium-term impacts of high-achieving charter
      schools on non-test score outcomes. Working Paper. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University.

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G., Jr. (2011). “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence
      from New York City.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2013,5(4) 28–
      60.

___________, “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement Among the Poor?
      Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone,” American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics 3 (July 2011b): 158–187.

Engberg, John, Dennis Epple, Holger Sieg and Ron Zimmer, “Evaluating Education Programs
      That Have Lotteried Admission and Selective Attrition,” Journal of Labor Economics,
      Vol. 32, No. 1, January 2014.

Epple, Dennis, Akshaya Jha, and Holger Sieg. “The Superintendent's Dilemma: Managing
       School District Capacity as Parents Vote with Their Feet,” Working Paper, 2014.

Exstrom, Michelle, “Teaching in Charter Schools,” National Conference of State Legislatures,”
       July 2012.

Farrell, Caitlin, Priscilla Wohlstetter and Joanna Smith, “Charter Management Organizations: An
        Emerging Approach to Scaling Up What Works”, Educational Policy 2012 26(4) 499–
        532.

Ferreyra, Maria Marta and Grigory Kosenok, “Charter School Entry and School Choice: The
       Case of Washington, D.C.,” October 15, 2013.

Finn, C. E., B.V., Manno, and G. Vanourek. (2000) Charter Schools in Action: Renewing Public
       Education. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Fiske, E., and H. Ladd, (2000). “When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale.” Washington,
        D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Fitzgerald, J., P. Harris, P. Huidekiper, M. Mani. (1998) 1997 Colorado Charter Schools
       Evaluation Study: The Characteristics, Status, and Student Achievement Data of
       Colorado Charter Schools. Denver, CO.: The Clayton Foundation.


                                              81
Frankenberg, E., and C. Lee (2003). “Charter schools and race: A lost opportunity for integrated
      education.” Education Policy Analysis Archives, 11(32). Retrieved from
      http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v11n32/.

Frankenberg, E., Siegel-Hawley, G., & Wang, J. (2010). Choice without Equity: Charter School
      Segregation and the Need for Civil Rights Standards. Civil Rights Project, UCLA
      Retrieved January 3, 2013, from http://civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/research/k-12-
      education/integration-and-diversity/choice-without-equity-2009-report/frankenberg-
      choices-without-equity-2010.pdf

Fryer, Roland G., “Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools:
        Evidence from Field Experiments,” Harvard University, April 1, 2014.

Furgeson, J., Gill, B., Haimson, J., Killewald, A., McCullough, M., Nichols-Barrer, I., . . . Lake,
       R. (2012). Charter-school management organizations: Diverse strategies and diverse
       student impacts: Updated Edition. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.

Furgeson, J., Brian Gill, Joshua Haimson, Alexandra Killewald, Moira McCullough, Ira Nichols-
       Barrer, Bing-ru Teh, Natalya Verbitsky-Savitz, “The National Study of Charter
       Management: Organization (CMO) Effectiveness Charter-School Management
       Organizations: Diverse Strategies and Diverse Student Impacts,” Mathematica Policy
       Research, 2012

Garcia, D.R., McIlroy, L., & Barber, R.T. (2008). Starting Behind: A Comparative Analysis of
       the Academic Standing of Students Entering Charter Schools. Social Science Quarterly,
       89(1), 199-216.

Gill, B.P., L. Hamilton, J.R. Lockwood, J. Marsh, R. Zimmer, D. Hill, and S. Pribesh. (2005).
        Inspiration, Perspiration, and Time: Operations and Achievement in Edison Schools,
        Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation. MG-351-EDU. As of November 5, 2008:
        http://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG351/

Gleason, P., Clark, M., Tuttle, C. C., & Dwoyer, E. (2010). The evaluation of charter school
      impacts: Final report. (NCEE 2010-4029). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
      Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and
      Regional Assistance.

Glomm, Gerhard, Douglas Harris, and Te-Fen Lo (2005). "Charter school location," Economics
     of Education Review, 24, 451.457.

Goldring, Rebecca, Gray, Lucinda, and Bitterman, Amy, “Characteristics of Public and Private
       Elementary and Secondary School Teachers in the United States: Results from the 2011-
       12 Schools and Staffing Survey, First Look,” Institute of Education Sciences, National
       Center for Education Statistics 2013-314, August 2013.




                                                82
Hanushek, Eric, “The trade-off between child quantity and quality,” Journal of Political
      Economy, 100(1), 1992, 84-117.

Hanushek, Eric and Rivkin, Steven, “Teacher Quality,” Chapter 18 in Handbook of the
      Economics of Education, Volume 2, Hanushek, Eric and Welch, Finis, eds., 2006,
      Elsevier B.V., 1051-1078.

Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., Rivkin, S. G., & Branch, G. F. (2007). Charter school quality and
      parental decision making with school choice. Journal of Public Economics, 91(5), 823-
      848.

Hoxby, C.M. (2003). School Choice and School Productivity: Could School Choice Be a Tide
      That Lifts All Boats? In The Economics of School Choice, edited by Caroline M. Hoxby,
      287–342. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hoxby, C., Kang, J., & Murarka, S. (2009). Techinical Report: How New York City’s charter
      schools affect achievement, New York City Charter Schools Evaluation Project.
      Retrieved July 5, 2013 at:
      http://users.nber.org/~schools/charterschoolseval/how_nyc_charter_schools_affect_achie
      vement_technical_report_2009.pdf

Hoxby, C. M., & Murarka, S. (2007). Charter schools in New York City: Who enrolls and how
      they affect their students’ achievement. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
      Research. Retrieved November 5, 2008, from http://www.nber.org/
      ~schools/charterschoolseval/nyc_charter_schools_technical_report_july2007.pdf.

Hoxby, C. M., & Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The impact of charter schools on student achievement.
      Unpublished paper. Department of Economics, Harvard University.

Imberman, S. A. (2011). Achievement and behavior in charter schools: Drawing a more
      complete picture. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2), 416-435.

Imberman, S.A. (2007). “The Effect of Charter Schools on Non Charter Students: An
      Instrumental Variable Approach” NSCPE Working Paper, Accessed on August 1, 2014
      from: http://www.ncspe.org/publications_files/OP149.pdf

Institute on Metropolitan Opportunity, “Charter Schools in the Twin Cities:2013 Update,”
        University of Minnesota Law School, October 2013.

Institute on Race and Poverty, “Failed Promises: Assessing Charter Schools in the Twin Cities,”
        University of Minnesota Law School, November 2008.

______________, “Update of ‘Failed Promises: Assessing Charter Schools in the Twin Cities’,”
      University of Minnesota Law School, January 2012.




                                               83
Jackson, C. Kirabo, “School competition and teacher labor markets: Evidence from charter
       school entry in North Carolina,” Journal of Public Economics, 96 (2012), 431-448.

Kane, Thomas and Staiger, Douglas, “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An
       Experimental Evaluation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       #14607, December 2008.

Kolderie, T., Creating the Capacity for Change: How and Why Governors and Legislatures Are
       Opening a New-Schools Sector in Public Education. (2004). Education Week Press.

Ladd, S., Clotfelter, C., & Holbein, J.B. (2014) “The Evolution of the Charter School Sector in
       North Carolina” Paper to be presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association for
       Public Policy Analysis and Management, Albuquerque, New Mexico, November 2014

Lee, David S., “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
       Effects,” Review of Economic Studies, 76 (2009), 1071-1102.

Mehta, Nirav, “Competition in Public School Districts: Charter School Entry, Student Sorting,
       and School Input Determination,” Working paper, University of Western Ontario, June
       14, 2012

Miron, G. N., & Nelson, C. (2002). What’s Public About Charter Schools? Thousand Oaks, CA:
       Corwin Press, Inc.

Moody’s. “Charter schools pose greatest credit challenge to school districts in economically
     weak urban areas,” October 15, 2013.

Nathan, J., “Controversy: Charters and Choice,” (1998). The American Prospect, 9, November-
      December, available at www.prospect.org.

Nelson, F. H., Muir, E., & Drown, R. (2000). Venturesome capital: State charter school finance
       systems. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.

Nichols-Barrer, I., Gill, B.P., Gleason, P., & Tuttle, C.C. (2014). “Does Student Attrition Explain
       KIPP’s Success.” Education Next 14(4).

PDK/Gallup Poll, “The 46th annual pdK/gallup poll of the public’s attitudes toward the public
     schools.” http://pdkintl.org/programs-resources/poll/ 2014.

Podursky, Michael, and Ballou, Dale, “Personnel Policy in Charter Schools,” Thomas B.
      Fordham Foundation, August 2001.

Ni, Y. & Rorrer, A. K. (2012). Twice Considered: Charter schools and student achievement in
       Utah. Economics of Education Review, 31(5), 835-849.

Nissar, H. (2012). Heterogenous Competitive Effects of Charter Schools in Milwaukee” NCSPE
        Working Paper.


                                                84
Powell, J., J. Blackorby, J. Marsh, K. Finnegan, and L. Anderson. (1997). Evaluation of Charter
       School Effectiveness. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.

Ravitch, D. (undated). Florida Model Does Not Work, Letter to New Mexico State Legislators.
       Reprint Retrieved July 30, 2013, from http://www.independentsourcepac.com/diane-
       ravitch-letter-to-new-mexico-legislature.html.

Reardon, S.F. (2009) Review of “How New York City’s Charter Schools Affect Achievement.”
      Boulder and Tempe: Education and the Public Interest Center & Education Policy
      Research Unit. Retrieved August 25, 2014 from http://epicpolicy.org/thinktank/review-
      How-New-York-City-Charter

Reckhow, S. (2013). Follow the Money: How Foundation Dollars Change Public School
      Politics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, USA.

Sass, T. R. (2006). Charter schools and student achievement in Florida. Education Finance and
       Policy, 1(1), 91–122.

Schafft, Kai A. , Erica Frankenberg, Ed Fuller, William Hartman, Stephen Kotok, and Bryan
       Mann. “Assessing the Enrollment Trends and Financial Impacts of Charter Schools on
       Rural and Non-Rural School Districts in Pennsylvania,” Penn State University,
       Department of Education Policy Studies, 2014.

Sherry, Allison, “New start at Cole ends this spring: Charter KIPP pulls plans to revamp all
       grades at middle school,” Denver Post, 03/13/2007.
       http://www.denverpost.com/specialreports/ci_5421568

Stuit, David, and Smith, Thomas, “Teacher Turnover in Charter Schools,” 2009,
        www.vanderbilt.edu/schoolchoice/documents/stuit smith ncspe.pdf

Toma, E., Zimmer, R., & Jones, J. (2006). Beyond Achievement: Enrollment Consequences of
      Charter Schools in Michigan, Advances in Applied Microeconomics 14: 241–55.

Tuttle, C. C., Gleason, P., & Clark, M. (2012). Using lotteries to evaluate schools of choice:
        Evidence from a National Study of Charter Schools. Economics of Education Review,
        31, 237–253.

Tuttle, C. C., Gill, B., Gleason, P., Knechtel, V., Nichols-Barrer, I., & Resch, A. (2013). KIPP
        middle schools: Impacts on achievement and other outcomes. Washington, DC:
        Mathematica Policy Research.

Weiher, G.R., & Tedin, K.L. (2002). Does Choice Lead to Racially Distinctive Schools? Charter
      Schools and Household Preferences. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 21 (1),
      79-92.




                                                85
Winters, M. (2012). Measuring the effect of charter schools on public school student
       achievement in an urban environment: Evidence from New York City. Economics of
       Education Review, 31(2): 293-301.

_______. Why the Gap? Special Education and New York City Charter Schools,” Center for
      Reinventing Public Education, September 2013.

_______. “ Understanding the Charter School Special Education Gap: Evidence from Denver,
      Colorado,” Center for Reinventing Public Education, June 2014.

Wolf, P., Gutmann, B., Puma, M., Kisida, B., Rizzo, L., Eissa, N., & Carr, M. (2010).
      Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program: Final Report, NCEE 2010-
      4018, U.S. Department of Education, Institute for Education Sciences, National Center
      for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance (Washington, DC: U.S. Government
      Printing Office) http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104018/pdf/20104018.pdf

Wong, M.D., Coller, K.M., Dudovitz, R., Kennedy, D.P., Buddin, R., ...Chung, P.J. (2014).
      Successful Schools and Risky Behaviors Among Low-Income Adolescents. Journal of
      Pediatrics. Available at:
      http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/early/2014/07/16/peds.2013-3573.abstract.

Zimmer, R. & Buddin, R. (2007). Getting inside the Black Box: Examining How the Operation
     of Charter Schools Effects Performance. Peabody Journal of Education 82 (2–3): 231–
     73.

Zimmer, R. & Buddin, R. (2009). Is Charter School Competition in California Improving the
     Performance of Traditional Public Schools? Public Administration Review. 69(5): 831-
     845.

Zimmer, R., Buddin, R., Chau, D., Gill, B., Guarino, C., Hamilton, L.,…Brewer, D. (2003).
     Charter school operation and performance: Evidence from California. MR-1700. Santa
     Monica, CA: RAND.

Zimmer, R. Gill, B., Attridge, J., & Obenauf, K. (2014). Charter School Authorizers and Student
     Achievement. Education, Finance, and Policy. 9(1): 59-85.

Zimmer, R., Gill, B., Booker, K., Lavertu, S., Sass, T., & Witte, J. (2009). Charter Schools in
     Eight States: Effects on achievement, attainment, integration, and competition. MG-869.
     Pittsburgh: RAND.

Zimmer, R., Gill, B., Booker, K., Lavertu, S., & Witte, J. (2012). Examining charter school
     achievement in seven states. Economics of Education Review, 31(2), 213–224.

Zimmer, R., & Engberg, J. (2013). Can broad inferences be drawn from lottery analyses of
     school choice programs? An exploration of appropriate sensitivity analyses. NCSE
                                               86
       Working Paper #220 Accessed July 16, 2014 at:
       http://www.ncspe.org/publications_files/OP220.pdf

Zimmer, R. & Guarino, C. M. (2013). Is there empirical evidence that charter schools “push
     out” low-performing students? Educational Evaluation and Policy




                                              87
