                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LINKAGES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                        Dominick Bartelme
                                       Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                       Working Paper 21251
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w21251


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2015




We are grateful to Susanto Basu, Johannes Boehm, Barry Eichengreen, Chad Jones, Eric Johnson,
Pete Klenow, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley and the NBER Summer
Institute for comments. We thank Evan Plous, Johannes Wieland, and Yury Yatsynovich for excellent
research assistance. Gorodnichenko acknowledges financial support from the NSF, the Sloan Foundation,
the Center for Equitable Growth, and the UC-COR. Bartelme acknowledges financial support from
ISEEES at UC Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Dominick Bartelme and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Linkages and Economic Development
Dominick Bartelme and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 21251
June 2015
JEL No. C67,O11,O47

                                            ABSTRACT

Specialization is a powerful source of productivity gains, but how production networks at the industry
level are related to aggregate productivity in the data is an open question. We construct a database
of input-output tables covering a broad spectrum of countries and times, develop a theoretical framework
to derive an econometric specification, and document a strong and robust relationship between the
strength of industry linkages and aggregate productivity. We then calibrate a multisector neoclassical
model and use alternative identification assumptions to extract an industry-level measure of distortions
in intermediate input choices. We compute the aggregate losses from these distortions for each country
in our sample and find that they are quantitatively consistent with the relationship between industry
linkages and aggregate productivity in the data. Our estimates imply that the TFP gains from eliminating
these distortions are modest but significant, averaging roughly 10% for middle and low income countries.


Dominick Bartelme
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
bartelme@econ.berkeley.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction

A single Honda automobile is made of 20,000 to 30,000 parts produced by hundreds of different
plants and firms.1 The maverick vision of Henry Ford, whose dream of total self-sufficiency in
the production of automobiles was embodied in the massive River Rouge plant,2 proved to be
out of step with the course of economic history. Instead, the immense productivity gains of the
past several centuries have relied on an extensive division of labor across plants which trade
specialized inputs with one another in convoluted networks. Some key unanswered questions
are how and why these networks of plants and flows of intermediates vary across countries, and
how they are related to economic development.
        An early literature (e.g. Hirschman (1958)) reasoned these industry linkages were essential
for economic development and focused on how to promote the formation of robust input mar-
kets in poor countries and target investment to the industries with the strongest linkages. How-
ever, before the data and methods to test these ideas became available, one-sector models that
abstracted from intermediate goods altogether became the standard framework for studying
growth. Recent work by Ciccone (2002), Acemoglu et al. (2007), Jones (2011a) and others has
shown that distortions in input markets can in principle explain a large fraction of productiv-
ity differences between countries, but this literature has remained largely theoretical. We build
on these recent studies and analyze the empirical relationship between linkages and aggregate
productivity.
        In the first step, we develop a simple neoclassical framework in the spirit of Jones (2011a)
to link the observed input-output structure of the economy to technological constraints as well
as various distortions in input and output markets. These distortions diminish the gains from
using intermediate inputs, make linkages weaker, and reduce measured productivity and other
key indicators of development and welfare. We use the framework to derive an econometric
    1
    Source: http://world.honda.com/CSR/partner.
    2
    “Located a few miles south of Detroit at the confluence of the Rouge and Detroit Rivers, the original
Rouge complex was a mile-and-a-half wide and more than a mile long. The multiplex of 93 buildings
totaled 15,767,708 square feet of floor area crisscrossed by 120 miles of conveyors. There were ore docks,
steel furnaces, coke ovens, rolling mills, glass furnaces and plate-glass rollers. Buildings included a tire-
making plant, stamping plant, engine casting plant, frame and assembly plant, transmission plant, radia-
tor plant, tool and die plant, and, at one time, even a paper mill. A massive power plant produced enough
electricity to light a city the size of nearby Detroit, and a soybean conversion plant turned soybeans into
plastic auto parts. The Rouge had its own railroad with 100 miles of track and 16 locomotives. A sched-
uled bus network and 15 miles of paved roads kept everything and everyone on the move. . . . In 1992 the
only car still built at the Rouge, the Ford Mustang was about to be eliminated and assembly operations in
Dearborn Assembly terminated.” http://www.thehenryford.org/rouge.


                                                     2
specification and a summary measure of distortions based on input-output tables, as well as
pinpoint identification challenges and potential solutions to these challenges.
   A central ingredient of the framework is the input-output table. In a massive data effort, we
have constructed a novel database of input-output tables for 106 countries at different levels
of development (from Uganda to USA) and in different time periods (from 1950s to present).
For example, our database includes such rare gems as input-output tables for Peru in 1955,
Bangladesh in 1960 and Ghana in 1965. As we show in the paper, the broad time-series and
cross-sectional coverage is essential for identifying the systematic relationship between link-
ages and development. These input-output tables come from national statistical offices and
central banks, various international statistical agencies (e.g., OECD, Eurostat, United Nations),
and academic/commercial initiatives (e.g., Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP)).
   We show that the strength of linkages — measured as the average output multiplier (AOM)
from an input-output table — is strongly and positive related to measured output per worker
and total factor productivity. Linkages are quantitatively important: a one standard deviation
increase in AOM is associated with a 15% - 35% increase in output per worker depending on the
specification, most of which stems from gains in productivity rather than accumulated factors
of production. We subject this result to a battery of robustness checks. We consider additional
controls and subsamples, use methods robust to outliers, exploit the panel dimension of the
data, allow for nonlinear effects, and utilize alternative measures of linkages. Although there is
some variation in the estimated strength of the relationship, the qualitative and quantitative re-
sults largely survive these checks. As a part of this robustness analysis, we also shed new light on
why previous attempts to empirically relate linkages and productivity have been unsuccessful.
   While cross-country regressions are subject to doubts about omitted variables and measure-
ment issues, we can evaluate our findings using a calibrated version of our model and a more
structural approach to identifying distortions. We use the IO data and two different identifying
assumptions to extract industry-level distortions for each country, then compute the produc-
tivity gains associated with eliminating these distortions. We find that eliminating distortions
would result in gains of roughly 6-10% for the median country in the sample, rising to 13-20%
for countries at the 75th percentile and higher for a significant number of poor countries.
   These gains are broadly in line with the quantitative relationships we found in the country-
level regressions. When we regress the model-implied TFP on AOM, we estimate slope coeffi-
cients similar to those we found in the data. The results indicate that the data is both qualita-



                                                 3
tively and quantitatively consistent with the hypothesis that distortions in intermediate goods
account for a modest but tangible fraction of cross-country variation in productivity. This find-
ing challenges the view that intermediate goods linkages can be neglected when studying the
process of economic development. At the same time, our results do not support the view that
distortions in intermediate goods markets are the primary cause of low productivity in poor
countries.
      Our paper contributes to the reviving literature on intermediate goods linkages and eco-
nomic development. In growth theory the seminal work of Romer (1987, 1990) and Grossman
and Helpman (1992) formalized the idea that the division of labor, modeled as an increasing
variety of intermediate products, could generate sustained economic growth. More recently,
Acemoglu et al. (2007) study how contractual incompleteness affects the range of intermediate
inputs used in production and consequently an economy’s overall productivity. They show that
a greater level of contractual incompleteness reduces the number of intermediate inputs used
in production, with greater reductions when intermediate inputs are more complementary in
production. Jones (2011a) shows how distortions that act like taxes on final output reduce in-
termediate usage and how relatively modest distortions might reduce TFP substantially through
this channel.3 Our paper focuses on quantifying the effects of the frictions identified by Ace-
moglu et al. (2007) and Jones (2011a) empirically in a general macroeconomic framework. To
the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first broad cross-country study of intermediate link-
ages and development since Chenery et al. (1986).
      Our paper is also related to the large literature on the fragmentation of production and the
boundaries of the firm, much of which has been written in the context of international trade.4
Grossman and Helpman (2002) analyze the firm’s decision to vertically integrate production in
a general equilibrium model with many industries in a search and matching model with spe-
cialized intermediate suppliers. Their model features multiple equilibria with different industry
structures evolving in ex ante identical countries due to the negative externality that a firm’s
decision to vertically integrate exerts by thinning the market for intermediate inputs. Costinot
(2007), Nunn (2007) and Levchenko (2007) show that differences in contractual institutions are a
source of comparative advantage: countries with poor institutions are net importers of contract-
intensive products. Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) find that access to imported intermedi-

  3
     For a recent theoretical contribution analyzing the endogenous formation of an input network and
aggregate productivity, see Oberfield (2013).
   4
     For a review see Antràs and Rossi-Hansberg (2009)


                                                 4
ate inputs improved productivity following India’s trade liberalization. Boehm (2013) uses a
structural model of interindustry trade and a novel measure of contract enforcement costs by
industry-pair to estimate the gains from eliminating these costs for a large number of countries,
and finds them to be substantial. Acemoglu et al. (2009) study the relationship between con-
tract enforcement, financial development and vertical integration and find that high contracting
costs and high financial development are associated with high degrees of vertical integration. In
comparison to this literature our paper takes a broader view of the distortions that can affect
trade across establishments as well as firms within countries and focuses on how these distor-
tions affect aggregate productivity in a general macroeconomic framework.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the literature on development accounting inaugurated by
Hall and Jones (1999) and reviewed by Caselli (2005) and Hsieh and Klenow (2010). This litera-
ture typically finds that differences in TFP account for a large fraction of differences in output
per worker across countries. A source of these TFP differences can be microeconomic distor-
tions that induce misallocation of resources across firms and sectors (Restuccia and Rogerson,
2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Restuccia et al. (2008), Vollrath (2009) and Gollin et al. (2012) find
that productivity in developing countries is much lower in agriculture than in non-agriculture,
consistent with productive factors (including intermediate inputs to agriculture) being signifi-
cantly misallocated across sectors. Our paper studies the misallocation of intermediate inputs
empirically. More broadly, our paper is also related to the literature on economic growth and
structural change (Imbs and Wacziarg, 2003; Duarte and Restuccia, 2010; Hausmann and Hi-
dalgo, 2011; Buera et al., 2011). Rather than study how the composition of output changes over
the course of development as in most of the literature, we study how the composition and struc-
ture of inputs changes as economies develop. The evolution of intermediate linkages over the
course of development appears to be a neglected aspect of structural change that also promises
to shed light on international differences in productivity.


2   Theory

Input-output (IO) tables measure the flow of intermediate products used in production between
different plants or establishments, both within and between sectors. The ijth entry of the IO
table D is the value of output from establishments in industry i that is purchased by different
establishments in industry j for use in production. The iith entry is similarly defined as the value
of industry i’ output that is purchased by different establishments within industry i and used in

                                                 5
production by industry i. Intermediate output must be traded between establishments in order
to be recorded in D. For example, if one plant produces tires and ships them to a different plant
that produces finished autos, the value of the tires would be recorded in D. If instead the same
plant produced both tires and finished autos, the value of the tires would not be recorded in
D. Even though total value added is the same in both cases, the recorded flows of intermediate
inputs are different.5
       If we divide each column j of D by the gross output in industry j we obtain the technical
matrix B, which provides a summary of the linkages between different production units in the
economy. Larger entries in B indicate a greater amount of input trade between plants. In this
sense B measures the fragmentation of the production chain across different locations, or the
level of specialization across plants in the economy, for a given production process.
       There are a least two channels through which the IO structure of the economy could be re-
lated to economic development. One channel, identified by Jones (2011a,b), is through a distor-
tion that acts like taxes on firms’ final output. These could be not only sales or other formal taxes
on output but also a wide range of other mechanisms such as theft, bribery, regulations, or other
types of expropriation that reduce the value the firm receives from producing a given level of
output. Jones (2011a) shows that these types of distortions are amplified by intermediate goods
linkages between firms and result in reduced intermediate usage and lower aggregate TFP.
       A second connection is through distortions that specifically affect the ability of production
units to reliably source inputs from other production units in different locations and under dif-
ferent ownership. Hirschman (1958) and other early development theorists focused on this pos-
sibility, arguing that modern industry requires a network of mutually dependent suppliers in a
variety of different sectors and that coordination failures could prevent the emergence of such
a network. In addition to coordination failures, poor transportation and communication net-
works could impede the spatial fragmentation of production by increasing transportation and
monitoring costs. As emphasized by the property rights approach to the boundaries of the firm,
poor contract enforcement and other aspects of institutional environments that make transact-

   5
    In theory, the ownership structure of the economy is irrelevant to whether transactions are counted as
intermediate flows. Shipments between plants that are owned or controlled by the same organization are
supposed to be recorded in the same manner as shipments between plants under different ownership. In
practice, however, there is likely to be a strong correlation between measured flows across establishments
and actual flows across firms for two reasons. First, most firms operate single establishments, so trans-
actions across establishments are likely to be transactions between firms as well. Second, non-market
transactions between establishments in the same firm are probably less likely to be recorded than market
transactions between firms.


                                                    6
ing across firms difficult and expensive provide incentives to keep the production chain within
the firm. These factors increase the range of tasks performed in an individual plant, which re-
duces both the size of the IO coefficients and the productivity gains from specialization across
plants. High cost or unavailability of credit could also prevent the optimal use of intermediate
goods. We model these two channel as an implicit tax on intermediate inputs.6


2.1     Basic Framework

We can use a simple model to illustrate how these forces affect the entries in the IO table. Sup-
pose the representative firm in sector j hires labor, rents capital and purchases intermediate
inputs to produce its output using the production function

                                                         1−σj Yn
                                                                    σ
                                     Yj = Kjα (Aj Lj )1−α      ·   Xijij                                  (1)
                                                                        i=1
                                                                                               Pn
where the Xij are the intermediate goods from sector i used by sector j and σj =                  i=1 σij ,   K
is capital, L is labor, and A is the labor augmenting technology level. The firm sells its output
to both other firms and consumers on a competitive market. However, the firm faces a “tax”
of τjY percent on each unit of output it produces. It also faces a tax τijX on each unit of inputs
that it purchases from sector i. As in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), τ X and τ Y represent the effect
of a host of complex microeconomic distortions that could affect input and output markets.7 In
the context of our discussion above, τ Y captures the first connection between IO structure and
economic development and τ X captures the second connection.
       The firm’s maximization problem is

                                                                       n
                                                                       X
                         max         (1 −   τjY )Pj Yj   − wLj − rKj −   (1 + τijX )Pi Xij                (2)
                       Kj ,Lj ,Xij
                                                                         i=1


The firm’s first order condition with respect to Xij can be rearranged to yield the ijth entry of the
   6
      These two channels do not exhaust the list of possibilities. For example, input-output structure and
economic development could be connected via the adoption of different production technologies or
products which are more or less intermediate intensive. The direction of this effect on the IO coeffi-
cients is ambiguous. On the one hand, new technologies or products may be more complex in the sense
of requiring a larger range of specialized inputs, increasing the average size of the IO coefficients. On the
other hand, new technologies are likely to economize on expensive primary inputs such as electricity, fuel
and raw materials by increasing efficiency and substituting less expensive materials.
    7
      This specification of intersectoral trade costs is akin to the iceberg trade costs commonly used in
models of international trade and economic geography. More explicit but stylized models of input mar-
kets and linkages can be found in Acemoglu et al. (2007), Boehm (2013) and Oberfield (2013).


                                                             7
(observed) IO matrix B = {bij }
                                                    Pi Xij   σij
                                            bij ≡          =                                         (3)
                                                    Pj Yj    tij
                   X
               1+τij
where tij ≡    1−τjY
                     .   Distortions that act as taxes on revenue or intermediate input usage reduce
the size of the input-output coefficient.8 This makes statistics based on the IO entries poten-
tially powerful indicators of the presence of distortions in the economy. However, we cannot
distinguish between these two types of distortions based on the entries of B because they have
the same effect on the IO coefficient. Furthermore, without additional information we cannot
separate the technological factor share σij from the distortion, even in the special case of the
Cobb-Douglas production function. We will return to this point below, but first we examine how
distortions affect productivity.



2.2     Distortions and Productivity

First consider an economy with only one sector and hence only one intermediate input. Substi-
tuting the firm’s first order condition back into the production function, solving for output and
subtracting intermediate inputs gives an expression for value added or net output,
                                                        σ  σ     σ
                                                                        
                                                             1−σ
                             V A = Y − X = K α L1−α A1−α          1−                                 (4)
                                                          t          t
                                                   |         {z         }
                                                                   TFP


where the term in brackets is measured TFP under conventional development accounting tech-
niques that ignore intermediate goods. Measured TFP has an additional component due to in-
termediate goods and the distortions, and both types of distortions have identical effects. TFP
is maximized when t = 1.9 Notice that taxes need not be zero to achieve this maximum be-
cause exactly offsetting sales and intermediate taxes will result in no change in TFP. In the long
run distortions have an additional effect on output per worker through their effect on capital
accumulation.
       In a multisector generalization of this model with Cobb-Douglas production functions and
preferences and competitive input and output markets, Jones (2011b) shows that the aggregate

   8
     This conclusion holds more generally (e.g. for CES production functions). See Appendix A for the CES
formulas.
   9
     See Appendix A and Jones (2011b) for derivations and more details.


                                                      8
(value-added) production function is Cobb-Douglas and that TFP can be written as


                                       T F P = A · (T, B∗ , γ, α, η)                                   (5)


where A is an aggregate technology term, T is a matrix of sectoral distortions, B∗ is the matrix
of undistorted intermediate shares σij (that is, B∗ = {b∗ij } = {σij }), γ is a vector of value-added
shares, α is a vector of sectoral capital exponents and η is a vector of idiosyncratic sectoral pro-
ductivities. As in the one-sector case, measured TFP is log separable in an aggregate technology
term A and a term involving distortions, .10
       There are three additional implications of this model that we want to highlight here. First,
the impact of distortions on productivity is highly non-linear: distortions become increasingly
costly as t moves farther from 1. Second, the productivity losses from distortions are bigger when
the intermediate shares σij are larger. Third, in the multisector model increased variability of
distortions also negatively affects productivity, which is a direct consequence of the non-linear
effect of distortions on productivity.



2.3     Identification

The theory above gives simple and clear predictions for how distortions affect productivity, but
testing the theory and quantifying the presence and impact of these distortions in the data is
challenging for several reasons. One concern is that the simple linkage between distortions
and the IO coefficients in equation (3) relies on the assumptions of Cobb-Douglas technology
and competitive input markets. For example, if the elasticity of substitution between factors of
production is different than one, relative prices (which we do not observe) will also enter into
the expression for the IO coefficient. Models with a low elasticity of substitution (Jones, 2011a)
can also generate large productivity losses from relatively modest distortions, in contrast to the
Cobb-Douglas model in which the losses are smaller for the same level of distortions.11 The

  10
     See Appendix A for the exact expression for .
  11
     Jones (2011a) studies a model in which the elasticity of substitution between the aggregate interme-
diate good and the other factors of production is equal to 1, but intermediate varieties combine with
non-unit elasticity of substitution. In this model, a lower elasticity of substitution magnifies the output
losses from distortions. In Appendix A we show that a lower elasticity of substitution between the ag-
gregate intermediate and the other factors of production also tends to magnify the impact of distortions
for reasonable values of the elasticity. However, for very low elasticities of substitution the sign of this
relationship is reversed. In the limit of a Leontieff aggregate production technology, moderate distortions
cause no output losses. We thank Susanto Basu for making this last point to us.


                                                     9
exact relationship between the size of frictions, the observed IO coefficients and the impact on
productivity depend on the details of the model. However, alternative models (e.g. Grossman
and Helpman 2002; Acemoglu et al. 2007; Jones 2011a; Boehm 2013) yield similar qualitative
predictions in the sense that higher distortions lead to lower observed intermediate shares.
       The other important concern is that the technological factor shares σij may vary across coun-
tries, so we might have trouble distinguishing between cross-country differences in distortions
and differences in technology when only the matrix B is observed. Variation in σij may come
from differences in product mix within industries across countries or from differences in the dis-
tribution of available ideas that generate the sectoral production technology (as in Jones (2005)).
In these cases, the same underlying forces that generate the distortions (e.g. cost of contract en-
forcement) might be correlated with factors that influence the available technology as well. In
addition, variables that determine A can also affect distortions t and vice versa. As a result, the
conceptual distinction between “technology” and “distortions” can be somewhat blurry in prac-
tice.12
       In light of these constraints, our goal in this paper is modest: to explore the extent to which
the data is consistent with both the qualitative and quantitative implications of our theory. To
this end, we first measure the strength of the relationship between a measure of IO linkages and
productivity in the data. We then employ different assumptions to identify the distortions for
each country and compute their productivity impacts using the model. Finally, we compare the
relationships generating by the model (in our sample) to the same relationships in the data.
       Our first approach is to run regressions based on the logarithm of productivity in equation
(5), of the form
                       yct = constant + κ · AOMct + ψ · CON T ROLSct + errorc                         (6)

where c and t index countries and time, y is a measure of productivity (output per worker, TFP,
etc.), AOMc is a measure of IO linkages that depends on both technology and distortions, and the
controls are variables that may be correlated with both output per worker and either technology


  12
    Recent work by Fadinger et al. (2015) identifies distortions with measured tax rates in a smaller sam-
ple from the World Input Output Database (WIOD). Using a number of simplifying assumptions, they
structurally estimate the relationship between measured taxes rates, IO structure and productivity in a
neoclassical framework similar to ours. They find that the model with input-output structure has sub-
stantial additional predictive power for income per capita out of sample, and that imposing U.S. levels of
tax rates on poor countries results in output gains of a few percent. Our paper finds significantly larger
gains from eliminating distortions because our methods account for unreported or implicit distortions
as well.


                                                   10
or distortions. AOM is the “Average Output Multiplier,” defined as

                                                    1 T
                                         AOM =        ι (I − B)−1 ι                                        (7)
                                                    N

where ι is a vector of ones and N is the number of sectors. The matrix L = (I − B)−1 is the
Leontief inverse of the input-output matrix, which in an undistorted world would measure the
elasticity of output in sector j with respect to productivity in sector i as its ijth entry, taking both
direct and indirect effects into account. The AOM is then the elasticity of gross output with
respect to a change in aggregate productivity.
       AOM has a number of attractive features as a summary measure of linkages and distor-
tions.13 For example, it is increasing in σij and decreasing in tij . It is sensitive to the position
of coefficients in the IO matrix as well as their magnitude because it takes both direct and in-
direct effects on output into account. Distortions in sectors that are highly connected to others
reduce AOM more than the same distortion in a sparsely connected industry, which has intu-
itive appeal as well as precise foundations in our model. Because we do not observe B∗ and
instead have to use B to calculate AOM , κ in equation (6) is not a structural parameter measur-
ing the impact of distortions. Despite this limitation, we view the regression (6) as a valuable tool
to summarize the empirical relationships that can be used as inputs for the theoretical model.14
       We pursue a more structural approach in our second exercise. Specifically, we model the
technology σij directly in order to extract the distortions tij and compute the model-based pro-
ductivity gains of eliminating distortions for each country. Our first identification strategy is the
common assumption that the U.S. IO matrix represents the undistorted technology and com-
puting distortions for each country as the deviations from the U.S. shares. Our second strategy

  13
      One potential drawback of using AOM is that it does not take the size of the sector into account. A
gross output weighted version of AOM known as the weighted average output multiplier (W AOM ) can
be shown to be equal to the inverse of the share of intermediate inputs, which was suggested by Jones
(2011b) as a measure of distortions. However, this and other weighted measures mix information on what
is produced with how it is produced, which will bias the estimates if sectoral output is correlated with
economic development. For example, the correlation between output per worker and the share of output
in the service sector is 0.62 in our data, but services tend to be naturally less intermediate-intensive with a
mean intermediate share of 0.32 vs. 0.5 for manufacturing and 0.36 for the primary sector. Countries that
produce relatively more services will have a lower W AOM even if they use exactly the same production
techniques as countries that produce more agricultural and manufacturing output, biasing κ downward.
Consequently we use AOM in our main specifications and W AOM as a robustness check.
   14
      While AOM is a natural summary measure of linkages, in principle there are many other measures
that might be used. Some of these other measures may well more or less correlated with productivity than
AOM , depending on the specification. Using alternative measure, however, yield qualitatively similar
results.


                                                     11
postulates that technology can vary with country and sector characteristics and we can use the
variation in IO tables among rich countries to predict the undistorted IO coefficients for middle-
and low-income countries. We then use the estimated model to predict the technology for poor
countries and compute the resulting distortions. We feed the distortions along with the other
country parameters into the model to compute the productivity gains of eliminating distortions
in different sectors.
         In a final step we compare the model output to the data in two ways. First, we regress the
TFP generated by the model on actual AOM and compare the estimated coefficient to the one
we find using TFP computed from the data. Second, we regress TFP in the data on the model-
generated  (calculated as in equation (5)) and compare the coefficient to the theoretical predic-
tion of 1. While each of our strategies to identify the impact of distortions on productivity has
limitations, consistent results across the various approaches provides some credibility to our
interpretation of the data.


3    Data

In our empirical work we utilize an extensive, newly assembled cross-country dataset of IO ta-
bles with coverage from the 1950s to 2005. The tables are from a wide variety of sources, from
large electronic collections such as the OECD to hard copies of old reports from national statis-
tics offices. Below we describe the data in greater detail and discuss some of their limitations
and how we handle them.
         Our richest cross-section of IO tables comes from the Global Trade and Analysis 7 (GTAP7)
project, which collected consistently defined IO tables, sectoral value added and factor shares,
and sector-level trade data for a number of wealthy and developing countries in the year 2004.
The tables divide the economy into 56 sectors, of which 14 are agricultural, 3 mining, 25 man-
ufacturing, 4 utilities and construction, and 10 services.15 . The detail on agricultural inputs is
especially welcome because while many IO tables aggregate agriculture into a single sector, a
large share of output is agricultural in many developing countries. However, the bulk of the
sectors are in manufacturing and services, which are broadly the sectors in which we would ex-
pect the largest gains from specialization. Table 11 in Appendix B shows the countries from the
GTAP7 database that we include in our sample along with their values for AOM and output per

    15
    We omit the 57th sector which is imputed rent from owner-occupied housing. A list of the sectors and
their 3-digit abbreviations can be found in Table 13 in Appendix B


                                                  12
worker in 2004.16
       GTAP7’s IO tables are built from country-level IO tables submitted by specialists in the coun-
try concerned. They subject each submission to consistency checks and ensure that the tables
are “reasonable” in the sense that large deviations from standard tables can be justified. Not all
submitted tables have 56 sectors; in roughly half the cases the country-level data does not sup-
port the exact level of disaggregation that GTAP7 requires. GTAP7 disaggregates the agricultural
sector by using a separate country-specific agricultural IO table constructed using data from the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and other sources and merging this table with the user-
supplied table. For other sectors that require disaggregation, GTAP7 bases the disaggregation on
a “representative” table that is averaged from the tables that do have full information. This pro-
cedure could introduce some systematic measurement error, because poor countries may be
less likely to have as much sectoral detail as rich countries. However, this error would tend to
make the IO structure between rich and poor countries more similar, making it less likely that
we would find a relationship between aggregate productivity and IO structure.17 The resulting
collection of IO tables is consistently defined by construction and of relatively high quality.
       In addition to the GTAP7 cross-section, we also assembled a novel panel of IO tables using a
wide variety of sources including GTAP, the OECD, Eurostat, the UN and individual country sta-
tistical offices. Non-electronic sources were entered and checked for accuracy and consistency,
and some tables were discarded because of apparent errors in the original sources. The panel is
unbalanced and skewed towards Western Europe and its offshoots, especially in the early years.
Nevertheless developing countries have significant representation for most time periods, and
early Western observations include countries like Italy, Spain, Greece and Portugal which were
significantly poorer than the leading Western economies at the time.
       The tables in the panel are highly heterogeneous in the quality of their data collection and
the number of sectors covered, as well as their definition of what falls under each sector. Calcu-
lations of AOM based on these tables are not comparable because less aggregated tables tend
to produce larger values of AOM even if the underlying IO structure is the same. Since richer

  16
      We eliminated Myanmar, Bulgaria and Nigeria from the sample due to large apparent errors in their
IO tables. We also excluded Botswana and Zimbabwe from the GTAP7 sample. Botswana has an excep-
tionally low value of AOM for its income level due to its heavy reliance on the diamond industry. Zim-
babwe has a very low level of income due to the recent deterioration of its economic environment and
a medium value of AOM . Both are large outliers whose effect in the regressions tends to cancel, leaving
coefficient estimates roughly roughly the same but inflating standard errors. Our main results remain
statistically significant if we include these countries.
   17
      See the GTAP7 website at for detailed documentation of the construction.


                                                  13
countries tend to have more detailed tables available, this would tend to bias our estimates up-
ward. To ensure comparability, for the panel analysis we aggregated the IO tables into 4 broad
sectors: agriculture, manufacturing, services and “other” (which includes mining, utilities and
construction) before computing the linkage measures.18 We also discard observations which
are missing major sectors (e.g. mining, services) or have an inconsistent treatment of trade and
transportation margins.19 Table 12 in Appendix B identifies each table, its source, whether or
not it is included in the sample and the reason for omission if applicable.
         The structure of production in an economy evolves slowly, and year-on-year fluctuations in a
country’s IO table are likely to reflect measurement error (in part due to changes in sources) and
transitory factors rather than the institutional and structural changes we are trying to capture.
To address this problem we divide time into five year intervals (1960-64, 1965-69, and so on)
and average observations within these intervals. In a few cases we found that tables for the
same country and time period from different sources disagreed wildly, in which case we simply
dropped those observations. We also drop observations for which AOM changes by more than
20% over a 5 year interval.20 Table 1 shows the number of observations available for each 5 year
interval and region of the world. The long duration of our data also helps separate the noise
from the changes in fundamentals that we are interested in.
         We use national accounts data from the Penn World Tables (PWT) 7.0 as well as other stan-
dard sources of cross country data on geography, institutions and technology adoption. The text
accompanying the tables describes the variables and sources when they are used.


4     Empirics

4.1       Descriptive Statistics and Correlations

We begin our empirical investigation of the IO data by studying industry-level linkages and
their correlation with productivity at various levels of aggregation. We analyze the GTAP7 cross-
section, which permits more detailed disaggregation, then turn to the panel data.
    18
     To aggregate the IO table to x by x, we simply sum the elements of the flow matrix D in each broad
category, i.e. agriculture to agriculture, agriculture to manufacturing, etc. Formally, let C be the x by 56
matrix with C(1, i) = 1 if i is an agricultural sector and 0 otherwise, C(2, i) = 1 if i is a manufacturing
sector and 0 otherwise, and so on. The new x by x aggregated matrix is Dx = CDCT .
  19
     Standard practice is to treat trade and transportation as sectors with their own row and column in the
IO table. A number of earlier tables pulled these sectors out and simply reported their total gross output.
This earlier practice does not allow us to recover IO tables necessary to calculate AOM .
  20
     Our estimates are robust alternative treatments of these observations.


                                                    14
   We aggregate each country’s IO matrix from 56 to 3 industries and study the individual link-
ages between broad sectors of the economy. The industries are primary (agriculture, mining,
utilities, construction), manufacturing (secondary), and services (tertiary). Panel A of Table 2
shows the means and standard deviations of each aggregated coefficient, with columns indicat-
ing the sector using the input and rows the producing sector. The diagonal entries tend to be
the largest, a pattern that is also evident in the disaggregated data. Manufacturing and services
supply a lot of inputs to all sectors, while primary inputs form a somewhat smaller proportion of
the inputs for other sectors. Services and manufacturing also have strong linkages with one an-
other; an economy composed of just services and manufacturing would have stronger linkages
than any other sector pair. There is considerable variation across countries in all coefficients,
especially in those involving the primary sector.
   Panel B of Table 2 presents the correlation of each aggregated coefficient with aggregate log
output per worker in 2004 (RGDP W OK from the PWT 7.0, henceforth y). Usage of primary
inputs in manufacturing and services tends to be strongly negatively correlated with y. Manu-
facturing and service inputs are generally positively correlated with y, with the diagonal entries
as well as agriculture’s use of these inputs being especially highly correlated.
   These sectoral patterns largely hold at a more disaggregated level as well. Panel A of Figure
1 plots the correlation of y with each industry’s diagonal coefficient, while Panel B plots the cor-
relation with the column mean of the off-diagonal elements. The correlation with the diagonal
elements is low negative for most agriculture and utilities, and highly positive for most services.
Manufacturing displays the most heterogeneity, with simpler products such as vegetable oils
and fats (VOL), beverage and tobacco products (B T), leather and textiles exhibiting low corre-
lations and the bulk of more complex products like machinery (OME), metal products (FMP),
electronic equipment (ELE) and petroleum and coal products (P C) exhibiting higher correla-
tions. Correlations with off-diagonal backward linkages are high for agriculture, low negative for
manufacturing and mixed but on average positive for services. The results for manufacturing
and services reflect the strong negative relationship between the use of primary inputs and y.
   The total correlation of backward linkages with y depends on the relative magnitudes of the
diagonal and off-diagonal elements and their correlation with one another as well as their pair-
wise correlations with y. Panel C of Figure 1 shows the correlation of the column mean, this
time including diagonal elements, with y. The high positive correlations for agricultural indus-
tries show that off-diagonal elements dominate, while the high positive correlations for services



                                                15
reflect that on and off-diagonal elements largely reinforce one another. Manufacturing overall
exhibits low (but positive) correlations, with diagonal and off-diagonal elements roughly can-
celling in effect. Panel D plots results for the row means for each industry (including diagonal
elements), a measure of forward linkages. They confirm the results from Table 2 that usage of pri-
mary inputs is negatively correlated with productivity, while manufacturing and service inputs
are positively correlated. For manufacturing we once again have a generally positive relationship
between the correlation and the complexity of the product.
   Rich countries use more inputs from the manufacturing and service sectors, especially from
plants within their own industry. This implies that rich countries exhibit greater specialization
at the plant level within these industries. This is consistent with the view that manufacturing
and service inputs are more complex and more subject to contract disputes that rely on good
contract enforcement mechanisms, and that rich countries have better contract enforcement
mechanisms. It is also consistent with the view that advanced technologies in services and
manufacturing require more specialized inputs from their own broad industry categories and
less primary inputs.
   We turn next to the panel data, which are aggregated in the same way as in the cross-section.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the means and standard deviations of each aggregated coefficient, while
Panel B shows the correlation of each coefficient with y. Sample characteristics are similar to the
GTAP7 data, with the main difference being somewhat lower backward linkages for manufac-
turing in the panel. The correlations with y are remarkably similar across the two datasets, with
the main difference being slightly higher correlations with manufacturing linkages and slightly
lower with service linkages in the panel data.
   We can also ask which IO coefficients are correlated with growth over time. Panel C of Table 3
shows the correlation between the residuals from regressing log output per worker and each IO
coefficient on country dummies. Increases in agricultural inputs are negatively correlated while
increases in service inputs are strongly positively correlated with output growth. Growth in man-
ufacturing inputs to manufacturing are somewhat negatively correlated with output growth,
which could reflect the impact of factor-saving innovation. The panel and cross-section do not
paint exactly the same picture, but as we discuss in more detail in Section 4.2.2, strong relation-
ships in the cross-section are consistent with the opposite or no relationship over time. However,
both the cross-section and the panel suggest a strong dichotomy between the relationship of y
with primary and secondary inputs. We might expect different results from specifications that



                                                 16
include primary linkages from those that exclude them.


4.2     Regression analysis

While the results for the individual industries are suggestive, they do not take into account the
correlations between the coefficients or the impact of indirect linkages between industries. Cor-
relations and simple regressions also do not consider other factors that influence y and may be
correlated with the strength of IO linkages. In this section we tackle these issues by using AOM
calculated at the country level as our dependent variable to account for all direct and indirect
linkages and by controlling for institutions, technology adoption and other determinants of ag-
gregate productivity. We use the disaggregated 56 sector tables from GTAP7 to calculate AOM in
the cross-section and aggregated 4 sector tables (agriculture, mining + utilities, manufacturing
and services) to calculate AOM in the panel analysis. In the following section we will compare
these estimates to those obtained from the model using different assumptions to identify distor-
tions.


4.2.1     Cross-section

The top panel of Figure 2 is a scatterplot of log output per worker y against AOM with a regres-
sion line drawn through it. There is a strong positive unconditional relationship between AOM
and y, although there is significant variation in productivity for each value of the multiplier. The
bottom panel of the figure shows that this relationship is present and somewhat tighter when we
focus on manufacturing and service linkages only. To separate the relationship between y and
AOM from potentially confounding factors, we run a series of regressions given by specification
(6).
       The first column of Table 4 confirms that the unconditional relationship evident in Figure 2
is strong and statistically significant at the 1% level. A standard deviation increase in AOM is
associated with a roughly 35% increase in output per worker. This is a substantial effect but it
could overestimate the impact of distortions on productivity due to omitted variables.
       The quality of institutions is an important omitted variable because it is likely to be highly
correlated with both output per worker and distortions that affect trade across firms and plants.
Column 2 of Table 4 adds the average value over 1996-2008 of the Rule of Law index from Kauf-
mann et al. (2009) as a measure of the quality of institutions. This measure has the most com-
prehensive coverage of the available institutional variables and it is the most relevant for our

                                                  17
purposes because it specifically includes contract enforcement. As expected, the inclusion of
this variable reduces the estimated magnitude of κ, but it remains sizeable and highly statisti-
cally significant. It also dramatically increases the fit of the regression as measured by the R2 .
   Geography may affect output per worker directly through the disease environment (Sachs,
2003) and indirectly through its correlation with colonial experience, historical state formation
and other variables (Acemoglu et al., 2001). In column 3 we include distance from the equator as
                                                                                Imports+Exports
a proxy for these factors. In column 4 we control for openness to trade using        GDP          from
the PWT, which corresponds to the notion of “real openness” in Alcalá and Ciccone (2004). This
variable is important for both its potential direct effect on productivity as well as the theoretical
importance of the size of the market in determining the degree of specialization. The estimated
coefficient κ is similar in magnitude and statistical significance to the previous specification
controlling for institutions alone.
   A careful examination of Figure 2 reveals that many of the countries with the highest values
of AOM are current or former centrally planned economies. This raises the interesting possibil-
ity that centrally planned economies may subsidize or otherwise encourage domestic sourcing
of intermediate goods, perhaps through attempts to keep entire supply chains domestic or to
equalize regional incomes by dictating the location of plants in underdeveloped areas. However,
the resulting increase in plant-level specialization may not be associated with the typical pro-
ductivity gains. More generally, heavy government involvement in the economy may increase
inefficiency. To control for this possibility we include the share of government consumption in
output from the P W T as well as a dummy variable indicating whether a country has a history of
central planning in column 5. As expected, the estimated κ increases somewhat.
   Controlling for the quality of transportation and communication infrastructure and the level
of technology will help distinguish the direct impact of these variables from their indirect im-
pact on specialization. The index of technology adoption constructed by Comin et al. (2008)
measures the intensive margin of adoption for various major technologies such as motor vehi-
cles, telephones, personal computers and the internet. Because it measures the penetration of
each technology at different points in time (e.g. telephones in 1970, PCs in 2002) it is a mea-
sure of average technology adoption over the last 40 or so years. Most of the technologies are
transportation and communication technologies, and so the index also serves as an index of the
average quality of transportation and communication infrastructure. The drawback is that it




                                                 18
covers only a subset of countries in our sample.21 Column 6 shows the results when the tech-
nology adoption and infrastructure index is included. As expected, the estimated κ is somewhat
lower than previous specifications but still sizable and quantitatively significant.
       The inclusion of controls roughly halves the estimated κ from the simple regression in col-
umn 1. The lowest estimate implies that a standard deviation increase in AOM is associated
with a roughly 15% increase in output per worker. This reduction in magnitude is in line with
our priors regarding the correlation between distortions that affect input-output relationships
and other determinants of output per worker. However, the magnitude of the coefficient remains
sizable. We subject these results to a battery of robustness checks in Section 4.3.
       To ensure that our results are not driven by primary sector linkages, we construct an alter-
native measure of linkages which includes only manufacturing and services, AOM − M S. This
alternative measure has the same interpretation as AOM for the whole economy but instead
it treats the economy as consisting of only a subset of industries, illustrating the convenience
of using the average output multiplier as a measure of linkages in the economy. Columns (7)-
(12) of Table 4 show that using this alternative measure yields very similar results and hence our
findings are not driven by the relative importance of the primary sector across countries.
       Theory also predicts that barriers to specialization have a direct impact on T F P , with the
standard indirect effects of changes in T F P on human and physical capital accumulation. To
test this hypothesis, we follow Hall and Jones (1999) and decompose output per worker in the
year 2005 as
                                                            α
                                                     K       1−α
                                            y=                     hA                                (8)
                                                     Y
where h is human capital per worker and A is TFP. We use the perpetual inventory method to
construct physical capital stocks and the data from Barro and Lee (2012) on year of schooling
for the population age 25 and over to construct the stock of human capital, using the same func-
tional form and parameters as Hall and Jones (1999) to convert years of schooling into the hu-
man capital stock. We then repeat the regression in column 6 of Table 4 using the logs of the
capital to output ratio (multiplied by α/(1 − α), where we take α = 0.33), human capital per
worker and TFP as the dependent variables.
       Table 5 shows the results of this exercise. The log of the capital-output ratio is positively but


  21
    There is no obvious pattern to the missing observations that would bias the result in one direction
or another. The results from the specifications without technology adoption are similar if one excludes
observations for which the technology adoption variable is missing.


                                                     19
not strongly related to AOM . Human capital is more robustly related to AOM , but the bulk of
the relationship between AOM and output per worker is accounted for by TFP. The pattern is
similar when we use AOM − M S instead of AOM . These findings are consistent with the pre-
diction that the direct impact of distortions is on TFP. The full eventual impact of distortions on
capital accumulation will not be evident until the transition to the new steady state is complete.
This is especially unlikely to be true in our data, which is taken from period of fundamental
transformation in transportation and communications technology as well as rapid institutional
change.



4.2.2   Panel

The results from Panel C of Table 3 suggest that the historical relationship between growth in
linkages and productivity may be different than in the cross-section. Theory does not unam-
biguously predict that growth is accompanied by an increase in specialization; a strong positive
level effect is consistent with a weak or non-existent growth effect if growth takes place due to
technological change rather than diminishing barriers to specialization. A positive level effect
could even be consistent with a negative growth effect if new production technologies tend to
economize on the use of raw materials as intermediates. Thus a panel fixed effects regression is a
test of the joint hypothesis that a) distortions are important determinants of output per worker,
and b) reductions in distortions have been a quantitatively significant driver of economic growth
in the past several decades. This hypothesis is not implausible given advances in transportation
and communication technologies and the significant institutional changes in many countries
over the last 50 years.
   In the first pass at the data, we estimate our baseline specification using the panel data with-
out country fixed effects (Column 1, Table 6). In this exercise, we combine time-series and cross-
sectional variation in productivity and linkages. We use Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard er-
rors to allow for general forms of both cross-sectional and time-series dependence of the error
term. While AOM is now calculated using 4 × 4 IO matrices (to ensure comparability across
countries and times), we continue to find point estimates of κ similar to those those based only
on the cross-sectional variation and IO tables from GTAP. Since we have many more observa-
tions, the coefficient is estimated more precisely. Therefore, both datasets yield similar results
and we can be reasonably confident that any differences in estimates with country fixed effects
do not arise from using alternative data.

                                                20
       With country fixed effects (column 2), the estimated κ when AOM is the only regressor is
somewhat smaller than its cross-sectional counterpart in Table 4 but is sizeable and statistically
significant. Some of the decrease in the size of the estimate may be due to increased noise to
signal ratio typical in panel data with fixed effects included (Griliches and Hausman (1986)).
Column 3 includes those controls from Table 4 which vary over time,22 again finding similar
results as in the cross-section.
       Column 4 includes decade fixed effects in addition to the controls from Column 2. While
this attenuates the threat of spurious regression from common trends, it also means that we will
fail to detect the impact of global trends in the reduction of barriers to specialization. The point
estimate is reduced but it continues to be statistically and economically significant. Based on
the results from the individual coefficient regressions in Panel B of Table 3, we conjecture that
this result is largely due to the strong negative correlation between the use of agricultural inputs
and economic development over time. In Columns 5 through 8 we confirm this interpretation by
using a version of AOM that includes linkages from manufacturing and services only (AOM −
M S) which has magnitude and statistical significance similar to the cross-sectional estimates.


4.3     Robustness Checks

Table 7 presents some basic robustness checks and extensions of our main specification. The
first row shows the result of substituting weighted AOM (W AOM ) for AOM with full controls.
As argued in Section 2, we expect W AOM to be a contaminated indicator of the level of distor-
tions because it weights naturally intermediate-intensive sectors more heavily for poor coun-
tries than rich ones. Consistent with this logic, we find that the estimated κ is smaller than the
one estimated with AOM , with similar standard errors. In the second column we use a version of
W AOM that only includes linkages between manufacturing and service industries, with similar
results.
       Row 2 includes an additional regressor: imported intermediate inputs as a share of total
output in the regression. The domestic and imported intermediate shares tend to be highly
negatively correlated, as documented in Figure 3, which is to be expected since domestic and
  22
     The measure of institutional quality with the most comprehensive time-series and cross-sectional
coverage of our sample is the Polity IV measure of democratic governance, which is not the ideal concept
of institutional quality for our purposes but which should be strongly correlated with the quality of con-
tractual institutions. In our cross-sectional sample the Rule of Law index (averaged over 1996-2008) with
the Polity IV index (averaged over 1980-2008) is 0.66. Alternative measures of institutional quality do not
have sufficiently long time-series dimension or cover only a relatively small set of countries.


                                                    21
imported inputs are substitutable. Domestic distortions induce firms to import more interme-
diate goods, so the domestic and imported intermediate shares contain roughly the same infor-
mation about distortions. Consistent with this interpretation, including import linkages in our
specifications results in high joint statistical and economic significance for the coefficients on
domestic and imported linkages. However, due to the strong negative correlation between these
two variables and the limited statistical power of the regressions, the magnitude and statistical
significance of the individual coefficients is unstable across specifications. Because of this near
collinearity, we do not include imported intermediate inputs as a share of total output in other
specifications.
   Row 3 excludes observations corresponding to an earlier part (pre-1970) of the sample–these
observations may have larger measurement errors–to explore robustness of our results. We ob-
serve similar estimates. Row 4 excludes countries with output per worker less that $3,000 at PPP
to assess whether our results are driven by grossly underdeveloped countries. We find that this
is not the case and constraining the sample to exclude very poor countries yields similar results.
Row 5 reports estimates of the baseline specification only on rich, OECD countries. This is an
interesting exercise because previous attempts (Jones, 2011b) to discern the contribution of IO
linkages were largely based on highly developed countries for which one can easily obtain input-
output tables. For these countries, we fail to find any relationship between AOM and output per
worker, a result consistent with previous studies. This finding highlights the importance of hav-
ing large variation in IO tables. We continue to find results similar to our baseline specification
when we exclude countries with low AOM values (Row 6), which tend to be poor or resource rich
countries. In similar spirit, we find that our results continue to hold when we exclude very open
economies (Row 7, (imports + exports)/GDP > 1.1; e.g. Belgium), or small economies (Row 8,
population less than 4 million; e.g. Cyprus). Rows 9 and 10 assess the sensitivity of estimates
to using alternative estimation methods that are robust to outliers and influential observations.
We find that using these alternative methods yields similar results.
   The theory of intermediate goods distortions developed in Jones (2011a,b) predicts that the
impact of distortions on productivity is highly nonlinear. The effect of distortions in the neigh-
borhood of t = 1 is weak but it becomes increasingly large as t moves away from 1. Variations
in AOM amongst rich countries may reflect mostly factors unrelated to productivity, while vari-
ation amongst poor and middle income countries reflects distortions. Dropping high produc-
tivity countries in the linear specification tends to increase the estimated effect, in line with this



                                                 22
theory. More formally, we test for nonlinearity of the effect size by estimating a series of quantile
regressions for the quintiles {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}. The estimated κs decrease steadily with output
per worker, with the estimates at the lowest quintile of output per worker being roughly double
the estimate at the highest (coefficients not reported). However, an F-test cannot reject that the
coefficients are all equal at conventional significance levels. Thus the evidence is consistent with
the theory which predicts that the cost of distortions is small at low levels, but we are unable to
conclude definitively that nonlinearity is present.
         In summary, our cross-section and panel results show that AOM is robustly positively corre-
lated with output per worker across countries and within countries over time. While we cannot
claim to have identified the causal effect of distortions on productivity, our results are qualita-
tively consistent with predictions of the model described in Section 2. To assess the quantitative
fit of the model and provide additional evidence on the size and productivity consequences of
these distortions, we turn next to a different, more model-driven empirical strategy.


5     Quantitative Exercises

In this section we model the technology σij directly in order to extract the distortions tij and
compute the model-based productivity gains of eliminating distortions for each country. We
then compare the model output to the patterns we found in the data in the previous section.


5.1       Model and Identification

We use a static closed economy version of the Long and Plosser (1983) and Jones (2011b) mul-
tisector neoclassical growth model with Cobb-Douglas production functions and preferences,
competitive input and output markets, and intermediate goods distortions.23 For simplicity,
and in order to reduce the impact of measurement error in our empirical exercises, we assume
each industry has a single distortion rate τic .24 Recall from equation (5) in Section 2 that we can
write total factor productivity (and total output) in this economy as the product of two terms,
only one of which is a function of distortions. We focus our attention on this term, denoted c ,
which is also a function the intermediate factor shares σijc , the capital shares of income αic , the
expenditure shares γic and the idiosyncratic productivity ηic in each sector.
    23
    See Appendix A for the fully specified model, and Jones (2011b) for detailed derivations.
    24
    Since we cannot distinguish empirically distortions in product (τ Y ) and input (τ X ) markets and these
distortions are symmetric in the static, we assume for this exercise that distortions occur in the product
market. To simplify notation, we drop superscripts for τ .


                                                    23
       For the GTAP7 sample we observe the share of value added paid to capital in each industry
and the share of aggregate value added produced in each industry for each country. We calibrate
the αic and γic to equal these values. Since we do not observe industry-level productivity, we set
ηic = 1 for all i, c. We also observe the value added shares in the panel data, but not the capital
shares. We assume that the latter do not change over time and use the capital shares from GTAP7
for the panel data as well. Using equation (3), we identify the product of the distortion and the
intermediate factor shares σijc (1 − τic ) from the observed intermediate goods shares bijc . We use
two different approaches to separately identify τic and σijc .
       Our first approach is to assume that all countries use the same intermediate goods technol-
ogy and that the U.S. is undistorted: σijc = σij = bij,U S ∀c, i, j. Under this assumption, we extract
distortions as 1 − τicU S = j bijc / j bij,U S . We refer to τicU S as the U.S. technology measure of
                           P        P

distortions. Here our assumption of a single distortion per industry allows us to aggregate all the
intermediate shares when estimating the distortion for that industry. Since most entries of the
IO table are zero or very small, this approach avoids the problem of dividing by zero or very small
numbers which can exaggerate the size of distortions. We also capped absolute value of distor-
tions at 0.95 for each industry, which affects very few observations and helps avoid numerical
problems when computing c .
       The single technology assumption, while common and simple (see e.g. Hsieh and Klenow
2009), is quite strong. Our second approach assumes instead that the systematic variation in rich
country IO tables is due to variation in the σijc and not due to distortions; that is, σijc = bijc +νijc ,
with νijc i.i.d. and mean zero for the sample of rich countries.25 With this assumption, we use the
rich-country patterns in technology to predict the technology for poor countries. We estimate
the following equation on the sample of rich countries (the richest 20 in the sample) alone:

                   X
                        bijc = νi + β1,s outputshareic + β2,s log(population)c + erroric              (9)
                    j


where outputshare is the share of country c’s gross output accounted for by industry i of sector
s and population is country c’s population. We think of outputshare as controlling for systematic
differences in output mix between countries that specialize more or less intensively in a product,

  25
    Alternatively, we could assume a non-zero mean level of rich country-sector distortions. In that
case, still assuming independence, our regression would identify the true technology parameters plus
the mean level of each sector’s distortion in the rich country. Our counterfactuals would then be inter-
preted as computing the gains from bringing poor countries up to rich country levels of distortions in
each sector.


                                                    24
as well as measurement error in sectors with little output. Including population helps control for
the fact that small countries are naturally more open than large countries, without modeling
international trade or the underlying reasons why small countries trade more.26 We allow the
coefficients to vary with the broad sectoral classification (primary, manufacturing, services), and
use industry-time fixed effects for the application to the panel data. We then use the model to
predict j σijc for each country and industry, and compute 1 − τicadj = j bijc / \
       P                                                                P      P
                                                                                 j σijc . We refer
to τicadj as the adjusted technology measure of distortions.


5.2     Results

Table 8 summarizes the results of these exercises for the GTAP7 cross-section. The average dis-
tortion rates and the gains from eliminating them (calculated accroding to equation 5 ) are quite
large under the U.S. technology assumption: the average country has a 17% gain in productiv-
ity from eliminating distortions in a sample that includes many rich countries. The distribution
of these gains are quite skewed, with most rich countries enjoying gains in the high single dig-
its and the poorest countries enjoying gains of 25% or more. Both the average distortion rate
and the gains from eliminating them are lower for our second identification strategy (“adjusted
technology”), although many countries still experience substantial gains of 13% or more. The
gains computed under the two different assumption have a .39 correlation, which is not as high
as we might expect. Much of the difference is accounted for by small countries, which tend to
be highly distorted under the U.S. technology assumption and much less so under the adjusted
technology assumption. Panel A of Figure 4, which plots the total gains against log output per
worker, shows that most of the countries with the biggest gains are small economies including
very wealthy ones like Luxembourg and Belgium. The analogous plot for the adjusted technol-
ogy assumption in Figure 5 shows no such pattern.
       Panels C through D of Figures 4 and 5 plot the gains from eliminating distortions in the pri-
mary, manufacturing and service sectors respectively. For many countries the major gains come
from eliminating distortions in the primary sector under both identification assumptions. Gains
from eliminating distortions in manufacturing tend to be smaller, reflecting low value added in
manufacturing for the poorest countries as well as relatively small average distortions. Elimi-

  26
    Explicitly modeling international trade in intermediate inputs would be an interesting extension.
However, the data requirements would be far greater, as would the the number of assumptions about
parameters such as the elasticities of substitution between domestic and intermediate goods. We discuss
the issue of imported intermediates further in section 4.3.


                                                  25
nating distortions in the service sector provides somewhat larger gains than in manufacturing.
Under the U.S. technology assumption a few small and relatively wealthy countries have ex-
tremely large gains in manufacturing and services, which casts doubt on the appropriateness of
the U.S. technology assumption for these countries.
      Turing to the results from the panel data in Table 9, we focus on the results from the adjusted
tech assumption only. They are qualitatively and quantitatively quite similar to the adjusted
tech scenario in the cross-section, with the main difference being that the gains are slightly more
skewed in the panel. Once again the primary sector accounts for the largest portion of the gains,
followed by services and manufacturing. There is also a strong downward time trend, 2% per 5
year increment, in the gains from the primary sector (controlling for country fixed effects) while
there is no clear trend in the gains from manufacturing or services.
      The basic message that emerges from this exercise is that the gains from eliminating distor-
tions are modest for many countries but can be substantial for a significant number of highly
distorted economies. The largest gains accrue to very poor countries that eliminate distortions
to their primary sector, primarily agriculture. This provides a potential explanation for the fact
that cross-country variation in TFP is highest in agriculture (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008).



5.3    Comparing Model and Data

In this section we compare the moments implied by our model and identified distortions to
those in the data. First, we regress the model implied log(TFP) on the AOM observed in the
data. If the estimated slope in this regression is similar to the estimated slope in the regres-
sion reported in Section 4, then our our reduced form empirical results can be generated by the
model and the identified distortions. Since the relationship between TFP and distortions in the
model is certainly causal, we can conclude that our reduced form results are consistent with
a quantitatively reasonable causal relationship between productivity and distortions. Second,
equation 5 indicates that measured TFP is proportional to . That is, a one percent increase in 
raises measured TFP by one percent. We examine if this prediction holds by regressing log(TFP)
observed in the data on the  implied by the model.
      Panel A of Table 10 gives the results of the first exercise. The estimated coefficient of 0.46
for the US technology assumption is almost exactly the same as the coefficient of 0.45 we found
in the analogous exercise in Table 5, while the adjusted technology coefficient is a significantly
smaller 0.14. Note that small deviations from our assumption that U.S. or rich country distor-

                                                  26
tions are identically zero can have sizable effects on these coefficients due to non-linearity. For
example, assuming that all rich countries have τ̄ = 0.05 rather than zero raises the coefficient in
the regression from 0.14 to 0.36. With this in mind, the broad agreement between these two sets
of regressions is reassuring for both approaches.
       Panels B and C report the results of the second exercise, using log(TFP) and y respectively as
the dependent variables and including the full panoply of control variables from Column 6 of
Table 4 for the cross-section and panel respectively. The standard errors are quite large, espe-
cially for the adjusted technology assumption which requires that we drop a significant number
of countries from the sample. However, none of the specifications allow us to reject the hypoth-
esis that the coefficient on  equal 1 at conventional significance levels, and the coefficients are
larger when y is the dependent variable as they should be. While hardly dispositive, these results
confirm that the calibrated model is not inconsistent with the patterns we found in the data.
       Overall, the two different approaches are congruent with one another and seem to deliver
similar results. One potential area of disagreement lies in the role of manufacturing and service
linkages. In Section 4 we found that a version of AOM including only manufacturing and service
linkages was as robustly correlated with y as the full version of AOM, but the model suggests that
these sectors play a lesser role in determining the gains from eliminating distortions.27


5.4     Alternative interpretations

This paper has presented strong evidence that poor countries tend to have weaker domestic
input-output linkages, and provided an explanation that emphasizes the role of domestic distor-
tions in reducing both productivity and intermediate input use. While the empirical evidence is
both qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with this explanation, there are other potential
explanations that might generate the same pattern. While a detailed assessment of alternative
models is beyond the scope of this paper, in this section we briefly discuss two potential alter-
natives.
       In both the model and our empirical work, we focused on the domestic IO table without
explicitly considering imported intermediates due to the increased data and parameter require-
  27
    One possibility is that distortions in these sectors are highly correlated with the important compo-
nents of primary sector distortions, although the raw correlations between average distortions in these
sectors is somewhat weak. Another possibility is that manufacturing and service sector distortions are
correlated with the error term in the regression. A third possibility is that the gains from eliminating
distortions in these sectors is larger than the model suggests. Pursuing these hypotheses further is an
interesting avenue for further research.


                                                  27
ments that would have entailed. However, the same positive correlation between domestic in-
puts and productivity that we found could be generated through imported intermediates in two
possible scenarios: i) imported intermediates are substitutes for domestic intermediates and
the relative price of imported intermediates is low in poor countries; ii)imported intermediates
are complements with domestic intermediates and the relative price of imported intermedi-
ates is high in poor countries. The second scenario is inconsistent with recent evidence that
imported and domestic intermediates are substitutes with an elasticity of substitution of 2 or
greater (Antràs et al., 2014; Blaum et al., 2015). The first scenario is more plausible, although
one might expect the relative price of imported intermediates to be high in poor countries given
their typically higher trade costs. However, we we lack any systematic evidence on the relative
price of imported vs. domestic intermediates for rich and poor countries that could allow us
to determine and quantify any bias from omitting imported intermediates. Understanding the
interaction between domestic and imported intermediates and productivity seems like a fruitful
topic for future research.
   Another potential alternative set of explanations revolves around relaxing the restriction that
the sectoral production functions be Cobb-Douglas. Consider instead a CES production func-
tion in capital, labor and intermediate goods from each sector. In this framework (which again
requires more data and elasticities to calibrate) relative prices also affect factor shares, and there
are again two scenarios that are consistent with the positive relationship between productivity
and strength of domestic IO linkages: a) the elasticity of substitution in production is less than 1,
and goods that are used intensively as intermediates have lower relative prices in poor countries,
or b) the elasticity of substitution is greater than 1 and goods that are used intensively as inter-
mediates have higher relative prices in poor countries. Unfortunately there is no consensus on
the magnitude of aggregate or sectoral elasticities of substitution. Similarly, we lack consistent
data on the relative prices of sectoral output in rich and poor countries. However, the relative
price of investment goods is high in poor countries (Hsieh and Klenow, 2007) and it seems likely
that this would continue to hold for a broader class of intermediate goods. In addition, recent
studies (e.g., Boehm et al. 2014, Atalay 2014) suggest that the elasticities of substitution between
different intermediate goods, and between a composite intermediate good and value added,
are lower than one. Thus, we view the available evidence as weakly pointing to a world with a
low elasticity of substitution and high prices for intermediate goods in poor countries, a com-
bination that would tend to generate a negative correlation between productivity and domestic



                                                 28
inputs.


6    Conclusion

In a famous example, Adam Smith illustrated gains from specialization in a pin factory.28 While
his focus was on gains from specialization within a factory, further economic development proved
that the scope of gains extends far beyond the boundaries of a plant or firm. For example, just
in North America, Honda has a network of more than 600 direct suppliers. The history of auto
industry with the rise and fall of the Ford Rouge factory demonstrates that successful firms in-
creasingly rely on networks of suppliers scattered all over the world. The omnipresent special-
ization in modern economies is a genuine marvel which surely has gone beyond the wildest
dreams of the famous Scottish economist.
         While a great deal of empirical research has been done on specialization at the very micro
level (e.g., division of labor in a pin factory) and the very macro level (e.g., international trade
between countries), linkages across firms and industries within a country – i.e., the middle level
– have been much less studied. Most of the analysis at this middle level is theoretical and quali-
tative but the predictions are clear: these linkages should play an important role in economic de-
velopment and are likely to be an important source of productivity gains. Having built a database
of input-output tables for a broad spectrum of countries and times, we provide evidence con-
sistent with these predictions: countries with stronger linkages have higher productivity. This
relationship is quantitatively strong and robust. We also show that the empirically observed
sensitivity of productivity to the strength of linkages is in line with the results from a calibrated
multisector neoclassical model.
         Admittedly, we cannot completely rule out potentially confounding factors in cross-country
regressions or model mispecification, and hence our findings call for more research on the work-
ings of linkages between firms and industries. Various works in economics grapple with the im-
portance of these linkages and specialization. For example, selling and buying goods to/from
domestic foreign-owned companies as well as imports of foreign inputs appear to be associated
with increased productivity of firms (e.g., Javorcik (2004), Gorodnichenko et al. (2010)). Stocks
    28
     Smith wrote, “One man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth
grinds it at the top for receiving the head: to make the head requires two or three distinct operations: to
put it on is a particular business, to whiten the pins is another ... and the important business of making a
pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, which in some manufactories are
all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man will sometime perform two or three of
them.”


                                                      29
of companies with corporate spin-offs aimed to increase the focus of their operations appear to
earn higher abnormal returns relative to stocks of firms with spin-offs without such a focus (e.g.,
Daley et al. (1997), Desai and Jain (1999)). However, these efforts lack a unifying framework with
a macroeconomic perspective. We hope that future research will take up these challenges.




References

Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman, “Contracts and technology adoption,” The Ameri-
  can economic review, 2007, 97 (3), 916–943.

  , Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Em-
  pirical Investigation,” The American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1369–1401.

  ,   , and Todd Mitton, “Determinants of vertical integration: Financial development and contracting
  costs,” The Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (3), 1251–1290.

Alcalá, Francisco and Antonio Ciccone, “Trade and Productivity*,” The Quarterly journal of economics,
  2004, 119 (2), 613–646.

Antràs, Pol and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Organizations and Trade,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009,
  1, 43–64.

  , Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot, “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence from U.S.
  Firms,” Working Paper 20772, National Bureau of Economic Research December 2014.

Atalay, Enghin, “How Important Are Sectoral Shocks,” Working Papers 14-31, Center for Economic Stud-
  ies, U.S. Census Bureau September 2014.

Barro, Robert J and Jong-Wha Lee, “A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–2010,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 2012.

Blaum, Joaquin, Claire Lelarge, and Michael Peters, “The Gains From Trade in Firm-Based Models of
  Importing,” 2015.

Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Input Linkages and the Transmission of
  Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” Manuscipt, University of Michigan,
  2014.

Boehm, Johannes, “The Impact of Contract Enforcement Costs on Outsourcing and Aggregate Productiv-
  ity,” 2013.


                                                   30
Buera, Francisco J, Joseph P Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin, “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two Sec-
  tors,” The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1964–2002.

Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for cross-country income differences,” Handbook of Economic Growth,
  2005, 1, 679–741.

Chenery, Hollis, Sherman Robinson, and Moshe Syrquin, Industrialization and growth, New York: Oxford
  University Press, 1986.

Ciccone, Antonio, “Input chains and industrialization,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (3), 565–
  587.

Comin, Diego, Bart Hobijn, and Emilie Rovito, “Technology usage lags,” Journal of Economic Growth,
  2008, 13 (4), 237–256.

Costinot, Arnaud, “Contract enforcement, division of labor, and the pattern of trade,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569–600.

Daley, Lane, Vikas Mehrotra, and Ranjini Sivakumar, “Corporate focus and value creation: Evidence from
  spinoffs,” Journal of Financial Economics, August 1997, 45 (2), 257–281.

Desai, Hemang and Prem C. Jain, “Firm performance and focus: long-run stock market performance
  following spinoffs,” Journal of Financial Economics, October 1999, 54 (1), 75–101.

Driscoll, John and Aart Kraay, “Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially dependent panel
  data,” Review of economics and statistics, 1998, 80 (4), 549–560.

Duarte, Margarida and Diego Restuccia, “The role of the structural transformation in aggregate produc-
  tivity,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 129–173.

Fadinger, Harald, Christian Ghiglino, and Mariya Teteryatnikova, “Productivity, Networks and Input-
  Output Structure,” 2015.

Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos, and Michael E Waugh, “The Agricultural Productivity Gap in Developing
  Countries,” 2012.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell, “Globalization and Innovation in Emerging
  Markets,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2010, 2 (2), 194–226.

Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman, “Errors in variables in panel data,” Journal of Econometrics, February
  1986, 31 (1), 93–118.


                                                    31
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and growth in the global economy, MIT press,
  1992.

   and    , “Integration Versus Outsourcing in Industry Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2002, 117 (1), 85–120.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker
  Than Others?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 83–116.

Hausmann, Ricardo and César A Hidalgo, “The network structure of economic output,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Growth, 2011, 16 (4), 309–342.

Hirschman, Albert O., The strategy of economic development, Yale University Press, 1958.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” American Economic Re-
  view, 2007, 97 (3), 562–585.

   and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

   and Peter J Klenow, “Development accounting,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010,
  2 (1), 207–223.

Imbs, Jean and Romain Wacziarg, “Stages of diversification,” American Economic Review, 2003, pp. 63–86.

Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
  Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American Economic Review, June 2004,
  94 (3), 605–627.

Jones, Charles I, “The shape of production functions and the direction of technical change,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (2), 517–549.

Jones, Charles I., “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development,” Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (2), 1–28.

  , “Misallocation, economic growth, and input-output economics,” 2011.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, “Governance matters VIII: aggregate and individ-
  ual governance indicators, 1996-2008,” World bank policy research working paper, 2009, (4978).

Klump, Rainer, Peter McAdam, and Alpo Willman, “The normalized CES production function: theory and
  empirics,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 2012, 26 (5), 769–799.


                                                   32
Levchenko, Andrei A., “Institutional quality and international trade,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007,
  74 (3), 791–819.

Long, John B and Charles I Plosser, “Real business cycles,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1983, pp. 39–
  69.

Nunn, Nathan, “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569–600.

Oberfield, Ezra, “Business networks, production chains, and productivity: A theory of input-output ar-
  chitecture,” 2013.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heteroge-
  neous establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707–720.

  , Dennis Tao Yang, and Xiaodong Zhu, “Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A quantitative cross-
  country analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (2), 234–250.

Romer, Paul, “Growth based on increasing returns due to specialization,” The American Economic Review,
  1987, 77 (2), 56–62.

  , “Endogenous technical change,” Journal of Political economy, 1990, 98 (5), 71–102.

Sachs, Jeffrey D, “Institutions don’t rule: direct effects of geography on per capita income,” Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, WP 9490 2003.

Topalova, Petia and Amit Khandelwal, “Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The case of india,”
  Review of economics and statistics, 2011, 93 (3), 995–1009.

Vollrath, Dietrich, “How important are dual economy effects for aggregate productivity?,” Journal of De-
  velopment Economics, 2009, 88 (2), 325–334.




                                                    33
    Figure 1: Correlations of Industry Coefficients with Aggregate Output per Worker


                        A: Diagonal Entries                         B: Off−Diagonal Backward Linkages
                                                                          GRO
                                                                         PDR  OCR
      .5




                                             FMPOMEWTPOBS                  V_F
                                                                            OSDOAP
                                                                              CTL
                                                                                WOL
                                         P_C      OTP
                                                   ATPROS
                                                    CMN
                                                    OFI                           FSH                      WTP
                        FRS        OFD         ELE                        WHTPFB
                                                                            C_BRMK  GAS                    ATP
                              CNS       PPPI_SMVH
                                          NMM OTNTRDISR                            OIL                   TRDISR
                                          CRP
                                       LUMNFM
                                      WAP              OSG                       FRSOMN
                           OMN CMT
                               OMTSGR
                                 MIL                                                  GDT                   OFI
                                                                                                          OTP
                    PFB
                  V_F           VOL  TEX
                                      LEA       OMF                                COA CNS B_T                ROS
                              WTRPCR
      0




                                   B_T                                                 WTR
                                                                                        CMT    WAP          CMN
                      RMKGAS
                      OAP                                                                 MIL
                                                                                        OMT    LEA MVH
                 GRO
                 WHT CTLFSH
                     OCR COA GDT
                            ELY                                                      ELY      TEX  NMM
                                                                                                        OMF
                                                                                                        OME
                                                                                                      OTN
                                                                                                    NFMELE    OBS
                   C_B WOL
                   OSD                                                                    PCR
                                                                                           SGR  LUM
                                                                                                 PPP           OSG
                          OIL                                                                     CRP
                                                                                            OFD P_C  FMP
                                                                                                   I_S
                PDR                                                                      VOL
      −.5




                 C: Total Backward Linkages                                D: Total Forward Linkages
                                                                                                             OBS
                                                                                                     FMP
      .5




                  V_F
                 GRO                            WTP                                         OFDPPP OME
                      OAP                       ATP
                                                 OFI
                                               OTP
                    OCR
                PDRPFB FRS                    TRD ISR                                             CRP ELE CMN  OSG
                 WHT
                   OSD    GAS
                          OMN
                     CTLFSH
                         OIL CNS                   OBS
                                                 CMNROS                                CNSMIL         OTNOTPISR
                                                                                                              ROS
                       WOL                                                              CMT        I_SMVHTRD
                   C_BRMK   GDT            MVH
                                             OME                                        OMT
                                                                                         VOL WAPLUMNFM WTP  OFI
                               MILB_T
                             CMT      PPP
                                    WAP I_S
                                        NMM                                                       NMM
                                                                                                 P_C       ATP
                              OMT
                         COAWTR  OFD       OTN
                                            ELE
                                          FMP                                       OMNWTRPCR TEX
      0




                                    LEA
                                   TEX CRP
                                     LUM NFM OMF OSG                           RMK         SGR LEA      OMF
                                                                          GRO      COA      B_T
                           ELY SGR P_C                                    WHT       GAS
                                                                           V_F OAP GDT
                                PCR                                           OCR
                                                                             PFB     ELY
                                                                              CTLFRS
                                                                                WOLOIL
                              VOL                                                 FSH
                                                                            C_B
      −.5




                                                                         PDROSD

            0               20               40               60     0               20              40               60
                                                  Industry Number
                  corr, sector == Manufacturing                            corr, sector == Primary
                  corr, sector == Services


Notes Each dot represents the correlation between an individual industry linkage and aggregate log output per worker. Backward
linkages calculated by averaging the entries of each column of the IO matrix A. Forward linkages calculated by averaging the
elements of each row of the matrix A. Primary sector includes agriculture, mining, utilities and construction. Industry codes can
be found in Appendix B. IO data are from GTAP7.




                                                              34
                                              Figure 2: AOM and Output per Worker


                    12
                                                              All Industries
                                             LUX                           NOR
                                                     SGP
                                                   BEL              IRL ITA   AUT  AUS USANLD  SWE
                                                                         TWNCAN                GBR
                                                                                                FRA
                          11



                                                      CHE               FIN GRCHKG DNK     GER JPN
                                                                                    NZLESP
           Log Output/Worker




                                              MLT                                 KOR
                                                                                  SVN
                                                                        HUN                   CZE
                                                         CYP
                                                                MEX HRV CHLEST      SVK PRT              POL
                                                           TURMYS                    LTU
                                                                  CRI LVA
                     10




                                                                          ARG IRN         RUS
                                           MUS        URY        COLROMVEN  PAN KAZ       BLR        ZAF
                                                                 GTM                      BRA
                                                        EGY TUN THA               PERECUUKR
                                                              ALB               AZE
                                                     ARM                MAR PRY BOL                 CHN
                9




                                                    LKA            GEO  IDN
                                                       PHL             IND
                                                                     PAK
                                                NGA VNM             NIC
                                                                               KGZ       LAO
                                              SEN                   ZMB
                                                                   KHM
           8




                                             UGA                          BGD
                                                                      TZA
                                                           MDG
                                                  MWI MOZ
                                                               ETH
                    7




                               1.2              1.4          1.6           1.8                 2                2.2
                                                      Average Output Multiplier ( AOM )

                                                          y                   Fitted values



                                               Manufacturing and Services Only
                    12




                                     LUX                           NOR
                                                        SGP
                                                      BEL     IRL               USA
                                                                              AUS
                                                                              AUT        NLDSWE GBR
                                                            CHE CANFINITAHKG DNK   ESP JPNGERFRA
                          11




                                                                TWN           GRC
           Log Output/Worker




                                 MLT                                     NZL KOR
                                                     CYP HUN               CZESVN   PRT
                                                       HRV
                                                         MEX     EST LTU SVK               POL
                                                       TUR
                                                      MYS  LVACHL
                     10




                                                 IRN        ARG CRIRUS
                                              BLR
                                        MUS URY               VEN
                                                         ROM KAZ                               ZAF
                                        EGY         TUNPAN COL
                                                             GTM ECU         BRA
                                                ALB     THA
                                                         UKR                   PER
                                    AZE
                                   ARM                         BOL PRY MAR           CHN
                9




                                           LKA
                                           GEO               IDN
                                                   PHLNICPAK IND
                                     NGAKGZVNM
                                  LAO     SEN              ZMB
                                                     KHM
           8




                                    UGA                  BGD
                                                      TZA
                                                  MDG
                                           MWI MOZ
                                                                        ETH
                    7




                                     1.8                2             2.2              2.4                      2.6
                                                      Average Output Multiplier ( AOM )

                                                          y                   Fitted values



Notes AOM is calculated as (ιLι)/N where L is the Leontief inverse of the input-output (IO) matrix B, ι is the summer vector and
N is the number of industries. AOM for manufacturing and services only is calculated by setting all entries of B associated with
primary products to zero, then calculating AOM according to the formula above with N as the number of manufacturing and service
industries. IO data are from GTAP7.
                                                                      35
                            Figure 3: Correlation between Domestic and Imported Inputs
                 .5




                                   V_F


                                                                                                    WTP
                                                                                               ROS
                                                                                              OBS
                                             FRSOIL                                       OFI OSG
                        0




                                      PFB
                                PDR C_BOCR            WTR                                CMNISR
            Correlation




                                                                                     TRD
                                  GRO      RMKFSH
                                        CTL      GAS
                                          OAP     OMN
                                    OSD        COA      CNS
                                                    ELY
                                                     GDT                              OTP
                                                                B_T
                                 WHT                                                    ATP
         −.5




                                                              SGR               OTN
                                                          OMT OFD         NMM     OME
                                            WOL             MIL       PPP        ELE
                                                         CMT     TEXLUMCRP MVH     OMF
                                                           VOL    WAP        NFM
                                                                    LEA P_CI_S
                                                             PCR
                                                                              FMP
                 −1




                            0                      20                             40                             60
                                                              industry

                                    corr, sector == Manufacturing            corr, sector == Primary
                                    corr, sector == Services


Notes Each dot represents the correlation between the domestic and imported intermediate shares for an industry. Primary sector
includes agriculture, mining, utilities and construction. Industry codes can be found in Appendix B. IO data are from GTAP7.




                                                             36
Figure 4: Output per Worker and the Gains from Eliminating Distortions, US Technology
Assumption
              12




                                                                                               12
                              NOR                               LUX                                            NOR  LUX
                             USA
                              AUS
                              NLDIRLHKG SGP
                               AUT
                               ITA                BEL                                                         USA
                                                                                                              SGP
                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                               AUTBEL
                                                                                                                ITA
                              SWE
                              CAN
                              GBR
                              FRA
                              DNK
                              GER
                                CHE
                                FIN
                              JPN
                                TWN
                              ESP   GRC                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                              GER
                                                                                                                CHE
                                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                                              TWN
                                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                               ESP HKG
                                                                                                                 FIN
     Log Output/Worker




                                                                                      Log Output/Worker
                              NZL
                               KOR
                              SVN                                               MLT                           NZL
                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                              SVN        MLT
                               CZE
                                 HUN
                               PRT                CYP                                                         CZE
                                                                                                               HUNCYP
                                                                                                              PRT
                               SVK
                               EST
                              POL
                               LTU     HRV MEX                                                                SVK
                                                                                                              EST
                                                                                                               HRV
                                                                                                              POL
                                                                                                               LTU MEX
                                CHL
                                LVA  TUR                                                                      CHL
                                                                                                               LVA TUR
                10




                                                                                                 10
                               RUSCRI
                                 ARG   MYS
                                        IRN                                                                    RUSMYS
                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                                                               ARG         IRN
                                VEN
                              ZAFROM
                               KAZ
                                 COL
                               BRA  BLR
                                      URY
                                        PAN  BWA        MUS                                                   ZAFVEN
                                                                                                               KAZ
                                                                                                                BRA  BLR
                                                                                                                   URY
                                                                                                                 ROM
                                                                                                                   COL  PANBWA
                                                                                                                       MUS
                                GTM TUN
                                   ECU
                                    THAEGY                                                                       GTM
                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                   ECU
                                                                                                                     EGY
                              UKRPER
                                   ALB
                                    AZE
                                                                                                               PER
                                                                                                               THA
                                                                                                                UKRALBAZE
                               CHN
                               BOL   LKA
                                   PRY
                                     GEOMAR        ARM                                                         CHN
                                                                                                                 BOL MAR
                                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                                                    PRY
                                                                                                                  GEO                   ARM
                                  IDN
                                 IND  PAKPHL                                                                      INDIDN
                                                                                                                     PAK
                                                                                                                     PHL
                                    NIC    VNM                                                                     NIC  VNM
                                         KGZ
                                       ZMB                  LAO                                                        ZMB  KGZ                  LAO
                                          KHM        SEN                                                                KHM       SEN
         8




                                                                                          8
                                  BGD                            UGA                                            BGD                                     UGA
                                          TZA                                                                                 TZA
                                      MDGMOZ
                                          MWI ETH                                                                        MDG
                                                                                                                        MWIMOZ      ETH

                                ZWE                                                                              ZWE
              6




                                                                                               6
                         0         .2       .4      .6      .8         1                                  0             .2            .4        .6      .8
                                             Total Gains                                                                     Gains from Primary
              12




                                                                                               12




                              NOR              LUX                                                             NOR                                     LUX
                              USA
                              AUS
                              NLD
                               AUT
                               ITA  IRL      BEL SGP                                                          USA
                                                                                                               IRLSGP
                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                                                ITA                   BEL
                               SWE
                              GBR
                               CAN
                              FRA
                              DNK
                              GER
                               JPN
                               GRC
                              ESP  CHE
                                 HKG
                                  FIN
                                   TWN                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                               GER
                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                              ESP  HKG GRC
                                                                                                                 TWN
     Log Output/Worker




                                                                                      Log Output/Worker




                              NZLKOR
                                SVN                                             MLT                            NZL
                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                              SVN                     MLT
                               CZE
                               PRT   HUN                                                                       CZE
                                                                                                               HUN
                                                                                                                 PRT
                                EST
                              POL  HRV CYP
                                 SVK                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                               EST
                                                                                                               POL  TURHRV
                                                                                                                                      CYP
                                 LTU
                                  CHL
                                  TUR
                                   LVA     MYS MEX                                                            LTU MEX
                                                                                                                CHL
                                                                                                               LVA
                10




                                                                                                 10




                                RUS
                              IRNCRI
                                ARG                                                                           MYS
                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                IRNCRI
                                                                                                                   ARG
                               VEN
                                ZAF
                                BWA
                              PAN BLR
                                KAZ
                               COL
                               BRA ROM URY                       MUS                                            VEN
                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                 BLR
                                                                                                               ROM
                                                                                                               KAZ
                                                                                                                COL
                                                                                                               BRA URY
                                                                                                                     PANBWA
                                                                                                                      MUS
                               GTM
                             ECUTUN   EGY                                                                        GTM TUN
                                                                                                                   ECU
                                                                                                                   EGY
                              ALB PER
                              UKR
                              AZE
                                        THA                                                                     PER
                                                                                                                THA
                                                                                                              UKR
                                                                                                               AZE ALB
                             PRYCHNARM
                              BOL
                               GEO
                               IDN     MAR
                                      LKA                                                                      ARM
                                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                                              BOL
                                                                                                              IDN  MAR
                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                   PRYPAK
                                                                                                                        GEO
                              IND
                               PAK         PHL                                                                   IND
                                                                                                               PHL
                                NIC      VNM                                                                       NIC
                                                                                                                    VNM
                                KGZ
                                 LAOZMB                                                                       KGZZMB   LAO SEN
                                      SEN
                                     KHM                                                                          KHM
         8




                                                                                          8




                             BGDUGA                                                                                   BGD
                              TZA                                                                               TZA UGA
                              MDG
                              MOZ                                                                               MDGMOZ
                              ETHMWI                                                                               ETHMWI

                               ZWE                                                                            ZWE
              6




                                                                                               6




                         0            .1       .2    .3       .4           .5                             0                .2            .4             .6
                                       Gains from Manufacturing                                                           Gains from Services



Notes Plots the gains from eliminating all distortions, then the gains from eliminating distortions in each broad sector holding all
else constant. The gains from eliminating distortions are computed using the model outlined in 5.1 and Appendix A. The regression
line is drawn using least median squares to ensure robustness against outliers. Primary sector includes agriculture, mining, utilities
and construction. IO data are from GTAP7.




                                                                                37
Figure 5: Output per Worker and the Gains from Eliminating Distortions, Adjusted Tech-
nology Assumption
              12




                                                                                             12
                                TWN
                               ESP           GRC                                                            TWN
                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                              ESP
     Log Output/Worker




                                                                                    Log Output/Worker
                                    NZL
                                  KOR MLT
                                     SVN                                                                    KORNZL
                                                                                                             MLT
                                                                                                              SVN
                                  CZE
                                HUN
                                PRT  CYP HRV                                                                PRT
                                                                                                            CYPCZE
                                                                                                             HUN
                               POL SVK
                                     EST
                                    LTU                    MEX                                                 SVK
                                                                                                               EST
                                                                                                              POLLTUHRV
                                                                                                                      MEX
                                CHL
                                LVA             TUR                                                         CHL
                                                                                                             LVA    TUR
                10




                                                                                               10
                                CRI  RUS
                                     ARGMYS
                                      IRN                                                                   CRI
                                                                                                              ARGRUS
                                                                                                                  IRNMYS
                                   VEN
                                 ZAF
                                BWA
                                 URY
                                  ROMBLR
                                     KAZ
                                      COL
                                     BRA MUS
                                           PAN                                                              ZAF
                                                                                                             URY
                                                                                                             PAN
                                                                                                             BRAVEN
                                                                                                              BWA
                                                                                                                ROMBLR
                                                                                                                 MUS
                                                                                                                 KAZCOL
                                GTM  TUN
                                   ECU    PER THA           EGY                                                GTM
                                                                                                             TUN
                                                                                                              ECU
                                                                                                             PER THA           EGY
                                  UKR
                                ALB  AZE                                                                     ALB UKRAZE
                                   ARM
                                    GEO CHN
                                  PRY
                                 BOL         MAR
                                           LKA                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                              BOL
                                                                                                              GEO  ARM
                                                                                                                    MAR
                                                                                                                  CHNLKA
                                                    PAK
                                                    PHLIDN         IND                                                 PAKPHL IND       IDN
                                  NIC                                                                          NIC
                                  KGZ ZMB         LAOVNM SEN                                                      KGZZMB VNM       LAO
                                                                                                                                     SEN
                                             KHM                                                                         KHM
         8




                                                                                        8
                                                      BGD    UGA                                                BGD                                 UGA
                                               TZA                                                                                TZA
                                          MDGMWI    MOZ ETH                                                            MWIMDG   MOZ           ETH

                               ZWE                                                                           ZWE
              6




                                                                                             6
                         0            .1         .2          .3          .4                             0         .05       .1      .15        .2    .25
                                            Total Gains                                                                 Gains from Primary
              12




                                                                                             12




                                TWN
                                 GRC
                               ESP                                                                          ESPTWN                    GRC
     Log Output/Worker




                                                                                    Log Output/Worker




                                   NZL
                                     KOR MLT
                                    SVN                                                                          MLT
                                                                                                               KOR  NZL
                                                                                                                    SVN
                                CZE
                                  HUN
                                 PRT
                                CYP                                                                           HUN
                                                                                                               PRTCZE   CYP
                                 SVK
                                 EST
                               HRV
                                POL
                                LTU                                           MEX                           POL    SVK
                                                                                                                 LTU  EST
                                                                                                                     MEX  HRV
                              LVA  CHL   TUR                                                                 CHLLVA               TUR
                10




                                                                                               10




                                   RUS
                                 IRN
                                  CRI
                                   ARG   MYS                                                                MYS
                                                                                                            CRI RUS
                                                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                                                   ARG
                              BWA  VEN
                                 URY
                                 PAN
                                COL
                               BRA    ZAF
                                      BLR
                                    ROM
                                     KAZ       MUS                                                          ROMVEN
                                                                                                             ZAF
                                                                                                             BLR
                                                                                                             MUSBWA
                                                                                                               URY
                                                                                                                 KAZ
                                                                                                                 COL TUN
                                                                                                                       BRA     PAN
                              GTM
                               TUN
                                ECU          THAEGY
                                                PER                                                           GTM
                                                                                                                ECU
                                                                                                                 PER     THA EGY
                                UKRAZE
                              ALB                                                                             UKR
                                                                                                              ALB
                                                                                                              AZE
                                ARM
                              GEO PRYCHN LKAMAR
                                   BOL                                                                       ARM
                                                                                                            BOL LKA
                                                                                                            PRY       MAR
                                                                                                                    GEO CHN
                                   IDN
                                    PAK    IND         PHL                                                           IDN              PAK             IND
                               NIC              VNM                                                            NICPHL        VNM
                                KGZ
                                 LAO SENZMB                                                                  KGZ
                                                                                                               ZMBLAO
                                       KHM                                                                      KHM         SEN
         8




                                                                                        8




                             BGD UGA                                                                                     UGA                        BGD
                              TZA                                                                                TZA
                              MDG
                             MOZ                                                                                  MDG MWI MOZ
                              ETH MWI                                                                                      ETH

                              ZWE                                                                           ZWE
              6




                                                                                             6




                         0               .05          .1             .15                                0           .05        .1       .15          .2
                                     Gains from Manufacturing                                                         Gains from Services



Notes Plots the gains from eliminating all distortions, then the gains from eliminating distortions in each broad sector holding all
else constant. The gains from eliminating distortions are computed using the model outlined in 5.1 and Appendix A. The Adjusted
Technology assumption uses patterns in the 20 richest economies to predict technology for poor countries; see section 5.1. The
regression line is drawn using least median squares to ensure robustness against outliers. Primary sector includes agriculture,
mining, utilities and construction. IO data are from GTAP7.




                                                                              38
        Table 1: Panel: Observations by Region and Time Period


           Africa      Asia        Latin        Eastern Europe            Western Europe
                                America           & Transition               & Offshoots

 1950          0         0            2                   0                         0
 1955          0         0            3                   0                         7
 1960          0         1            4                   0                         4
 1965          2         1            0                   1                         14
 1970          5         7            5                   0                         15
 1975          3         5            2                   2                         12
 1980          1         3            1                   0                         6
 1985          1         4            1                   0                         8
 1990          1         4            0                   0                         10
 1995          8        14            8                   9                         20
 2000         15        17           14                  18                         19
Notes Eastern Europe and Transition includes the former Soviet republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Georgia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, along with Turkey and Eastern Europe as conventionally defined.
Western European “Offshoots” include Australia, Canada, Israel, New Zealand and the United States.




                                               39
                    Table 2: IO coefficient means and correlations, GTAP7


 Panel A: Means and standard deviations
                                                            Using Sector


                                     Primary Sector             Manufacturing             Services
                    Primary Sector            0.11                      0.14                 0.04
 Producing Sector




                                            (0.06)                     (0.11)               (0.04)
                    Manufacturing             0.13                      0.18                 0.08
                                            (0.06)                     (0.08)               (0.05)
                    Services                  0.12                      0.16                 0.20
                                            (0.05)                     (0.09)               (0.07)

 Panel B: Correlations with log output per worker
 Prod. Sec.




                    Primary Sector            0.08                     -0.55                 -0.33
                    Manufacturing             0.53                      0.34                 -0.13
                    Services                  0.38                      0.06                 0.46
 Notes Primary sector is agriculture, mining, utilities and construction. Each country’s IO table was ag-
gregated into a 3x3, then each coefficient was averaged across countries to compute the means. Stan-
dard deviations in parentheses under the entries in panel A. Panel B reports the correlation coefficient
of each aggregated IO entry with log output per worker.




                                                  40
                      Table 3: IO coefficient means and correlations, panel


 Panel A: Means and standard deviations
                                                                Using Sector


                                     Primary Sector            Manufacturing                  Services
                    Primary Sector           0.11                       0.14                     0.04
 Producing Sector




                                            (0.06)                     (0.08)                  (0.03)
                    Manufacturing            0.17                       0.22                     0.08
                                            (0.07)                     (0.09)                  (0.04)
                    Services                 0.16                       0.12                     0.17
                                            (0.06)                     (0.06)                  (0.07)

 Panel B: Correlations with log output per worker
 Prod. Sec.




                    Primary Sector           0.26                      -0.58                    -0.15
                    Manufacturing            0.57                       0.41                     0.02
                    Services                 0.46                      -0.09                     0.31

 Panel C: Correlations with log output per workers, country fixed effects
 Prod. Sec.




                    Primary Sector           0.01                      -0.56                    -0.05
                    Manufacturing            0.10                      -0.27                    -0.13
                    Services                 0.31                       0.51                     0.65
 Notes Primary sector is agriculture, mining, utilities and construction. Each country’s IO table was aggregated
into a 3x3, then each coefficient was averaged across countries to compute the means. Standard deviations
in parentheses under the entries in panel A. Panel B reports the correlation coefficient of each aggregated IO
entry with log output per worker. Panel C reports the correlation between the residuals from regressing y and
each IO coefficient separately on country dummies.




                                                      41
                                                         Table 4: Cross-section: Main Regression Results
                                                                  AOM                                                                AOM-MS
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)      (9)            (10)         (11)        (12)
 AOM (AOM-MS)                   1.69***     1.16***      0.92***      1.10***     1.32***      0.77***         2.70***      0.84**      0.85***      1.14***      1.16***      0.64**
                                 (0.61)      (0.31)       (0.28)       (0.29)      (0.27)       (0.24)          (0.55)       (0.33)      (0.32)       (0.33)       (0.31)      (0.29)
 Rule of law                                9.02***      7.89***      7.45***     6.78***      -2.78**                      8.61***     7.15***      6.40***      6.34***     -3.31**
                                             (0.67)       (0.65)       (0.62)      (1.07)       (1.38)                       (0.77)      (0.77)       (0.76)       (1.26)      (1.47)
 Dist. Equator                                           0.14***      0.14***     0.17***      0.16***                                  0.18***      0.18***      0.18***     0.17***
                                                          (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.06)       (0.05)                                   (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.05)
 Openness                                                             0.22***     0.24***      0.30***                                               0.24***      0.22***     0.29***
                                                                       (0.07)      (0.08)       (0.07)                                                (0.06)       (0.07)      (0.06)




                                                                                                                                                                                 42
 Central Planning                                                                  -1.94         -2.24                                                             -0.22       -1.25
                                                                                   (2.11)       (1.87)                                                             (2.29)      (1.89)
 Govt. Consumption                                                                -4.99**       -2.57*                                                            -4.33**      -2.11
                                                                                   (1.98)       (1.39)                                                             (2.00)      (1.42)
 Tech. Adoption                                                                                4.84***                                                                        5.03***
                                                                                                (0.68)                                                                         (0.72)
 Observations                     89           89           89           89          89           76              89           89          89           89           89          76
 R-squared                       0.09         0.69         0.72         0.73        0.75         0.85            0.21         0.66        0.71         0.72         0.74        0.85
 Notes Dependent variable is log(RGDP W OK) from the PWT 7.0 in all specifications. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Rule of Law the average value over 1996-2008 of the Rule of
Law index from Kaufmann et al. (2009). Openness is (Imports + Exports)/GDP from the PWT. Central Planning is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if a country has a history of
central planning. Government Consumption is from the PWT. Tech Adoption is the index of technology adoption constructed by Comin et al. (2008). ***, **, * denote statistical significance
at 1%, 5% and 10%.
Table 5: Cross-section: Components of Output per Worker

 Dependent                  AOM                    AOM-MS               Number of
 variable                 β         R2              β   R2                Obs.
                         (1)        (2)            (3)  (4)                (5)
   α          K
                  
  1−α
        log   Y
                        0.08       0.20          0.16*        0.22            74
                       (0.09)                    (0.09)
 log(h)                0.19**      0.72           0.14        0.71            73
                       (0.09)                    (0.09)
 log(T F P )           0.45**      0.82          0.48**       0.82            71
                       (0.20)                    (0.22)
 Notes Each row reports the results of using either all industries (AOM ) or manufactur-
ing and service industries only (AOM − M S) in otherwise identical regressions. De-
pendent variable is shown in the left column. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%. Controls include all controls
used in column 6 of Table 4.




                                           43
                                       Table 6: Panel: Main Regression Results


                                               AOM                                                      AOM-MS
                            (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
 AOM(MS)                 1.96***      1.15**       0.94***         0.30**          2.46***      2.28***       1.28***        0.68***
                          (0.40)      (0.38)        (0.25)         (0.10)           (0.18)       (0.45)        (0.35)         (0.18)
 Polity IV                                          1.15**          0.38                                       1.05**          0.39
                                                    (0.41)         (0.30)                                      (0.42)         (0.27)
 Openness                                          0.93***         0.51***                                    0.81***        0.51***
                                                    (0.13)         (0.05)                                      (0.13)         (0.05)
 Govt. Cons.                                      -5.56***       -5.24***                                     -5.21***      -5.27***
                                                    (0.70)         (0.93)                                      (0.70)         (0.80)
 R-squared                 0.13         0.10         0.65           0.78             0.12         0.27          0.66           0.79
 Obs.                      277          240          233            233              277           240           233            233
 Groups                     99           62           59             59               99            62            59            59
 Country FE                  N            Y            Y              Y                N            Y             Y              Y
 Decade Dum.                 N           N             N              Y                N            N             N              Y
 Notes Columns 1-4 report results using AOM , while columns 5 - 8 report results using AOM − M S from otherwise identical regressions.
Dependent variable is log RGDPWOK from the PWT 7.0 in all specifications. Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, *
denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%. For specifications with fixed effects, we report the within R2 .




                                                              44
                                           Table 7: Robustness Checks


 Row       Specification                            Cross-section                                          Panel
                                            AOM         AOM-MS            Obs.           AOM          AOM-MS           Obs.

 1         WAOM                             0.48*          0.35*            76          0.25***        0.39***          233
                                           (0.26)          (0.19)                        (0.08)         (0.14)
 2         Imported inputs                  0.62*           0.36            76
                                           (0.33)          (0.43)
 3         Drop older                                                                     0.24         0.53***          211
           observations                                                                  (0.13)         (0.17)
 4         Drop very                      0.58***         0.59***           70           0.29**        0.72***          214
           poor countries                  (0.22)          (0.22)                        (0.10)         (0.20)
 5         Include only                     -0.17          -0.11            25           -0.01           0.26*          128
           rich countries                  (0.10)          (0.16)                        (0.06)         (0.14)
 6         Drop small AOM                  0.81**          0.73*            71          0.40***        0.79***          207
                                           (0.31)          (0.38)                        (0.12)         (0.19)
 7         Drop very                      0.77***         0.69**            60           0.37**        0.76***          213
           open countries                  (0.27)          (0.34)                        (0.12)         (0.21)
 8         Drop small                     0.77***         0.69**            70          0.34***        0.66***          207
           countries                       (0.25)          (0.31)                        (0.08)         (0.15)
 9         Median regression              0.83***         0.74**            76            0.30            0.31          233
                                           (0.31)          (0.33)                        (0.22)         (0.29)
 10        Huber robust                    0.65**         0.70**            76            0.12          0.40**          233
           regression                      (0.28)          (0.31)                        (0.14)         (0.18)
 Notes Each row reports the results of using either all industries (AOM ) or manufacturing and service industries only
(AOM − M S) to calculate the average output multiplier in the panel and cross sectional specifications. Dependent variable
is log(RGDP W OK) from the PWT 7.0 in all specifications. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include the
controls used in column 6 of table 4, or column 4 of table 6 . Row 1 replaces AOM with W AOM . Row 2 includes the share of
imported inputs in total output as a regressor. Row 3 drops observations before 1970. Row 4 drops countries with output per
worker less than $3,000. Row 5 drops countries with output per worker less than $36,000 ($22, 000 in the panel). Row 6 drops
countries with AOM < 1.4 or AOM − M S < 1.9, respectively (AOM < 1.45 or AOM − M S < 2.28 in the panel). Row 7 drops
countries with (imports + exports)/rgdp > 1.1. Row 8 drops countries with population less that 4 million. Row 9 reports the
LAD estimate of κ with bootstrapped standard errors (1000 replications). Row 10 reports the results for Huber robust regression.
***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%.


                                                              45
                             Table 8: Distortions and Gains, GTAP7 Summary


                                               Avg. Distortion                             Gains
                                            US Tech         Adj. Tech            US Tech         Adj. Tech

                    Mean                       0.16             0.04                0.17             0.10
                    Median                     0.16             0.06                0.10             0.06
                    75th pctile                0.26             0.20                0.21             0.13
                    90th pctile                0.40             0.32                0.38             0.21
                    St. Dev.                   0.17             0.20                0.20             0.08

                    Correlation                         0.75                                 0.39
                    Observations                91               71                  91               71
                   Notes Distortions are computed for each industry and averaged across industries for each
                  country using the methods outlined in section 5.1. The Adjusted Technology assumption uses
                  patterns in the 20 richest economies to predict technology for poor countries; see section 5.1.
                  Statistics are based on the cross-country distribution of these average distortions. The gains
                  from eliminating distortions are computed using the model outlined in 5.1 and Appendix A.
                  All data from GTAP7.




                              Table 9: Distortions and Gains, Panel Summary


                      Avg. Distortion            Total Gains          Prim. Gains          Mnfg. Gains              Serv. Gains

 Mean                          0.08                   0.08                 0.06                  0.01                  0.00
 Median                        0.09                   0.03                 0.01                  0.00                  0.00
 75th pctile                   0.21                   0.07                 0.05                  0.01                  0.02
 90th pctile                   0.29                   0.22                 0.15                  0.02                  0.05
 St. Dev.                      0.20                   0.14                 0.13                  0.02                  0.05
 Time Trend                   -0.02                   -0.02               -0.02                  0.00                  0.00
 Notes Distortions are computed for each industry and averaged across industries for each country using the methods outlined in
section 5.1. Statistics are based on the cross-country distribution of these average distortions. We use patterns in the 20 richest
economies to predict technology for poor countries; see section 5.1. The gains from eliminating distortions are computed using
the model outlined in 5.1 and Appendix A. The sectoral gains are computed by eliminating distortions in that sector only, holding
all else constant. The IO matrix and value added shares come from the original IO tables detailed in Table 12 in Appendix B. Capital
value added shares are assumed constant over time and come from GTAP7. The time trend coefficient comes from a regression of
the gains on country fixed effects and a time trend.



                                                                46
       Table 10: Model and Data Comparisons


                                 GTAP7 Sample
            US Tech                          Adj. Tech

 Panel A: log(ct ) = const + κAOMct + errorct
 κ           0.46***                           0.14***
              (0.08)                            (0.03)
 Obs.            89                                69

 Panel B: log(T F Pct ) = κ log(ct ) + ρXct + errorct
 κ             0.47                               0.93
              (0.36)                            (1.06)
 Obs.            71                                52

 Panel C: yct = κ log(ct ) + ρXct + errorct
 κ           1.17***                              1.94
              (0.43)                            (1.37)
 Obs.            76                                57
 Notes: Xc includes a constant and all regressors from column 6 of Ta-
ble 4 (Rule of Law, Distance from Equator, Openness, Central Planning,
Government Consumption, and Technology Adoption). ct is the size of
distortions to TFP implied by the model (see equation 5). Robust standard
errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and
10%.




                                     47
7     Appendices: Not for publication

A     Derivations

A.1     One-Sector Growth Model with Intermediate Goods

This section presents a one sector Ramsey model with intermediate products. Gross output is
given by
                                                                      1−σ
                                       Y (t) = K(t)α L(t)1−α                 X(t)σ                  (10)

where X is the amount of intermediate goods used in production. At any point in time compet-
itive firms solve


        max          (1 − τY )(K(t)α (A(t)L(t))1−α )1−σ X(t)σ − w(t)L(t) − r(t))K(t) − (1 + τX )X(t) (11)
    K(t),L(t),X(t)


where τY is a distortion that acts as a sales tax and τX is a distortion that acts as a tax on inter-
mediate purchases. Firm optimization implies that, at any point in time, gross output is given
by                                                                         σ     σ    
                                                 α      1−α           1−α          1−σ
                                    Y (t) = K(t) L(t)             A                                 (12)
                                                                             τ
and net output or GDP is

                                             σ
                                                                     σ  σ     σ
                                                                                     
                                                                          1−σ
                     Y (t) − X(t) = Y (t) 1 −    = K(t)α L(t)1−α A1−α          1−                   (13)
                                              τ                        τ          τ

               1+τX
where τ =      1−τY    is the “net tax rate” and the term in brackets equals the Solow residual or mea-
sured TFP. Note that, given fixed capital and labor stocks, there is no distinction between the
effects of sales taxes and taxes on intermediates.
      We now establish the comparative statics of TFP at any point in time with respect to τ . Let

                                                          σ          σ
                                                                      1−σ
                                              G = A1−α
                                                              τ

We can then derive                                     
                                                       
                                                        <0                      if τ > 1
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                     
                                                       
                                 ∂T F P     σ(1 − τ ) 
                                        =G 2             =0                      if τ = 1           (14)
                                  ∂τ        τ (1 − σ) 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                       
                                                        >0
                                                                                if τ < 1

                                                      48
                ∂2T F P      1−τ      2                                        
                        =G 4       2
                                      τ − σ(1 − σ)(1 − τ ) + σ(τ − σ) log(σ/τ )              (15)
                 ∂σ∂τ     τ (1 − σ)


                                               
                                               
                                                 <0      if τ > 1
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                                =0      if τ = 1
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                               
                                                >0
                                                        if τ < 1


   Higher taxes on intermediates, direct (τX ) or indirect (τX ), reduce intermediate usage from
its optimal level and lower measured TFP. A higher intermediate share implies that intermediates
are relatively more important in the production process, so distortions to intermediate inputs
(i.e. deviations from τ = 1) are more costly.
   We add a household sector in order to study how intermediate goods and distortions affect
the steady state level of capital stock. Suppose a representative consumer solves

                                ∞
                                           C(t)1−θ
                            Z
                     max            e−ρt           dt                                        (16)
                     c(t)   t=0             1−θ
                      s.t. ȧ(t) = [r(t) − δ] a(t) + w(t) + τY y(t) + τX x(t) − c(t)         (17)


where lowercase variables are per capita values and δ is the capital depreciation rate. Technology
A grows at a constant exogenous rate g.
   Letting k = K/AL, c̃ = c/A and x = X/AL we can express the two dynamic equations of the
model as

                  c̃˙   r(t) − ρ − δ
                      =              −g                                                      (18)
                  c̃          θ
                                     σ
                  k̇ = k α (σ/τ ) 1−σ [(1 − τY )(1 − σ) + τY + τX σ/τ ] − c̃ − (g + δ)k      (19)

                                                   σ
where r(t) = (1 − τY )(1 − σ)αk α−1 (σ/τ ) 1−σ . Solving for the steady state value of capital per
effective labor, we find
                                                                        1
                                        θg + ρ + δ              σ        α−1
                                k̄ =                   (σ/τ )− 1−σ                           (20)
                                     α(1 − τY )(1 − σ)




                                                        49
      Along the balanced growth path, net output per worker is given by
                                         σ              
                            α
                                 σ 
                                        1−σ       τ −σ
                     ¯ = Ak̄ ·
                    va
                                  τ                 τ
                                                                       1
                                                                                      σ              
                             θg + ρ + δ              σ                α−1       σ              τ −σ
                                            (σ/τ )− 1−σ
                                                                                       1−σ
                       =A                                                   ·                               (21)
                          α(1 − τY )(1 − σ)                                      τ                 τ

Both taxes reduce capital accumulation, but τY has a larger negative effect because it directly
reduces the rate of return on capital as well as indirectly through its effect on TFP. The effect of
net subsidies (τ < 1) on output per worker on the balanced growth path is ambiguous because
subsidies reduce TFP but encourage capital accumulation to a varying degree depending on the
specific mix of distortions.
      We can establish the following:

                                 ∂ log(k̄)              1
                                           =                         <0                                     (22)
                                   ∂τY       (α − 1)(1 − τY )(1 − σ)

                                 ∂ log(k̄)              σ
                                           =                         <0                                     (23)
                                   ∂τX       (α − 1)(1 + τX )(1 − σ)
The last two effects are straightforward: taxing sales and intermediates reduces the steady state
capital stock. Subsidies, on the other hand, encourage excessive capital accumulation.




A.2    Comparative Statics of σ

The comparative statics of output and productivity with respect to the factor shares in a Cobb-
Douglas production function depends crucially on whether technology augments labor/capital,
or intermediate goods/ is neutral. For example, consider the functions


                                              F1 = A(K α Lβ )1−σ X σ                                        (24)


                                         F2 = (K α (AL)1−α )1−σ X σ                                         (25)

and define let T F P1 and T F P2 denote total factor productivity in the value-added form of the
production function (assuming no distortions),

                                                                  σ         1
                                         T F P1 = (1 − σ)σ 1−σ A 1−σ                                        (26)

                                                             50
                                                              σ
                                       T F P2 = (1 − σ)σ 1−σ A1−α                                (27)
                                       σ
It is easy to show that d/dσ (1−σ)σ 1−σ < 0, which implies that dT F P2 /dσ < 0. But when σ enters
into the exponent of A as in T F P1 the magnitude of A determines the sign of the derivative. For
A large enough dT F P1 /dσ > 0 and for A small enough we get the opposite. These features make
conducting comparative statics with σ very unappealing since there is no good reason to prefer
one specification to another. Moreover the magnitude of A depends on the units in which inputs
and outputs are measured, which in the case of T F P1 will affect the magnitude and sign of the
elasticity of TFP with respect to σ.


A.3     CES Generalization

Consider the CES generalization of the gross output production function (10),29

                                                                              1
                             Y = (aL (πL L)ρ + aK (πK K)ρ + aX (πX X)ρ ) ρ                       (28)


Following the same steps as in the previous sections, in a competitive economy with distortions
the intermediate goods share will be

                                                                1
                                                        ρ    1−ρ
                                           X         aX πX
                                             =                                                   (29)
                                           Y           t

and net output will be
                                                                     ρ   −1
                                                    1 − aX πX1−ρ t 1ρ
                               Y − X = constant ·                   1                          (30)
                                                             ρ   −ρ   ρ
                                                            1−ρ 1ρ
                                                   1 − aX πX t

This expression need not be positive (or real) for all admissible values of t and ρ. Intuitively, if
the tax t is high and ρ is low the firm must pay more for its intermediate input than it can get for
its output, so production shuts down and the formula ceases to be meaningful. If t is low and ρ
is high enough the firm can make infinite profits by simply using intermediate goods to produce
final goods without the use of capital and labor at all, which also cannot be an equilibrium.
Therefore, we confine our discussion to the parameter space for which equation (30) delivers an
economically sensible answer.
       We are interested in how the impact of distortions on aggregate output varies with the elas-
  29
   This is a “normalized” CES function, appropriate for doing comparative statics on the elasticity of
substitution (Klump et al., 2012).


                                                     51
ticity of substitution. Intuitively, there are two off-setting effects. When the elasticity of substitu-
tion is lower, a given tax causes a relatively smaller change in the input-output coefficient (29).
On the other hand, the misallocation in input quantities induced by the distortion is more costly
the lower the elasticity of substitution. Which effect dominates depends non-monotonically on
the elasticity. Figure 6 shows the impact of different taxes for several values of the elasticity of
substitution. For an elasticity of substitution of 1/2 (i.e. ρ = −1)), the output cost of a given
level of distortion is much larger than in the case of a unit elasticity. The output cost is still larger
than in the unit elasticity case when elasticity of 1/11, but the difference is much smaller. In the
Leontief limit, the output cost of distortions is zero.




                                                   52
A.4    Multi-Sector Model


In our simulations we use the closed economy version of the multisector neoclassical growth
model with distortions explored by Jones (2011b) with 56 sectors. We refer the reader to that
paper for an in depth discussion. In this appendix we simply specify the model formally for easy
reference.
      The production side of the economy consists of multiple intermediate goods sectors and a
final goods sector. Each intermediate sector has competitive input and output markets. Produc-
tion in sector i takes place using the Cobb-Douglas technology

                                                                       1−σi Yn
                                                                 1−αi             σ
                                   Yi =        Kiαi   (Ai Li )               ·   Xijij                       (31)
                                                                                j=1

                                                                                                     Pn
where the Xij are the intermediate goods from sector j used by sector i and σi =                      j=1 σij ,   K
is capital, L is labor, and A is the labor augmenting technology level. Firms choose input and
output levels to maximize profits:

                                                                                      n
                                                                                      X
                              max         (1 −   τiY )Pi Yi   − wLi − rKi −                 Pj Xij           (32)
                            Ki ,Li ,Xij
                                                                                      j=1


where a fraction τiY of the firm’s output is stolen and rebated lump sum to consumers. The firm’s
output is sold either to other intermediate goods producers or to the final goods sector, whose
Cobb-Douglas production function is
                                                                      cγi i
                                                                 Y
                                                        Y =                                                  (33)
                                                                  i
         P
where      i γi   = 1. Consumers then purchase this composite final good. Consumers own all
factors of production (which are in fixed supply) and care only about consumption, and since
the model is static the solution to their optimization problem is to simply spend all their income
on this consumption good.
      Market clearing requires that all intermediate production is uses to produce either other in-
termediates or final goods,
                                                                      X
                                                  Yi = ci +               Xij                                (34)
                                                                      j

all final good production is consumed,
                                                           Y =C                                              (35)

                                                              53
     Figure 6: Output cost of distortions for CES production functions




          1



         0.9



         0.8


                                                                             =0
         0.7                                                                  = .5
                                                                              = -1
output




                                                                              = -10
         0.6



         0.5



         0.4



         0.3



         0.2
               1   1.05   1.1   1.15   1.2      1.25      1.3   1.35   1.4   1.45      1.5
                                             tax rate t




                                       54
and all factors of production are fully employed

                                            X
                                                  Ki = K                                         (36)
                                             i
                                            X
                                                  Li = L                                         (37)
                                              i


   A competitive equilibrium is a set of quantities C, Y, Yi , Ki , Li , Xij and prices Pi , r, w such
that all firms are maximizing profits, all markets clear and consumers consume optimally.
   Jones (2011b) shows that in this competitive equilibrium aggregate output is a Cobb-Douglas
function of aggregate capital, labor and TFP, where TFP is the product of a term that involves no
distortions and a term that does, . In our simulations we focus on variation in , so we provide
the formula below.


                                          log() = ω + µ0 η̄                                     (38)




                                                  55
where


          ω = γ 0 ωc + µ0 ωq

         µ0 = γ 0 (I − B∗ )

         η̄i = log (Ai (1 − τi ))

        ωq = ωK + ωL + ωX
                   
                   γi
        ωci = log
                   βi
          β = (I − B0 )−1 γ
                N
                X
        ωXi =         σij log(σij βi /βj )
                j=1

        ωKi = δKi log(θKi )

        ωLi = δLi log(θLi )
                          δKi βi
        θKi = PN
                  j=1 (1   − τj )δKj βj
                          δLi βi
        θLi = PN
                  j=1 (1    − τj )δLj βj

        δKi = αi (1 − σi )

        δLi = (1 − αi )(1 − σi )




                       56
B   Data Appendix




                    57
   Table 11: Cross Section Sample of Countries

countrycode   country             y      AOM    AOM-MS
   ALB        Albania            9.34    1.58    1.94
   ARG        Argentina          9.96    1.73    2.08
   ARM        Armenia            9.10    1.45    1.77
   AUS        Australia          11.21   1.86    2.29
   AUT        Austria            11.19   1.80    2.29
   AZE        Azerbaijan         9.23    1.82    1.78
   BEL        Belgium            11.24   1.41    1.93
   BGD        Bangladesh         7.84    1.73    2.04
   BLR        Belarus            9.84    1.97    1.91
   BOL        Bolivia            8.96    1.82    2.12
   BRA        Brazil             9.71    1.98    2.28
   CAN        Canada             11.12   1.76    2.13
   CHE        Switzerland        11.06   1.46    2.08
   CHL        Chile              10.20   1.75    2.11
   CHN        China              9.00    2.12    2.39
   COL        Colombia           9.72    1.63    2.08
   CRI        Costa Rica         10.01   1.64    2.13
   CYP        Cyprus             10.53   1.51    1.99
   CZE        Czech Republic     10.62   2.03    2.25
   DNK        Denmark            11.09   1.89    2.28
   ECU        Ecuador            9.55    1.89    2.18
   EGY        Egypt              9.50    1.49    1.83
   ESP        Spain              10.97   1.93    2.36
   EST        Estonia            10.39   1.79    2.14
   ETH        Ethiopia           7.00    1.59    2.21
   FIN        Finland            11.05   1.70    2.17
   FRA        France             11.12   2.06    2.50
   GBR        United Kingdom     11.12   2.06    2.56
   GEO        Georgia            8.90    1.65    1.87
   GER        Germany            11.06   1.99    2.46
   GRC        Greece             10.98   1.77    2.29


                            58
GTM   Guatemala            9.63    1.63   2.10
HKG   Hong Kong            11.06   1.81   2.22
HRV   Croatia              10.35   1.68   2.02
HUN   Hungary              10.59   1.71   2.05
IDN   Indonesia            8.86    1.71   2.10
IND   India                8.80    1.70   2.10
IRL   Ireland              11.23   1.59   2.04
IRN   Iran                 10.06   1.80   1.95
ITA   Italy                11.15   1.64   2.19
JPN   Japan                11.05   2.05   2.42
KAZ   Kazakhstan           9.74    1.85   2.12
KGZ   Kyrgyzstan           8.38    1.81   1.84
KHM   Cambodia             8.04    1.65   1.99
KOR   Korea, Republic of   10.74   1.86   2.28
LAO   Laos                 8.27    1.97   1.76
LKA   Sri Lanka            8.99    1.43   1.87
LTU   Lithuania            10.25   1.89   2.21
LUX   Luxembourg           11.55   1.32   1.76
LVA   Latvia               10.14   1.71   2.07
MAR   Morocco              9.03    1.70   2.24
MDG   Madagascar           7.34    1.53   1.95
MEX   Mexico               10.30   1.61   2.04
MLT   Malta                10.83   1.34   1.74
MOZ   Mozambique           7.18    1.47   1.92
MUS   Mauritius            9.84    1.28   1.82
MWI   Malawi               7.17    1.40   1.87
MYS   Malaysia             10.13   1.58   2.00
NIC   Nicaragua            8.58    1.66   2.01
NLD   Netherlands          11.20   1.97   2.45
NOR   Norway               11.45   1.75   2.16
NZL   New Zealand          10.86   1.89   2.22
PAK   Pakistan             8.78    1.67   2.04
PAN   Panama               9.76    1.77   2.03
PER   Peru                 9.46    1.86   2.30



                    59
     PHL           Philippines              8.69     1.47        1.96
     POL           Poland                  10.30     2.19        2.48
      PRT          Portugal                10.55     1.97        2.37
      PRY          Paraguay                 8.97     1.76        2.18
     ROM           Romania                  9.82     1.66        2.03
     RUS           Russia                  10.08     1.98        2.17
     SEN           Senegal                  8.15     1.33        1.86
     SGP           Singapore               11.28     1.44        1.96
      SVK          Slovak Republic         10.40     1.89        2.26
     SVN           Slovenia                10.73     1.86        2.29
     SWE           Sweden                  11.13     2.06        2.49
     THA           Thailand                 9.44     1.63        2.03
     TUN           Tunisia                  9.63     1.56        1.98
     TUR           Turkey                  10.19     1.54        2.02
     TWN           Taiwan                  10.99     1.71        2.13
     TZA           Tanzania                 7.56     1.68        2.01
     UGA           Uganda                   7.75     1.33        1.78
     UKR           Ukraine                  9.41     1.94        2.04
     URY           Uruguay                  9.83     1.47        1.88
     USA           United States           11.33     1.93        2.31
     VEN           Venezuela                9.86     1.69        2.11
     VNM           Vietnam                  8.42     1.45        1.87
      ZAF          South Africa             9.85     2.14        2.53
     ZMB           Zambia                   8.22     1.66        2.07

Sources: Penn World Tables 7.0, GTAP7 at https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu




                                   60
                    Table 12: Non-GTAP7 Countries and Sources

Country     years         Source                                      In Sample?
Argentina   1950, 1953,   United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
            1959, 1963,   for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
            1970          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Argentina   1997          OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
Australia   1968, 1974,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            1986, 1989,
            1994, 1998,
            2004
Austria     1961, 1964,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1976          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Austria     1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2000, 2004
Burundi     1970          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Belgium     1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1970          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Belgium     1995, 2000,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2004
Bangladesh 1962           UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Bangladesh 1997           GTAP5                                       Yes
Bulgaria    1963          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries for years around 1959, New
                          York, United Nations, 1972
Bolivia     1958          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Botswanna 1997            GTAP5                                       Yes




                                          61
Brazil     1959          United Nations Economic Commission          No, no domestic
                         for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        gross output
                         producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                         Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Brazil     1970          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                         for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                         producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                         Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Brazil     1995, 1996,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
           1997, 2000,
           2005
Canada     1965, 1971,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
           1975          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                         countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                         various years
Canada     1976, 1981,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
           1986, 1990,
           1995, 1997,
           2000
Switzerland 2001         OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
Chile      1962          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                         for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                         producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                         Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Chile      1977          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                         ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                         1985
Chile      1986, 1996,   http://www.bcentral.cl, GTAP5               Yes
           1997
China      1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
           2000, 2002
Ivory      1976          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, trade margins
Coast                    ing countries, New York : United Nations,   excluded
                         1985
Ivory      1981          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, major errors
Coast                    ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                         1985
Congo      1967          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, trade margins
                         ing countries, New York : United Nations,   excluded
                         1985
Columbia   1953          United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing service
                         for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        sectors
                         producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                         Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983



                                         62
Columbia     1956          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Columbia     1960          United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing service
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        sectors
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Columbia     1970          United Nations Economic Commission          No,    trade and
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        transport margins
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de     excluded
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Columbia     1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Costa Rica   1957          United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing service
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        sectors
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Costa Rica   1972          United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing mining
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        sectors
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Czechoslovakia
            1962, 1967,    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1973, 1977     dardized input-output tables of ECE
                           countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                           various years
Czech Re-    1995, 2000,   OECD                                        Yes
public       2005
Denmark      1966-2005,    http://www.dst.dk, GTAP5                    Yes
             annual
Dominican 1962             United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing service
Republic                   for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        sectors
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Ecuador      1972, 1975    United Nations Economic Commission          No, trade margins
                           for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        excluded
                           producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                           Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Egypt        1973          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, trade margins
                           ing countries, New York : United Nations,   excluded
                           1985
Spain        1966, 1975    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                           dardized input-output tables of ECE
                           countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                           various years



                                           63
Spain     1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5. Eurostat                       Yes
          2000, 2004,
          2005
Estonia   1997, 2000,   OECD                                        Yes
          2005
Finland   1965, 1970    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                        dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
Finland   1995-2007,    Eurostat, GTAP5                             Yes
          annual
Fiji      1972          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                        ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                        1985
France    1959,1965,    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
          1970, 1975    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
France    1972, 1977,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
          1980, 1985,
          1990, 1995-
          2007
United    1963          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       No, major errors
Kingdom                 dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries for years around 1959, New
                        York, United Nations, 1972
United    1968, 1969,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
Kingdom   1975          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
United    1979, 1984,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
Kingdom   1990, 1995,
          1997, 1998,
          2000, 2003
Germany   1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
          1970, 1975    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
Germany   1978, 1986,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
          1988, 1990,
          1995, 1997,
          2000-2007
Ghana     1968          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                        ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                        1985


                                          64
Greece      1958, 1970    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Greece      1994, 1995,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
            1997, 1999,
            200, 2005
Guatamala   1971          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Haiti       1971          United Nations Economic Commission          No, missing domes-
                          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-        tic gross output
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Haiti       1975          United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Hong        1997          GTAP5
Kong
Hungary     1959          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       No, missing domes-
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE         tic gross output
                          countries for years around 1959, New
                          York, United Nations, 1972
Hungary     1965, 1976    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Hungary     1997, 1998,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2000, 2005
Indonesia   1971          Biro Pusat Statistik, Tabel Input-Output    No, missing domes-
                          Indonesia, 1971                             tic gross output
Indonesia   1975          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Indonesia   1980          Biro Pusat Statistik, Tabel Input-Output    No, missing domes-
                          Indonesia, 1980                             tic gross output
Indonesia   1985, 1998,   Biro Pusat Statistik, Tabel Input-Output    Yes
            2005          Indonesia, various years
Indonesia   1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2000




                                          65
India     1973          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                        ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                        1985
India     1993, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
          1998, 2003
Ireland   1964, 1969    Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                        dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
Ireland   1997, 1998,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
          2000, 2005
Iran      2001          http://www.amar.org.ir                      Yes
Israel    1968, 1972    David Chen, Input-output tables 1968/69,    Yes
                        Jerusalem : Bureau of Stats, 1975, 1979
Israel    1995, 2004    OECD                                        Yes
Italy     1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
          1970, 1975    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
Italy     1985, 1992,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
          1995, 1997,
          2000, 2004,
          2005
Japan     1960          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       No, missing domes-
                        dardized input-output tables of ECE         tic gross output
                        countries for years around 1959, New
                        York, United Nations, 1972
Japan     1965, 1970,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
          1975          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                        countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                        various years
Japan     1980, 1985,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
          1990, 1995,
          1996, 1997,
          2000, 205
Kenya     1967,1971,    Input/Output Table for Kenya, Central       Yes
          1976          Burea of Statistics, various years
Korea     1970, 1973,   Bank of Korea, GTAP5                        Yes
          1975, 1978,
          1980, 1983,
          1985-1988,
          1990, 1993,
          1995, 1998,
          2000, 2003,
          2005


                                        66
Sri Lanka   1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Lithuania   2000, 2005    OECD                                        Yes
Luxembourg 1995, 1997,    OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
           2000, 2005
Latvia      1996, 1998    OECD                                        Yes
Morocco     1975          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Morocco     1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Madagascar 1973           UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, missing trade
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,   and transport
                          1985
Mexico      1950, 1960    United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
                          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Mexico      1970, 1980    Banco de Mexico                             Yes
Mexico      19,972,003    OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
Macedonia 2005            OECD                                        Yes
Malta       1971          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Malaysia    1978, 1983,   Jadual input-output Malaysia, Kuala         Yes
            1987, 1991    Lumpur : Jabatan Perangkaan, various
                          years
Malaysia    1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Malawwi     1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Mozambique199             GTAP5                                       Yes
Nicaragua   1974          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Netherlands 1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1970, 1975    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Netherlands 1972, 1977,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
            1981, 1986,
            1995-2005
Norway      1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1970, 1975    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years


                                          67
Norway      1992-2005     Eurostat                                    Yes
Norway      1995, 2000    OECD                                        Yes
New         1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
Zealand     2002
Peru        1955, 1963,   United Nations Economic Commission          Yes
            1968          for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-
                          producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                          Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
Peru        1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Philippines 1974          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     No, missing domes-
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,   tic gross output
                          1985
Philippines 1997          GTAP5
Papua       1972          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
New                       ing countries, New York : United Nations,
Guineau                   1985
Poland      1962, 1967,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1977          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Poland      1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2000, 2004,
            205
Portugal    1959, 1965,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1970, 1974    dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Portugal    1995, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5, Eurostat                       Yes
            1999, 2000,
            2005
Romania     2000, 2003-   Eurostat                                    Yes
            2005
Russia      1995, 2000    OECD                                        Yes
Russia      2002          OECD                                        No, major errors
Rwanda      1970          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Senegal     1959          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Singapore   1973          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985


                                          68
Singapore   1997          GTAP5
Slovakia    1995, 2000,   OECD, Eurostat                              Yes
            200
Slovenia    1996, 2000,   Eurostat                                    Yes
            2001, 2005
Sweden      1964, 1969,   Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
            1975          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                          various years
Sweden      1995, 1997,   GTAP5, Eurostat                             Yes
            2000, 2005
Thailand    1975          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Thailand    1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Turkey      1963          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       No, missing domes-
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE         tic gross output
                          countries for the years around 1959, New
                          York, United Nations, 1972
Turkey      1968          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries for the years around 1970, New
                          York, United Nations, 1982
Turkey      1973          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-       Yes
                          dardized input-output tables of ECE
                          countries for the years around 1975, New
                          York, United Nations, 1982
Turkey      1996, 1997    OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            1998, 2002
Taiwan      1971          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Taiwan      1981, 1984,   http://eng.stat.gov.tw/                     Yes
            1986, 1989,
            1991, 1994,
            1999, 2004
Taiwan      1996, 1997,   OECD, GTAP5                                 Yes
            2001, 2006
Tanzania    1970          UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-     Yes
                          ing countries, New York : United Nations,
                          1985
Tanzania    1997          GTAP5                                       Yes
Uganda      1997          GTAP5                                       Yes


                                            69
 Uruguay           1961                United Nations Economic Commission                       No, missing mining
                                       for Latin America, Tablas de insumo-                     sectors
                                       producto en America Latina, Santiago de
                                       Chile : Naciones Unidas, 1983
 Uruguay           1997                GTAP5                                                    Yes
 United            1958, 1963          Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-                    No, missing domes-
 States                                dardized input-output tables of ECE                      tic gross output
                                       countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                                       various years
 United            1972, 1977,         BEA                                                      Yes
 States            1982
 United            1985, 1990,         OECD, GTAP5                                              Yes
 States            1995, 1997,
                   2000, 2005
 USSR              1966                Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-                    No, missing domes-
                                       dardized input-output tables of ECE                      tic gross output and
                                       countries for the years around 1965, New                 F vector
                                       York, United Nations, 1977
 Venezuela         1997                GTAP5                                                    Yes
 Vietnam           1997                GTAP5                                                    Yes
 Yugoslavia        1962,      170,     Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-                    Yes
                   1976                dardized input-output tables of ECE
                                       countries ..., New York, United Nations,
                                       various years
 Yugoslavia        1966                Economic Commission for Europe, Stan-                    No, missing sectors
                                       dardized input-output tables of ECE
                                       countries for the years around 1965, New
                                       York, United Nations, 1977
 South             1971, 1975,         ZAF stat                                                 Yes
 Africa            1978, 1981,
                   1984, 1988,
                   1989, 1993
 South             2000, 2005          OECD                                                     Yes
 Africa
 Zambia            1973                UNIDO, Input-output tables for develop-                  No, missing domes-
                                       ing countries, New York : United Nations,                tic gross output
                                       1985
 Zambia            1997                GTAP5                                                    Yes
 Zimbabwe          1997                GTAP5                                                    Yes
 Notes The table lists each IO table we collected (excluding those in GTAP7, which are listed above in Table 11), its source,
and whether or not it is included in the sample. If not, we provide a brief description of why it was not. “Major errors”
means that we discovered significant errors in the original sources that proved impossible to correct. Generally tables
that were missing some major sectors were excluded, as were those that did not provide a measure of domestic gross
output. GTAP5 is the major source of tables for 1997.




                                                            70
                    Table 13: GTAP Sectors and Abbreviations

Code Description                  Code Description              Code Description
PDR Paddy rice                    OMT Meat products nec         OTN Transport       equip-
                                                                    ment nec
WHT Wheat                         VOL Vegetable oils and        ELE Electronic      equip-
                                      fats                          ment
GRO Cereal grains nec             MIL Dairy products            OME Machinery     and
                                                                    equipment nec
VF     Vegetables,       fruit,   PCR Processed rice            OMF Manufactures nec
       nuts
OSD Oil seeds                     SGR Sugar                     ELY Electricity
C B Sugar cane, sugar             OFD Food products nec         GDT Gas manufacture,
    beet                                                            distribution
PFB Plant-based fibers            B T Beverages and to-         WTR Water
                                      bacco products
OCR Crops nec                     TEX Textiles                  CNS Construction
CTL Bovine cattle, sheep          WAP Wearing apparel           TRD Trade
    and goats, horses
OAP Animal          products      LEA Leather products          OTP Transport nec
    nec
RMK Raw milk                      LUM Wood products             WTP Water transport
WOL Wool, silk-worm co-           PPP Paper     products,       ATP Air transport
    coons                             publishing
FRS Forestry                      P C Petroleum,         coal   CMN Communication
                                      products
FSH Fishing                       CRP Chemical, rubber,         OFI Financial      services
                                      plastic products              nec
COA Coal                          NMMMineral       products     ISR Insurance
                                     nec
OIL Oil                           IS    Ferrous metals          OBS Business       services
                                                                    nec
GAS Gas                           NFM Metals nec                ROS Recreational       and
                                                                    other services
OMN Minerals nec                  FMP Metal products            OSG Public    Adminis-
                                                                    tration,   Defense,
                                                                    Education, Health
CMT Bovine meat prod-             MVH Motor vehicles and
    ucts                              parts
Source: https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu



                                              71
