NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSE PRICE VOLATILITY AND THE HOUSING LADDER
James Banks
Richard Blundell
Zoé Oldfield
James P. Smith
Working Paper 21255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21255

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Economic and Social Research Council
through the research grant RES-000-22-0513. The work of Banks, Blundell and Oldfield, was also
supported by ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at IFS (RES-544-28-0001).
James Smith’s research was supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging and benefited
from the expert programming assistance of David Rumpel and Iva Maclennan. This paper was presented
at the biannual NBER Conference on the Economics of Aging at Carefree, Arizona in May 2015. We
would like to thank our discussant Steven Venti and participants in the meeting for very helpful comments.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoé Oldfield, and James P. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

House Price Volatility and the Housing Ladder
James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zoé Oldfield, and James P. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 21255
June 2015
JEL No. D12,D91
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the effects of spatial housing price risk on housing choices over the first half
of the life-cycle. Housing price risk can be substantial but, unlike other risky assets which people can
avoid, most people want to eventually own their home thereby creating an insurance demand early
in life. Our contribution focuses on the importance of home ownership as a hedge against future house
price risk for individuals that plan to move up the housing ladder. We use a simple theoretical model
to show that people living in places with higher housing price risk should own their first home at a
younger age, live in larger homes, and be less likely to refinance. These predictions are shown to hold
using panel data from the United States and United Kingdom.

James Banks
Arthur Lewis Building-3.020
School of Social Sciences
The University of Manchester
Manchester M13 9PL
United Kingdom
and Institute for Fiscal Studies
j.banks@ifs.org.uk
Richard Blundell
University College London
Department of Economics
Gower Street
London, ENGLAND
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk

Zoé Oldfield
Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgemount
London, WC1 7AE U.K.
zoe_o@ifs.org.uk
James P. Smith
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
smith@rand.org

One of the most critical consumption and investment decisions that individuals and families
make over their life-cycle involves the amount of housing services to consume and whether or
not to combine consumption with ownership. Housing is an important component of
consumption, but not simply because it absorbs a large fraction of the household budget—which
it does. Where we live and how much we decide to spend on housing is a key ingredient to the
amenities and life-style we have chosen for our families and ourselves. But housing, or more
particularly housing wealth, can be even more critical as an investment as it is typically by far
the biggest marketable asset in the household portfolio for most people.
The contribution of this paper is to bring together two key elements of housing
consumption and home ownership decisions into an empirical model of housing outcomes. The
first of these is the housing ladder. Rather than modeling home ownership as a one-time durable
purchase, we model it as a series of purchase decisions, or a housing ladder, where the desired
flow of housing services rises with family formation and growing family size over the life cycle.
The second is the acknowledgement of the role of future house price risk. In some geographic
markets, housing can be a risky asset with high levels of unpredictable price volatility while in
other places the prospect of capital gains or losses in housing are understandably not the subject
of much social conversation.
Our contribution is to focus on the importance of ownership as a hedge against future
house price risk as individuals move up the ladder. We use a stylized model to show that
increasing house price risk acts as an incentive to become a homeowner earlier in the life-cycle
and, once an owner, to move more rapidly up the housing ladder. Increases in volatility are
shown to increase ownership and to increase the quantity of housing wealth conditional on

2

ownership in earlier periods of the life-cycle. We then establish that these relationships hold
empirically using panel data on families in different geographic markets in Britain and in the US.
Housing needs change over the life-cycle and the decision of when to buy the first
property and at what point to move up the ladder is a key life-cycle decision. For example,
Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2004, 2006) note the importance of new entrants at the bottom of the
ladder for the determination of housing transactions along the whole ladder. Ermisch and Pevalin
(2004) document the importance of childbearing and family formation decisions on housing
choices. We follow this lead by allowing the demand for housing consumption and movements
up the ladder to depend directly on the demographic profile of the family. We then add to this the
enhanced incentive to own and to move up the ladder created by more volatile house prices.
The idea that home ownership can be seen as a hedge against uncertainty in the price of
housing services has many precedents. For example, Sinai and Souleles (2005) use this
observation to carefully show the increased demand for ownership when rental price uncertainty
is higher. Our contribution instead is to focus on the importance of ownership and the quantity of
housing owned as a hedge against future house price risk as individuals move up the ladder. We
examine the impact of volatility on both ownership and on measures of the quantity of housing
wealth conditional on ownership. Both are shown to rise with increased house price volatility.
In contrast to other risky assets in which risk-averse individuals can simply choose to
avoid them, everyone must consume housing, and the vast majority of people desire to and
eventually do end up owning their own home. In addition, for most individuals the demand for
housing will rise over the life-cycle as family size increases. The combination of these factors
results in an insurance role for housing wealth in early adult life that drives the predictions we
investigate in our empirical analysis.

3

Using panel data from the UK and the US, we test the implications of the ladder and price
volatility on the decision on when to become a homeowner, how much housing to consume, and
whether to refinance out of housing equity. In the presence of volatility in house prices, housing
has three roles—investment, consumption, and insurance against price fluctuations for future
movements up the housing ladder. A simple theoretical discussion illustrates these effects, and
the predictions for home ownership and housing wealth accumulation are drawn out.
Because housing price volatility is spatially variable, we test the importance of the role of
volatility in housing decisions empirically using comparable panel data from the US and the UK.
There are significant differences in housing price variability between and within these two
countries. But in addition there are also differences in the tax treatment of mortgage debt, the
nature of mortgage arrangements, and even the level of geographic mobility of younger
households. Consequently a test relying on between country differences is unlikely to isolate the
effects of interest. In our analysis we show that, while the international differences are indeed in
accordance with the predictions of our model, the model also performs well when estimated from
within-country variation in each of the countries we consider, despite their rather wide
institutional differences.
The analysis in this paper is in five sections. Section 1 documents a critical and salient
fact—a steep housing ladder with age which is coincident with changing demographics over the
life-cycle that are common across the two countries. Section 2 shows the large special dispersion
in house price volatility within and between the UK and US. Section 3 then discusses the
implications of housing price variability for housing choices in a simple life-cycle framework. In
Section 4 the model predictions concerning the age of initial home ownership, the decision to
refinance, the shape of housing wealth and the number of rooms, and the decision in the UK to

4

obtain an endowment mortgage are put to the test. In the final section we summarize our
conclusions.
1. The Housing Ladder
Even without credit constraints or income uncertainty, individuals would not choose to consume
the same flow of housing services at all times in their lives. People may start by moving out of
the parental home into a small rented or purchased apartment or flat of their own. When they
marry, they may know that two may well live more cheaply than one but they generally do not
want to live in smaller places and often may want to own a bigger but still modest first home.
Children then appear on the scene and eventually will age into rooms of their own—all of which
requires a bigger if not better home.
A simple way of illustrating this point is to examine how the size of homes people live in
changes with age. Table 1 shows the age profile of mean number of rooms of household heads
for owners and renters alike in the US and UK using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) in the US and the British Household Panel Study (BHPS).1 Note that the number of
rooms in the British data excludes kitchens and bathrooms while in the American data they
exclude only bathrooms and so the number of rooms is not strictly comparable across the two
countries.
In both countries there is a strong increase in size of house as the head of household
grows older, flattening out around the age 50 but rising steeply from the 20s to the 40s. The
general shape of the ladder is similar in the two countries.2 It is important to note that the steep

1

A detailed data description is provided in Appendix 1.
In the UK there is little evidence of cohort effects during the early part of the adult life cycle for the period 19681998 (Banks, Blundell and Smith, 2003). This suggests the rise would be the same whether we look at individual
date of birth cohorts or pool across cohorts as in the tables here. In the US, there is some evidence of the number of
rooms plateauing out at higher values among more recent cohorts.
2

5

part of the ladder is not simply the consequence of changing tenure status from renter to owner
although that transition certainly plays an important role. While owned homes are always larger
than rented ones on average, the steep early ladder characterizes both rented and owned
properties.3
Another way of seeing this transition is to examine the increase in home size at the time
of purchase among new and repeat buyers as shown in Table 2. New buyers are defined as those
who were previously renters in the prior wave of PSID or BHPS so that especially at young ages
this often will be their first owned home. Repeat buyers were previously also homeowners so
that this change now reflects changes in the size of owner-occupied housing. In the US, while the
transition from renter to owner involves a larger increment in house size, people are also clearly
trading up in the early part of the life cycle when they purchase their second and subsequent
homes. This effect is even stronger in the UK—on average first time buyers purchase houses that
are bigger comparable to their rented house, but bigger movements up the ladder, defined in
terms of increments to number of rooms, tend to take place for repeat buyers.
We view the shape of the ladder as demographically determined as individuals marry,
form families with children growing, eventually complete their family building with the by now
older children leaving home to go off on their own. Figures 1a and 1b plot the cumulative
distribution of individuals who have completed their fertility by age.4 The steepness of this
cumulative distribution mimics closely the overall shape of the housing ladder—a steep incline
during the 20s and 30s with a flattening out during the 40s. In fact, between ages 25 and the late
3

The profiles in Table 1 show some evidence of ‘downsizing’ at older ages as children move out and the parents
transit into retirement. While this downsizing may be important especially for retired American households (see
Venti and Wise (2001) or Banks et al. (2012)), it is not the focus of this paper, which concentrates instead on the
implications of the steps up the ladder earlier in life and a full analysis would need to take into account the possible
effects of cohort differences amongst older those at older ages on these profiles.
4
Completed family size is computed by taking individuals aged 50 or over and assuming they will not have any
more children. We then look back through their fertility history and find the age at which their final child was born,
and call this age the age of completed family size.

6

30s, this cumulative distribution of competed fertility is almost linear, with each year of age
increasing the fraction that has finished childbearing by five percentage points. For example,
around age 31, half of all American individuals have completed their fertility with three out of
every four doing so by age 36. The shape and level of the profile corresponds extremely closely
to that observed in the UK over the same ages.
Children turning 5 years old may be at a critical stage for housing decisions since parents
may choose places to live with the quality of schools in mind and may want to stay longer in the
same place. This could be another indicator of reaching the top of the housing ladder and arrival
in the ‘family home. With this in mind, Figures 1a and 1b also plot the cumulative fraction of
individuals who ever had child at least 5 years old. Not surprisingly, compared to the cumulative
completed fertility, this figure is shifted out to the right so that, if age 5 is taken as the marker,
reaching the top of the ladder takes place for the median family in the mid to late thirties.
Nevertheless, as with the completed family size profile, the proportion rises steeply over the life
cycle up to age 40 in parallel to the sharp rise in the number of rooms demonstrated over the
same ages. Finally, Figures 1a and 1b also plot the proportion with their own children aged 5 or
over currently in the household, as a measure of contemporaneous housing needs. Again the
similarities between US and UK are striking—in both countries after age 40 there is a sharp
decline in young children at home, an indication of an eventual demographic rationale for
downsizing in later life.
2. House Price Volatility
Figure 2 shows real indices of country-wide average house prices for the US and UK
over the period 1974 to 1998 with both series normalized to take a value of one in 1980.
Immediately apparent is the much larger volatility of housing prices in the UK, with real prices
7

rising by 50% over the period 1980 to 1989 and then falling back to its previous value by 1992.
Over the period as a whole, however, real returns were similar across the two countries.
Although such difference will be instructive when looking at differences in housing
choices across the two countries, the majority of our testing will rely instead on within-country
differences in house price volatility over time in each of the two countries. The UK and the US
indexes both hide considerable differences across regions with some places and times being
much more volatile in housing prices than others. In Figures 3a and 3b we present house prices
from regional sub-indices, grouped to show house price trends in the more and less volatile
areas.
The variation across American states in housing price volatility is large. Using the
standard deviation in real prices (relative to a 1980 base) as the index, Massachusetts ranks at the
top with price swings between peak and trough over this period of more than two to one. At the
other extreme lies South Carolina where the peak price exceeds the trough by only 15%. The
most volatile states are concentrated in New England and along the North Eastern seaboard
(Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Hampshire, and
Maine) and in California and Hawaii. While we will use a continuous measure of volatility in our
analyses below, for descriptive purposes now we label these the volatile states.
To exploit regional and time series differences in volatility in house prices we construct
indices of volatility by computing the standard deviation of the change in the log real house price
index over the previous five years for each of the 50 US states and 12 UK regions for which we
have house price indices. These indices, which measure percent volatility over the sample,are
plotted in Figures 4a and 4b, grouped by the same two ‘volatile’ and ‘non-volatile’ areas as
before. Two things are important to note. First, the higher levels of volatility in the UK (even in

8

the ‘non-volatile’ regions) are apparent. Second, in both countries, it will be the state/regional
level volatility index, not an average across groups of regions that enters our empirical
specifications.
3. Housing Choices in the Presence of House Price Risk and the Housing Ladder
In order to think about how the housing ladder might affect housing demand in the presence of
house price risk we use the concept of a minimum housing ‘need’ that changes with family size.
This need can then be thought of as increasing over the life-cycle as individuals form into
couples, have children and reach their maximum family size. Central to our empirical modeling
is the idea that these increasing housing needs over the life-cycle interact with future house price
risks to generate an insurance role for housing consumption early in life.5 In this section we
discuss the intuition behind this idea, before moving on to testing the predictions of such a
framework empirically.
In a standard model without house price risk housing demand would increase with wealth
but would also adjust to reflect the minimum necessary level of consumption. In such a
framework one could write housing demands in each period as a function of adjusted lifetime
wealth (i.e., the present discounted value of lifetime wealth net of the discounted sum of
minimum necessary levels of housing over the lifetime6), the real user cost of housing services,
and the minimum level of housing needs in that period. Any future change in household
demographic composition would simply act through its effect on adjusted wealth. While the
consumption of housing services may involve the purchase of a house and an asset accumulation
decision, the assumption of perfect credit markets and certainty would yield this aspect of
5

In a related framework, Ortalo-Magne and Rady (2006) have looked at the theoretical predictions of an equilibrium
model of home-ownership when house prices are volatile.
6
This wealth variable contains the current value of assets and the future stream of discounted income flows.
Housing equity and other assets will be added in our discussion of uncertainty below.

9

housing consumption unimportant in such a setting. We need to generalize this model in order to
incorporate house price risk and consider the additional role of housing as a durable asset.
For ease of exposition we will assume the life-cycle profile can be represented by the
following sequence of three discrete life-stages: At (Demographic) stage D = 1 the individual is
living with his or her parents, at stage D = 2 he or she partners to form an independent family
unit, and at stage D = 3 the couple has had children and completed its family size. This is a
simplified demographic profile but represents effectively the upside of the housing ‘ladder’ that we wish
to capture in our model.7 For further simplicity we will assume that the leaving home decision D=1 →
D=2 simply concerns a decision over whether to rent or own in the light of the possible increase in family
size associated with the arrival of children between D=2 and D=3.

Without price uncertainty the rent/own decision will be driven by transaction costs of
ownership as well as the desire for mobility, the potential tax advantage of a mortgage, and any
down payment rules or constraints on the multiples of income that may be borrowed. For a
household that expects to remain in their house for a reasonable length of time, for example at
D=3 (the top stage of the demographic ladder), owning is the most efficient way of achieving a
desired level (and type) of housing service—with idiosyncratic tastes a renter can never commit
to stay long enough to make it in the landlord’s interest to invest in the renter’s idiosyncratic
tastes. Hence we will assume for simplicity that all households will be owner-occupiers at D=3
and that this is known to them at D=2.8
Before turning to the introduction of house price risk, there are two aspects of the supply
of housing services, which are relevant to our discussion. First, a more inelastic supply will
7

We ignore here older stages of the life cycle where the possibility of downsizing comes into play (see Venti and
Wise (2001) and Banks et al. (2012) for example.
8
To the extent that this probability is less than one then any insurance motive will be dampened but as long as the
positive probability of homeownership at D=3 is not zero the insurance motive will still exist. Since our empirical
tests are simply for the presence of an insurance effect of house price risk on housing choices at D=2 all they
formally require is that this probability is not zero.

10

induce a larger sensitivity of house prices to changes in demand and, in particular, to fluctuations
in incomes of young first-time buyers. The second aspect relates to the rental market—
imperfections and/or regulation of the private rental market may make it difficult for the young
to use rental housing as the step between leaving the parental home and acquiring a house.
The introduction of house price uncertainty into the model adds an important distinction
between ownership and renting which will enhance the desire to accumulate housing wealth and
thus the need to become an owner earlier in the life cycle—house price risk generates an
incentive to accumulate housing equity at D=2 before the family is complete. At first sight this
may seem a puzzle since accumulation of a risky asset might normally be expected to decrease
with the level of price volatility for a household with risk-averse preferences. That usual result
does not hold because of the vital insurance role played by housing in early life in our
framework. We argue this intuitively below, but to back up this intuition, in Appendix 2 we
simulate the predictions of a simple three-period model with constant relative risk-aversion
preferences that allows us to demonstrate more formally the effects on housing consumption
profiles of changing volatility, the changing steepness of the housing ladder and changing
degrees of risk aversion
At D = 2 there are two choices: how much housing to consume, and whether to own or to
rent. If house prices are variable and uncertain then, given the expected increase demand as the
household moves up the demographic ladder from D=2 to D=3, housing equity will be an
important source of insurance against future house price risk. Indeed, in the absence of a
financial instrument that could insure this house price risk (which may well be defined at a very
local level), holding housing early in life may be the only insurance mechanism. The larger the

11

uncertainty in house prices and the steeper the increase in minimum housing needs over the life
cycle, the more important is the insurance aspect of housing equity.
Thus the key mechanism for these effects is the insurance role of housing in period 2. If
prices turn out to fall or stay the same then ownership will not, ex post, dominate renting. Indeed
if house prices fall there will be some loss to ownership. However, because of the strongly
declining marginal utility of consumption associated with housing consumption in period 3
approaching the minimum necessary requirement, insuring the risk of house price rises is more
important than avoiding the risk of a house price fall. To achieve this, the consumer needs to
hold an asset whose return is correlated with (local) housing prices. If such an asset is not
available on the financial market the insurance can only be achieved by purchasing the asset
itself. Consequently, other things equal, the higher the level of house price uncertainty the higher
the incentive to become an owner-occupier. In this context increasing minimum housing
requirements or increases in risk aversion are acting in a similar way to an increase in volatility.
By a straightforward extension of these arguments, individuals will also stay away from
endowment mortgages and refinancing of housing equity for non-housing consumption or
investment purposes.9
In summary, the decision to accumulate housing equity early in the life cycle will be an
increasing function of house price volatility for risk-averse households who expect an increase in

9

Borrowing constraints add further refinements to the model. They typically take two forms: a down payment
constraint and a multiple income (or debt to income) constraint. The down payment is proportional to the house
price. The multiple income constraint restricts the mortgage to be a multiple of current income. With such
constraints in place, the potential downside of a house price rise between D=2 and D=3 for a non-owner enhances
the insurance value of ownership at D=2. If house prices rise relative to incomes then the capital gain reduces the
mortgage requirement and makes it more likely that the earnings to mortgage debt can be met. Such borrowing
constraints add to the insurance value of ownership since an unexpected price increase at D=3 considerably relieve
the down payment constraint.

12

family size. In the absence of an equity market in local housing assets, this demand for housing
equity also enhances the decision to own.10
Some housing price insurance against mid-life house price risk could be provided by
inheritances from parents of which housing wealth is frequently the most important port. But this
insurance is limited by a number of factors. First, not all parents are home owners themselves
especially since their home owner decisions were made in a distant past when home ownership
was much less common. Second inheritances are typically split amongst all the siblings making
this type of insurance partial at best. Parents may also not live in the same type of housing price
volatility area as their children which would also diminish the insurance value of this
mechanism. Finally the timing of the inheritance is relevant. Inheritances received when adult
children are in the early stages of the adult housing ladder have lost their insurance value while
those received after the peak of the ladder may have liquidity problems in creating an insurance
value.
One further extension that needs to be discussed, since we endeavor to control for it in
the empirical analysis that follows, is geographic mobility. If individuals anticipate residing in
less volatile areas in period 3 then their demand for insurance is reduced (and the insurance value
of their housing equity in period 2 will be reduced also to the extent that house prices are not
perfectly correlated across regions). It is expected volatility at D=3 (from the point of view of
D=2) that drives the insurance motive. In the case of individuals in D=2 anticipating moving to a

10

An additional reason for ownership is given by rental price risk. As Sinai and Souleles (2005) point out, house
ownership insures housing consumption from rental price risk (although it may not alleviate cyclical fluctuations in
housing costs when variable rate mortgages are the predominant form of finance for housing purchases). Our focus
here is specifically on the housing ladder where we show house price risk enhances the probability of ownership and
the speed with which an individual moves up the ladder. At this stage of the life-cycle where expected duration of
stay in rental housing is relatively short, rental price risk may be less relevant than for lifetime renters. In addition,
young agents can avoid rental price risk by living with their parents until they are ready to buy a home. This is
relatively common pathway in Britain.

13

‘safe’ area at D=3, both these factors are likely to play a reduced role, although they could still
be important to some extent.

4. The Empirical Relationship between Housing Choices and Risk
On the basis of our discussions in the previous section, and the numerical model solutions
presented in Appendix 2, there are three principal predictions that we will test empirically in this
paper: (1) other things being equal, individuals should buy homes earlier in more volatile areas;
(2) young homeowners are less likely to consume capital gains on housing through refinancing in
more volatile areas; and (3) young homeowners will consume ‘more’ housing in more volatile
areas than their counterparts in less volatile areas. In the following subsections we deal with each
of the above predictions in turn.
4.1 Age of Home Ownership
In the presence of a housing ladder, individuals living in places with more volatile housing prices
need to self-insure by buying their first home at a younger age. In the final column of Table 3,
we list for both the UK and US the proportion of individuals who are homeowners, by age for a
typical year—1994. These patterns do not depend critically on the year chosen. The data are also
presented separately for the volatile and non-volatile areas in both countries. While average rates
of home ownership are similar, there are striking differences by age between the two countries.
Home ownership rates amongst young households are far higher in the UK than in the US, with
differences of 10 percentage points for householders between ages 20-29 and 13 percentage
points those between ages 30-39. However, through middle age, home ownership rates converge
so quickly that US rates actually exceed those in the UK among older households.
Since prices are far more variable in the UK, these cross-country differences in home
ownership rates are consistent with our theoretical implication that ownership should occur at a
14

younger age in more price-volatile housing markets. However, when we compare home
ownership rates between the volatile and non-volatile areas within each country, the challenge to
our theory becomes more apparent. In both countries, owning a home is somewhat less common
among younger households in the volatile market.
However, there are other significant differences between these two markets in each
country that will presumably strongly affect the decision to own. Tables 4a and 4b lists some of
the more salient ones. Perhaps, most important, housing prices are much higher in the volatile
markets. For example, the average price of a home in the more volatile states is almost twice that
in the less volatile ones, which should certainly discourage home ownership among the young.
While rental prices are also higher in the more volatile states, the percentage difference is 46%
compared to 68% for housing prices. Young individuals living in the volatile states also have
more education, household income, and are less likely to be married and to have children. All of
these factors are obviously relevant to the housing tenure decision so the final verdict on the
theory requires multivariate modeling.
In our multivariate analysis, we estimate a probit model of whether or not one is a
homeowner using a sample of individuals who are between the ages of 21 and 35. Results are
similar if one uses a somewhat younger or somewhat older age band that corresponds to the
rising part of the housing ladder. In addition to our measure of housing price volatility described
above, this model includes several relevant demographic attributes—a quadratic in age, indicator
variables for whether one is married and whether one has children, the log income of the tax unit
in which the individual participates, and measures capturing years of schooling. We measure
area and age-specific housing prices by using the PSID and BHPS to compute mean housing

15

prices and mean rents in each state/region for owners and renters respectively, within broad age
groups. These prices as well as benefit unit income are entered in logs.
The critical variable for testing our theory concerns housing price variability, which
varies across space and time. We construct a five-year moving window of the standard deviation
of the year-to-year differences in the log real housing prices in a region11 as described in the
previous section. Since our US housing price series starts in 1974, this means that our PSID
analysis starts with the 1980 PSID and extends to the 1997 PSID. Since fewer historical years are
available in the BHPS, the analysis there covers the years 1991-2003.
We stop our analysis at these times for several reasons. First, after the 1997 wave the
PSID switched its periodicity from one year to two years making it not strictly comparable to the
BHPS especially for the type of time series price volatility analysis we are conducting in this
paper. Second, the signature event after this period would be the housing price collapse in both
countries associated with the Great Recession. But the magnitude of this event is order of larger
more unique and larger than the house price volatility risk we are trying to model in this paper.
As noted earlier, expected capital gains are likely to be an important component of the
demand for a risky asset like housing. Expected capital gains reduce the user cost, reflecting the
risk-return trade-off. To construct an expected gains variable we use the change in the regionally
varying log real house price index over the previous five years. Precisely the same five-year
moving window for house prices we use in constructing the house price risk variable.
There may well be other attributes of states or regions that create an incentive to own
homes and that may be correlated with housing price volatility. To control for the possibility that
the variability in housing prices across regions and states may simply be capturing unmeasured
differences across states and regions, we estimated all models with and without state and region
11

For each of the 50 US states and the 12 UK regions.

16

effects. Putting in these geographic level fixed effects means that only attributes of geographic
areas that are changing over time can affect our results. We see this as much less likely. A linear
time trend is added to our models so our time series variation is relative to a common linear
trend.
The results are displayed in Tables 5a and 5b, which lists marginal effects and standard
errors of all variables obtained from probit models. In both countries, we find positive income
effects (slightly higher in the UK) and education effects (a possible proxy for permanent income)
on home ownership. Not surprisingly, marriage in both countries encourages home ownership
and children do likewise. In the US and the UK, we also have statistically significant negative
price level effects on the probability of owning a home. We also find a positive impact of
expected capital gains, although this is not uniformly significant across all model specifications.
In both countries, high area-specific rents also discourage home ownership. While this
may at first blush seem counter-intuitive, it is important to remember that there are three options
open to young persons in terms of their housing choices—owner, renter, or living with others—
especially parents. When we estimated models for whether one was a renter, higher rental prices
discouraged both renting and home owning.
The coefficients on the price volatility variables form the basis of the fundamental test of
our central prediction. In both the US and UK, we estimate statistically significant positive
effects of price volatility indicating that as predicted individuals choose to own homes at a
younger age in the more housing price volatile areas. When state/region dummy variables are
included, these estimated effects are remarkably similar in the two countries so that on the
margin Britons appear to react more in moving into home ownership at a younger age only
because volatility on average is so much higher there.

17

4.2 The Decision to Refinance
As discussed above, our key hypothesis is that households in areas where housing prices are
volatile should self-insure at young ages by holding more housing. However, if they were to buy
a house and then refinance and use the proceeds to finance consumption or to purchase risky
assets this would simply undo the safety housing provides. As such, we would expect less of
such behavior in volatile areas and we test this prediction in this section. Although imperfect, our
two datasets provide some measure of the extent to which individuals engage in such activities.
With regard to the US, PSID data contain no direct questions in each year on refinancing, so we
define an indicator of refinancing to take the value 1 if an individual’s mortgage is observed to
have risen by a specified amount between waves.12 The problem with this measure is that
individuals could well be using the extra finance to improve their home, which would not
unravel the housing as price insurance mechanism, thus making it an imperfect measure for our
purposes.
This prediction can, however, be directly addressed in the UK using BHPS data, where
individuals are asked specific questions about whether they refinanced their housing equity
between waves, and if so whether the purposes for which the resulting money was used. With
such detailed questions we are able to construct a more precise indicator in the UK that takes the
value 1 only if individuals refinance between waves and do not increase the quantity or quality of
housing as a result.
Our results are summarized in Tables 6a and 6b. In addition to the non-price variables
that were part of the home ownership model, we included a measure of home equity in the
previous year to capture the amount available for refinancing. In both countries, using both
12

In practice, small rises could simply be a result of measurement error, so we choose a variety of thresholds above
which we assert a change in mortgage can be interpreted as a refinance. The specification in Table 6a uses a
definition of mortgage rising by at least 30% or $5000, whichever is the greater.

18

measures of refinancing, the predictions of the theory are borne out—individuals in more risky
areas are less likely to refinance, conditional on other characteristics and their initial level of net
housing equity.
4.3 Increased Consumption of Housing
As pointed out in Section 2, one can insure against future housing price volatility in period D=3
not only by purchasing a house in period D=2 but also by consuming more owned housing than
one might otherwise want given the objective demographic circumstances. Moreover, in the
presence of borrowing constraints there is a possibility that, if prices rise more quickly than
income, debt-to-income restrictions may prevent individuals being able to purchase a larger
home at D=3. With this possibility on the horizon individuals, already more likely to be an
owner-occupier as a result of the increased volatility, would also choose to increase their
consumption of housing. Since in the case of prices rising the capital gain will be higher and can
be used as down payment on the final home in order to offset the debt to income restriction.
Indeed, in the UK, the two conditions are often linked (since on a secured loan the consequences
of default to the lender are reduced with a higher down payment) such that individuals with
higher down payments can borrow a higher multiple of income.
In order to measure the consumption of housing, for the purposes of testing this
prediction we use two variables—the number of rooms in the house and the gross value of the
house.13 Neither is perfect since the former omits possible quality effects (such as variation in the

13

With increasing availability of appropriate panel data on wealth, there has been renewed interest in the study of
housing wealth dynamics and its implications for other economic factors. Flavin and Yamshita (2002) look at the
effect on household’s optimal financial asset holding of integrating housing (i.e., both housing wealth and the
associated consumption demand for housing services) into the portfolio model. In a more empirical study, Banks,
Blundell and Smith (2003) show that housing wealth differentials between the US and the UK offset to some extent
the differences in financial wealth observed between the two countries. But in spite of recognition of the dual
importance of housing as both consumption and investment, the implications of the often-considerable housing price
uncertainty for the life-cycle path of housing wealth are not well understood.

19

size and quality of a room which varies much more in the US than in the UK) and the latter may
be contaminated by unmeasured price variation leading to uncontrolled for demand effects.
Nevertheless, each provides a useful complementary test for the predictions of the model. For
each of these measures of housing consumption, we use a standard Heckman type selectivity
model to evaluate the predictions for home-owners only, using the probits reported in Tables 5a
and 5b as the selection equations and omitting the rental price from the continuous part of the
model.
Tables 7a and 7b report the results of estimating selection models for the number of
rooms occupied by young homeowners. These estimates show significant positive effects of
volatility on house size but only in the UK— other things equal, young British homeowners in
risky areas tend to consume more rooms than their counterparts in safer areas in order to partially
insure themselves against housing price risk. The effects are positive in the US as well but not
statistically significant at conventional test levels. It is possible that the much larger variation in
size and quality of rooms in the US make it a weaker test there.
Other estimated parameters accord with a priori intuition. The number of rooms increases
with income, education, whether an individual is married, and with the presence of children, and
decreases with the average price of housing per room in the area. The magnitude of the
demographic effects (marriage and children) and the income effects are similar in the two
countries. Finally, those individuals moving from risky to safe areas have a reduced number of
rooms, as would be predicted by their insurance motive being reduced, although not by enough
to offset the volatility effect altogether.
In Tables 8a and 8b we repeat this analysis using gross house value as our measure of
housing consumption. Again in both countries, as predicted by our theory, individuals in risky

20

areas choose to have higher housing wealth than those living in safe areas. This effect is reduced
for those observed to move from risky to safe areas during the period of our data. Thus, those
individuals who end up moving out of the risky housing price areas appear to insure less in the
sense that they do not over consume housing when they are young. Once again, the principal
demographic variables enter with the expected signs and in about the same magnitude in both
countries—home values increase with marriage, children, and age (at least until middle age).
Similarly, income and education effects are positive in both countries although our estimated
current income elastic city is much higher in the US than in the UK.
The models estimated in Tables 7 and 8 are based on two alternative and imperfect
measures of housing consumption. However, the general similarity of the estimated models
across both specifications, and in particular the similar estimated effects of our measure of
housing price variability on housing consumption in both countries, lends support to the
predictions of our model.
4.4 Endowment Mortgages
Over the period covered by our data, one relatively common financial instrument used to finance
house purchases in Britain was an endowment mortgage. During the life of the mortgage, the
borrower makes only interest payments on the loan, leaving the principal to be repaid at the end
of the term of the mortgage. In addition to the interest, the borrower pays into a saving scheme,
which is designed to mature and repay at least the value of the capital sum borrowed at the end
of the period of the loan. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s these schemes were common, with the
most common type of saving scheme being an endowment policy - essentially term life insurance
with the accumulating fund invested in the stock market.

21

Whilst the relative attractiveness of such a mortgage product is not so clearly different
across volatile and less volatile areas from the perspective of our main story (after all, the
homeowner retains the housing wealth and hence gets the insurance against the future house
price risk regardless of how that housing purchase is financed) one might still expect some
differences simply due to background risk effects. These endowment funds were typically quite
large and unavoidable for anyone who was unable to use a repayment mortgage (typically those
without the liquidity to finance a substantial downpayment). One might argue that the future
house price risk that is the main object of interest in this paper acts like a large background risk
that would discourage individuals from taking on a substantial further risk elsewhere in their
portfolio. As such, households who live in volatile areas should be less likely to choose this type
of mortgage.14 These predictions are borne out using the same empirical framework as the tests
presented above. In Table 9, we report results obtained from probit models with the dependent
variable being whether individuals finance their house purchase with an endowment mortgage as
opposed to some other method. Since mortgage arrangements typically do not change over the
term of the mortgage (and in the case of endowment policies the penalties for early termination
are high), we are able to use homeowners of all ages for this test, thus also implicitly increasing
the period over which are effects are apparent. Whether or not we include region dummies,
British families who live in more volatile housing price areas are less likely to take out an
endowment mortgage. This estimated effect is statistically significant.

14

One complication in testing this prediction is that particularly in the 1980’s (and early 1990’s), there is some
evidence that mis-selling of this type of mortgage took place by mortgage providers. In particular, there is the
possibility that consumers were not fully informed of the nature of other choices of mortgage arrangements available
or about the risky nature of the endowment policy. Assuming such effects were constant across regions, however,
we might still expect those living in more volatile regions to be less likely to take out such mortgages.

22

5. Conclusions
Typically, risk-averse individuals will avoid risky assets as volatility increases. In this paper we
show that owner-occupied housing is an exception to this rule. The consumption role of housing
wealth, coupled with increasing necessary levels of housing over the life cycle due to
demographic changes, and the fact that individuals will typically prefer to own rather than rent,
mean that individuals will expect to be consuming a risky commodity—owner-occupied
housing—in middle age. Since housing is a necessity the utility consequences of this risk might
be expected to be relatively large. In the absence of suitable financial products to insure this risk,
this will lead individuals to invest in housing early in the life cycle as a way of insuring future
price fluctuations. Not only does this lead to higher owner-occupation rates, it also leads to more
housing wealth and less propensity to realize capital gains on housing through refinancing to
fund non-housing consumption.
Using micro data from two countries we have constructed tests of these predictions and
all are borne out empirically. Cross-country differences between the US and UK corresponds to
the cross-country differences in volatility—the UK is more volatile and UK households own
earlier, and have more of their portfolio in housing. Because this may be driven by other
differences between countries, we use within-country tests that rely on time-series and crosssectional variation in volatility within and across states (in the US) or regions (in the UK), we
continue to find empirical support for the predictions of the theory.

23

Appendix I: Data Sources
The PSID started in 1968 collecting information on a sample of roughly 5,000 (original)
families. Of these, about 3,000 were representative of the US population as a whole (the core
sample), and about 2,000 were low-income families (the Census Bureau's Survey of Economic
Opportunities sample). Thereafter, both the original families and their split-offs (children of the
original family forming a family of their own) have been followed giving a total of around
35,000 individuals. Panel members were interviewed each year until 1997 when a two-year
periodicity rule was established. All original members of the 1968 households and their progeny
are considered sample members and thus are part of the panel even if they move out of the
original household. The US models presented in this paper include the SEO over sample
although they were also estimated using only the core sample and our results regarding the
effects of housing price volatility were not affected.
In each wave of the panel, the PSID asks detailed questions on individual and household
income, family size and composition, schooling, education, age, and marital status. State of
residence is available yearly and individuals are followed to new locations if they move. Unlike
many other prominent American wealth surveys, the PSID is representative of the complete age
distribution. Yearly housing tenure questions determine whether individuals currently own, rent
or live with others. Questions on housing ownership, value, and mortgage were asked in each
calendar year wave of the PSID.15 Renters are asked the amount of rent they pay and both
owners and renters are asked the total number of rooms in the residence.
In addition to the PSID, housing price data were obtained from the Office of Federal
Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) House Price Index. These data contain quarterly and

15

Mortgages are not available in the PSID for years 1973, 1974, 1975, and 1982.

24

yearly price indexes for the value of single-family homes in the US in the individual states and
the District of Columbia.16 These data use repeat transactions for the same houses to obtain a
quality constant index and is available for all years starting in 1974. All yearly housing prices by
state are reported relative to those that prevailed in 1980. By 1995 there were almost 7 million
repeat transactions in the data so that the number of observations for each state is reasonably
large. No demographic data are available with this index.
For the UK, we use the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS). The BHPS has been
running annually since 1991 and, like the PSID, is also representative of the complete age
distribution. The wave 1 sample consisted of some 5,500 households and 10,300 individuals, and
continuing representativeness of the survey is maintained by following panel members wherever
they move in the UK and also by including in the panel the new members of households formed
by original panel members. The BHPS contains annual information on individual and household
income and employment as well as a complete set of demographic variables. Like the PSID, data
are collected annually on primary housing wealth, and on secondary housing wealth. 17
In addition to the BHPS, regional house price data were obtained from the Nationwide
Building Society House Price series, which is a quarterly regional house price series going back
to 1974. Rather than use a repeat sales index, the prices are adjusted for changes in the mix of
sales to approximate a composition constant index, and are also seasonally adjusted.
Throughout the paper we take care to define the unit of analysis as the benefit unit (i.e.,
singles or couples with dependent children) such that young individuals at the beginning of the
life-cycle living in shared accommodation or with other family members are not lost from the
analysis as subsidiary adults in households headed by other individuals. This is particularly

16
17

For details on this data see Calhoun (1996). The paper is available on the OFHEO website.
Housing wealth and mortgages are not available in 1992.

25

important for older independent children who are still residing with parents and who would show
up in middle-aged households in a conventional head of household based analysis. In both
countries, housing wealth is allocated to the home owning benefit unit only. Hence a 25-year-old
living with their parents in an owned property is not defined as an owner (unless they own the
property jointly with their parents) and is assigned zero housing wealth.
We use several housing wealth concepts in this paper. The current value of the house is
derived in both the PSID and BHPS by asking respondents to report the current market value of
their home while housing equity is constructed by subtracting from the current house value the
outstanding mortgage.

26

Appendix 2: Numerical Simulation of a Simple Model of Ownership and Housing Equity in
the Presence of House Price Risk and a Housing Ladder
The integration of housing price risk into a single theoretical framework is complex and
even algebraic closed form solutions will only be possible under certain (restrictive) forms of
preferences. Ideally, however, we want to use relatively flexible preferences for consumption
and housing to generate predictions relating to the effects of house price risk. In this appendix we
use numerical methods in order to offer insight into the predictions of the model using a very
simple set of specifications for preferences, the steepness of the housing ladder, and the timeseries process for the underlying uncertainty.18
For the purpose of our simulations, we assume that individuals maximize expected
discounted life-time utility, with the utility functions for an individual in each of the decision
periods being given by:
(1)
where qt is the consumption of housing services in period t and all other consumption is
summarized by c t . To accord with our discussions of section III, these preferences are
characterized by having a necessary level of housing consumption, qt , in each period to capture
the housing ladder, but they also take the CRRA form to allow us to look at the impact of
varying risk aversion on the predictions of the model.
We solve the numerical model with three periods, aimed at capturing the phases of the
life cycle discussed in Section 3, rather than calendar years, quarters or even months. When
18

Ultimately, many other extensions could be looked at with this approach, such as the sensitivity of predictions to
rental premia, the cost of mortgage borrowing, the extension of the model to a greater number of time periods or the
differences in predictions that emerge as we allow income uncertainty (with differing degrees of correlation between
income and house price shocks). But we leave these extensions for further work since, at this stage, we want to make
the model as simple as possible whilst still remaining sufficiently general to examine the specific predictions on
which the empirical analyses in this paper are based.

27

building a numerical solution algorithm, the choice of units and parameter values forces one to
think carefully about the relative length of periods. In taking numerical methods to our model we
essentially need to think of periods of unequal length, in order to capture the sense in which
period 2 (the middle rung on the housing ladder) is a transition to a more permanent state of
completed family size and a ‘permanent’ family home. A convenient way in which to do this is
to introduce factors 2 and 3 , with 0 < t ≤ 1, t =2,3 and 2 ≤ 3 , which describe the flow of
consumption services qt from housing stock Ht , so that qt = tHt.
We choose a stylised model in which the only uncertainty is in house prices. In
accordance with our earlier discussions, we assume that in period 1 everyone is a renter and in
period 3 everyone is an owner. The key decision is whether to own in period 2 or wait until
period 3. We show that increasing house price uncertainty increases the pay-off to ownership in
the second period. This pay-off is larger the larger the degree of risk aversion and the stronger
the gradient in the housing ladder. As we are only interested in the relative pay-off of ownership
we normalise on first period utility and examine relative pay-off in periods 2 and 3. The budget
constraint for periods 2 and 3 under each option is given by:
(2a) [Owner at t=2]: y2  y3   p3  p2  H2  c2  c3  p22H2  p33H3
(2b) [Renter at t=2]: y2  y3  c2  c3   p2 2 H 2  p3 3 H 3
depending on which tenure is chosen, where yt are discounted incomes, pt are discounted prices,
ct are discounted consumptions, and  is the rental premium.
Implicit in this set up is that an individual can borrow or save at the same (safe) rate of
interest equal to the discount rate. Finally, we introduce house price uncertainty in period 3 by
allowing p3 to take the value p2(1+) with probability ½ and p2(1-) with probability ½. We can

28

then vary the variance of housing price uncertainty by solving the model for different values of
.19
We solve the model by backward induction with a relatively straightforward numerical
method that involves a discrete grid search across all possible paths for housing consumption in
each period, q, consumption in each period, c, and the owner/renter decision in period 2. For the
purposes of the solution, baseline values are set at:,  = 1,  = 0.3, 2 = .5, 3 = 1, q2  0 y3 = 200
and y 2 = .5y3. The later equality equates the flow of income across the two periods given the
choice of 2 and 3. The model is then solved under varying degrees of uncertainty for various
values of the necessary level of housing in period 3 (which we shall refer to as D) ranging from
D=10 to D=40, and for various values of the risk aversion parameter, .
Figure A1.a shows the difference between the expected utility of renting and owning in
period 2, expressed as a fraction of the utility of renting, as the variance of housing prices
increases and as the minimum level of housing required in period 3, i.e., the steepness of the
housing ladder, increases. The figure shows that increases in the minimum level of housing
demand in period 3 result in an increase in the relative utility of owning in period 2 for all
positive levels of volatility. Similarly, for all levels of the minimum housing requirement in
period 3, increasing price volatility results in a stronger preference for owning: Increasing house
price risk reduces expected utility for both renters or owners in period 2 but the impact is
stronger on the rental option. Consequently there is a gain in expected utility terms from
ownership in period 2 and this gain increases with risk. Figure A1.b presents a complementary
analysis but where we hold the housing ladder constant and vary the degree of risk aversion in

19

In this discussion we abstract from expected capital gains. However, our empirical model will allow for a capital
gains term which will reflect the risk-return trade off. Holding the riskless return constant, an expected capital gain
will reduce the user cost of housing and make ownership more attractive.

29

preferences. As risk aversion increases the slopes of the profiles with respect to volatility
steepen.
In addition to the home ownership predictions the model should also have predictions for
the quantity of housing consumed as discussed in Section 3. Figures A2.a and A2.b show the
predictions for housing consumption in period 2 as the housing ladder steepens and as risk
aversion increases. Figure A2.a shows that, for any level of the minimum housing requirement in
period 3, as volatility increases the quantity of housing demanded in period 2 increases—
individuals buy more insurance as risk accumulates.20 If volatility is significant, a steeper
housing ladder results in more housing consumption in period 2. This implies that not only will
individuals be more likely to purchase a house in period 2, they will also be more likely to
purchase a ‘bigger’ house. Note that for the very lowest value of the minimum housing
requirement (D=10) the quantity of housing actually declines with volatility. At such a low value
of the minimum (and given the relative preference for housing implied by our choice of α of 0.3)
the housing ladder constraint is not effectively binding and therefore the predictions of the model
are in accordance with the standard case: individuals choose less of a risky activity.
Figure A2.b presents similar results by risk aversion coefficient. Once again, as risk
aversion increases, the quantity demanded of housing in the second period increases. While not
shown in these graphs, our model also has implications for non-housing consumption in period 2,
which is generally declining in housing price volatility.

20

Varying the minimum housing requirement and keeping life-time resources constant also generates a wealth
effect. This is not important for our empirical tests since we will be examining demand for housing as volatility
varies for a given steepness of the housing ladder. As a result we abstract from this wealth effect in this figure by
normalizing the housing demand to its zero-volatility value in the two figures.

30

Table 1. Number of Rooms by Age of Head of Household
Age of head of household
< 25
years

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65+

All

3.89

4.97

5.99

6.40

6.16

5.34

5.61

Owners Only

5.22

6.16

6.82

6.89

6.56

5.99

6.48

UK
Owners and Renters

3.04

3.69

4.45

4.98

4.89

4.07

4.40

Owners Only

4.36

3.92

4.69

5.24

5.17

4.54

4.78

US
Owners and Renters

Note: Pooled data from the PSID and BHPS. US data excludes bathrooms, UK data excludes kitchens and
bathrooms.

Table 2. Changes in Rooms for Movers, by Type of Buyer
Age of head of benefit unit
< 25
US
First Time Buyers - Before
First Time Buyers - After
First Time - Difference
Repeat Buyers - Before
Repeat Buyers - After
Repeat - Difference
UK
First Time Buyers - Before
First Time Buyers - After
First Time - Difference

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65+

All

3.86
5.51
1.62

4.66
6.61
1.45

4.95
6.24
1.28

4.87
5.91
1.05

4.99
5.72
0.71

4.01
4.63
0.61

4.70
5.98
1.27

4.84
5.49
0.65

5.91
6.72
0.81

6.56
7.27
0.71

6.87
6.94
0.07

6.56
5.99
-0.57

5.92
5.48
-0.43

6.32
6.66
0.30

-

3.31
3.83
0.52

3.83
4.43
0.60

4.25
4.95
0.70

4.13
4.49
0.36

3.98
3.97
-0.01

3.79
4.29
0.50

Repeat Buyers - Before
3.63
4.38
4.98
5.23
4.98
4.59
Repeat Buyers - After
4.54
5.26
5.45
4.99
4.05
4.99
Repeat – Difference
0.91
0.88
0.47
-0.24
-0.93
0.40
Note: Pooled PSID and BHPS data from 1990-1999 and 1991-2003 respectively. First time buyers
restricted to those previously living in rented accommodation. Cell sizes too small in UK for age < 25.

31

Table 3. Proportion of Individuals Who are Homeowners in 1994

Age

Volatile
regions

Non-volatile
regions

All

20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70+

0.336
0.717
0.799
0.801
0.754
0.602

0.397
0.755
0.784
0.723
0.667
0.547

0.357
0.731
0.794
0.775
0.723
0.583

All

0.652

0.641

0.648

20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59

0.187
0.528
0.691
0.825

0.273
0.612
0.748
0.830

0.253
0.590
0.736
0.828

60-69
70+

0.784
0.683

0.875
0.723

0.850
0.714

All
0.583
0.649
Note: Data are from the 1994 BHPS and PSID.

0.633

UK

US

32

Table 4a. Differences across Broad Regions, 21-35 year olds, US
Non-volatile
0.78
0.43
0.37
0.58
13.04
9.90
83,777
4,116

Fraction of population (1999)
Owns home
Rents
Ever had a child
Years of education
Log income in 1995$
Mean PSID house value
Mean PSID annual rent

Volatile
0.22
0.33
0.44
0.47
13.58
10.07
155,989
6,025

Table 4b. Differences across Broad Regions, 21-35 year olds, UK

Non-volatile
Fraction of population (2000)
Owns home
Rents
Has a child
Education – low
Education – medium
Education – high
Ln income (in £ 2000)
Mean BHPS house value (£)
Mean BHPS weekly rent (£)

0.34
0.53
0.24
0.45
0.48
0.24
0.28
9.50
80,455
64.00

Source: PSID and BHPS.

33

Volatile
0.66
0.50
0.27
0.50
0.48
0.25
0.28
9.55
103,405
85.70

Table 5a. Probability of Home-Ownership, US
(1)
dF/ dx
Price Volatility
Index
Age
Age Squared
Married
Ever have a child
Education
Ln Income
Ln Housing Prices
Exp. Capital Gains
Ln Rental prices
Move A-B
Move B-A
Trend
State Dummies

(2)
dF/ dx Std. Err

Std. Err

0.1873
0.0448
-0.0004
0.2727
0.0628
0.0105
0.2057
-0.0561
0.0360
-0.0476
-0.1513
-0.1114
0.0022

0.0945
0.0061
0.0001
0.0045
0.0039
0.0009
0.0026
0.0051
0.0538
0.0057
0.0155
0.0173
0.0004

0.4061
0.0478
-0.0005
0.2698
0.0671
0.0104
0.2070
-0.0365
0.1069
0.0151
-0.1139
-0.1341
0.0009

No

0.1084
0.0061
0.0001
0.0045
0.0039
0.0009
0.0026
0.0069
0.0554
0.0069
0.0157
0.0174
0.0004

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models also control for city size, missing values, trend,
number of waves in panel, and a constant term.

Table 5b. Probability of Home-ownership, UK
(1)
Price Volatility
Age
Age Squared
Married
Has children
Educ - low
Educ - medium
Ln Income
Ln House Prices
Exp. Capital Gains
Ln Rental Prices
Move A-B
Move B-A
Regional dummies

(2)

dF/ dx

Std. Err

dF/ dx

0.3361
0.1107
-0.0014
0.4623
0.0349
-0.0874
0.0066
0.2992
-0.1084
0.1648
-0.1025
-0.0808
-0.1558

0.1212
0.0127
0.0002
0.0065
0.0089
0.0086
0.0097
0.0061
0.0203
0.0928
0.0174
0.0302
0.0279

0.3629
0.1093
-0.0014
0.4623
0.0352
-0.0866
0.0070
0.2989
-0.1080
0.1595
-0.0963
-0.0802
-0.1559

No

Std. Err
0.1226
0.0127
0.0002
0.0065
0.0089
0.0087
0.0097
0.0061
0.0222
0.0968
0.0186
0.0302
0.0280

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models include controls for living in a big city, number of waves observed in panel,
trend, and a constant term.

34

Table 6a. Probability of Refinancing a US Home
(1)

(2)

dF/dx Std. Err
Price Volatility Index
Age
Age Squared
Married
Ever have a child
Education
Ln Income
Ln House Equityt-1
Exp. Capital Gains
Move A-B
Move B-A
State dummies

-0.5654
-0.0081
0.0001
-0.0042
0.0181
-0.0081
-0.0183
0.0367
0.1626
0.0012
0.0239

0.1268
0.0094
0.0002
0.0065
0.0054
0.0011
0.0035
0.0022
0.0696
0.0344
0.0330

No

dF/ dx

Std. Err

-0.3715
-0.0072
0.0001
-0.0025
0.0170
-0.0079
-0.0153
0.0384
0.2228
0.0177
0.0182

0.1485
0.0093
0.0002
0.0065
0.0054
0.0012
0.0036
0.0022
0.0740
0.0337
0.0328

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models also city size controls, missing value dummies.

Table 6b. Probability of Refinancing a UK home
(1)
dF/ dx
Price Volatility
Age
Age Squared
Married
Has children
Educ - low
Educ - medium
Ln Income
Ln equity t-1
Exp. Capital Gains
Regional dummies

-0.1726
0.0071
-0.0001
-0.0115
0.0124
0.0148
0.0112
0.0083
0.0056
0.2262
No

(2)

Std. Err
0.0885
0.0071
0.0001
0.0069
0.0036
0.0043
0.0049
0.0031
0.0017
0.0661

dF/ dx

Std. Err

-0.2093

0.0876

0.0071
-0.0001
-0.0116
0.0128
0.0145
0.0110
0.0074
0.0050
0.1434

0.0071
0.0001
0.0069
0.0036
0.0043
0.0049
0.0031
0.0017
0.0759

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models include controls for living in a big city, number of waves
observed in panel, trend, tax unit composition change between waves t-1 and t.

35

Table 7a. Number of Rooms in US
(1)
coeff

(2)
Std. Err

coeff

Std. Err

Price Volatility Index 0.0593

0.6931

0.5800

0.7514

Age

0.3916

0.0495

0.3585

0.0468

Age Squared

-0 0041

0.0008

-0.0036

0.0008

Married

1.6815

0.0765

1.5641

0.0699

Ever have a child

0.7385

0.0317

0.7569

0.0302

Education

0.1309

0.0064

0.1235

0.0061

Ln Income

1.5806

0.0519

1.4971

0.0488

Ln Housing Prices

-0.5104

0.0368

-0.3232

0.0490

Exp. Capital Gains

0.9832

0.3889

1.2084

0.3766

Move A-B

-1.0676

0.1376

-0.6873

0.1295

Move B-A

-0.3129

0.1482

-0.4833

0.1419

Mills ratio

2.7749

0.1186

2.6086

0.1087

State dummies

No

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models also city size controls, trend, missing value
dummies, number of waves observed in panel, and a constant term. Selection
equation is reported in Table 4.1a.
Rental price omitted from rooms equation.

Table 7b. Number of Rooms in the UK
(1)
Price Volatility
Age
Age Squared
Married
Has children
Educ - low
Educ - medium
Ln Income
Ln House Price
Exp. Capital Gains
Move A-B
Move B-A
Mills ratio
Regional dummies

coeff
4.2949
0.2886
-0.0023
2.2813
0.9393
-0.5862
-0.1119
1.3262
-1.2942
2.0882
-0.2887
-0.8030
2.6704
No

(2)
Std. Err
0.6503
0.0766
0.0013
0.1268
0.0470
0.0471
0.0501
0.0721
0.0817
0.4611
0.1768
0.1788
0.1556

coeff
4.1218
0.2874
-0.0023
2.2594
0.9377
-0.5909
-0.1172
1.3193
-1.3970
2.3989
-0.2973
-0.7649
2.6425

Std. Err
0.6474
0.0760
0.0013
0.1258
0.0465
0.0467
0.0496
0.0716
0.1084
0.5026
0.1749
0.1773
0.1544

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Model also includes controls for city, trend, number of
waves observed in panel, and a constant term. Selection equation is reported in
Table 4.1a. Rental price omitted from rooms equation.

36

Table 8a. Gross Housing Wealth in the US
(1)
Coeff
Std. Err
Price Volatility Index 2.5190
Age
0.3266
Age Squared
-0.0044
Married
0.8253
Ever have a child
0.1031
Education
0.1002
Ln Income
1.0191
Ln Housing Prices
0.3990
Exp. Capital Gains
0.1532
Move A-B
-0.4946
Move B-A
-0.1506
Mills ratio
1.3505
State dummies

0.3510
0.0253
0.0004
0.0393
0.0161
0.0032
0.0266
0.0187
0.1971
0.0703
0.0754
0.0613

No

(2)
Coeff
1.7861
0.3045
-0.0041
0.6766
0.0888
0.0956
0.9176
0.3220
0.2007
-0.4152
-0.1286
1.1134

Std. Err
0.3787
0.0241
0.0004
0.0375
0.0154
0.0031
0.0257
0.0248
0.1901
0.0678
0.0736
0.0590

Yes

Note: Ages 21-35. Models also city size controls, missing value dummies,
number of waves observed in panel, and a constant term. Selection equation
is reported in Table 4.1a.
Rental price omitted from rooms equation.

Table 8b. Gross Housing Wealth in the UK

Price Volatility
Age
Age Squared
Married
Has children
Educ - low
Educ – medium
Ln Income
Ln House Prices
Exp. Capital Gains
Move A-B
Move B-A
Mills ratio
Regional dummies

(1)
Coeff
Std. Err
1.3034
0.2337
0.1891
0.0276
-0.0023
0.0005
0.8706
0.0467
0.2426
0.0169
-0.2377
0.017
-0.0448
0.0181
0.5862
0.0258
0.5118
0.0295
0.7693
0.1659
-0.087
0.0637
-0.2896
0.0646

0.9565
No

0.0556

(2)
Coeff Std. Err
1.1828
0.2298
0.1860
0.0270
-0.0023
0.0005
0.8530
0.0458
0.2419
0.0165
-0.2409
0.0166
-0.0484
0.0177
0.5794
0.0253
0.4291
0.0385
1.0163
0.1785
-0.0911
0.0623
-0.2653
0.0633
0.9347
0.0545
Yes

Note: Ages 21-35 only. Models also includes controls for city, trend, number of
waves observed in panel, and a constant term. Selection equation is reported in Table
4.1a. Rental price omitted from rooms equation.

37

Table 9. Probability of Holding Endowment Mortgage, Home Owners in UK Only
(1)
dF/ dx
Price Volatility
Age
Age Squared
Married
Has children
Education - low
Education - medium
Ln Income
Exp. Capital Gains
Move A-B
Move B-A
Regional dummies

-5.0454
0.0202
-0.0003
0.0395
0.0438
0.0430
0.0200
0.0072
0.7835
0.1121
-0.0531

(2)
Std. Err
0.1097
0.0018
2.07E-05
0.0089
0.0066
0.0070
0.0081
0.0052
0.0924
0.0452
0.0479

No

dF/ dx

Std. Err

-5.0143
0.0203
-0.0003
0.0392
0.0442
0.0440
0.0201
0.0072
0.8017
0.1143
-0.0590

0.1120
0.0018
2.08E-05
0.0089
0.0066
0.0070
0.0081
0.0053
0.0927
0.0450
0.0479

Yes

Note: All ages. Models also include number of waves observed in panel, city trend.

38

Figure 1a. The Demographic Ladder, US
1.2

Proportion

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Age

Ever had child over age 5

Own child over 5 in household

Completed family size

Figure 1b. The Demographic Ladder, UK
1.2

Proportion

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60
Age

Ever had child over age 5

Own child over 5 in household

39

Completed family size

Figure 2. Comparison of UK and US House Prices
1.8
1.6
Index (1980 = 1)

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004
Year
UK

40

US

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

ln price index

Safe

Safe

41
Risky

Risky

Year

All

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

ln price index

Figure 3a. US Mean House Price Index by Area, 1980-1997

5.2
5.1
5
4.9
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2

Year
All

Figure 3b. UK Mean House Price Index by Area, 1980-2000

5.4

5.2

5

4.8

4.6

4.4

4.2

4

Figure 4a. Regional Volatility Indices, US, 1980-1997, by Area
0.20
0.18
0.16
Volatility

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0.00

Year
Safe

Risky

All

0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Volatility

Figure 4b. Regional Volatility Indices, UK, 1980-2000, by Area

Year
Safe

Risky

42

All

Figure A1a: Relative Utility of Owner Occupation when Young by
Variance of House Prices and Steepness of Housing Ladder
D=10

D=15

D=20

D=25

D=30

Relative utility of owning

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

House price variance

Figure A1b: Relative Utility of Owner Occupation when Young by
Variance of House Prices and Degree of Risk Aversion
Gamma=1

Gamma = 2

Gamma = 4

Gamma = 8

Relative utility of owning

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

House price variance

43

0.2

0.25

Figure A2a: Consumption of Housing when Young by Variance of
House Prices and Steepness of Housing Ladder
D=10

D=15

D=20

D=25

D=30

Housing in period 2

2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

House price variance

Figure A2b: Consumption of Housing when Young by Variance of
House Prices and Degree of Risk Aversion
Gamma=1

Gamma = 2

Gamma = 4

Gamma = 8

Housing in period 2

2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

House price variance

44

0.2

0.25

References
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith. (2003). “Wealth Portfolios in the US and
the UK.” In David A. Wise (ed.), Perspectives on the Economics of Ageing, University of
Chicago Press, pp. 205-246.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell, Zoe Oldfield, and James P. Smith. (2012). “Housing Mobility
and Downsizing at Older Ages in Britain and the USA." Economica 79(313):1–26.
Calhoun, Charles A. (1996). “OFHEO House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description.” Web
address: http://www.ofheo.gov/media/archive/house/hpi_tech.pdf
PSIDJournal of Housing Economics 13:170-194.
Flavin, Margorie, and Takashi Yamashita. (2002). “Owner-Occupied Housing and the
Composition of Household Portfolio over the Life Cycle.” American Economic Review
92:345-362.
Ortalo-Magne, Francois, and Sven Rady. (2004). “Bargaining over Residential Real Estate:
Evidence from England.” Journal of Housing Economics 56:192-216.
Ortalo-Magne, Francois, and Sven Rady. (2006). “Housing Market Dynamics: on the
Contribution of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints.” Review of Economic Studies,
73:459-485.
Sinai, Todd, and Nicholas S. Souleles. (2005). “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge against
Rent Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2):763-789.
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. (2001). “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look.” In
David A. Wise (ed), Perspectives on the Economics of Ageing, University of Chicago
Press, pp. 127-180.

45

