                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EXPECTATIONS AND INVESTMENT

                                          Nicola Gennaioli
                                            Yueran Ma
                                          Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 21260
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21260


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




We are deeply grateful to John Graham and Campbell Harvey for providing data from the CFO survey,
and to Joy Tianjiao Tong for helping us to access the data. We thank our discussants Monika Piazzesi
and Chris Sims, as well as Gary Chamberlain, Martin Eichenbaum, Carlo Favero, Robin Greenwood,
Luigi Guiso, Sam Hanson, Chen Lian, Jonathan Parker, Fabiano Schivardi, Jim Stock, and Mirko Wiederholt
for useful suggestions. We also thank Yang You for research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Expectations and Investment
Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 21260
June 2015
JEL No. E03,E22,E32,G3

                                           ABSTRACT

Using micro data from Duke University quarterly survey of Chief Financial Officers, we show that
corporate investment plans as well as actual investment are well explained by CFOs’ expectations
of earnings growth. The information in expectations data is not subsumed by traditional variables,
such as Tobin’s Q or discount rates. We also show that errors in CFO expectations of earnings growth
are predictable from past earnings and other data, pointing to extrapolative structure of expectations
and suggesting that expectations may not be rational. This evidence, like earlier findings in finance,
points to the usefulness of data on actual expectations for understanding economic behavior.


Nicola Gennaioli                                   Andrei Shleifer
Department of Finance                              Department of Economics
Università Bocconi                                 Harvard University
Via Roentgen 1                                     Littauer Center M-9
20136 Milan, Italy                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it                     and NBER
                                                   ashleifer@harvard.edu
Yueran Ma
Harvard University
yueranma@g.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21260
1. Introduction

    One of the basic principles of economics in general, and macroeconomics in particular, is
that expectations influence decisions. In line with this principle, the use of survey-based
expectations data has been the mainstay of macroeconomic analysis since the 1940s, analyzing
variables such as railroad shippers’ forecasts. NBER published several volumes on data of this
kind, such as The Quality and Economic Significance of Anticipations Data (1960), showing that
forecasts help to explain real decisions by firms, including investment and production.
    The use of expectations data took a nosedive following the Rational Expectations
Revolution. First, under rational expectations, the model itself dictates what expectations rational
agents should hold to be consistent with the model (Muth, 1961), so anticipations data are
redundant. Second, economists became skeptical about the quality of expectations data; in fact
this skepticism predates rational expectations (Manski, 2004). According to Prescott (1977),
“Like utility, expectations are not observed, and surveys cannot be used to test the rational
expectations hypothesis” (underlining his). In finance, as in macroeconomics, the Efficient
Markets Hypothesis implies that expectations of asset returns are predicted by the model
(Campbell and Cochrane, 1999; Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), so expectations data are not
commonly used.
    In our view, the marginalization of research on survey expectations deprives economists of
extremely valuable information. Whether or not survey expectations predict behavior is an
empirical question. Moreover, the rational expectations assumption should not be taken for
granted, but rather confronted with actual expectations data, imperfect as they are. Today, we
have theoretical models that do not rely on the rational expectations assumption and make
testable predictions, as well as expectations data to compare alternative models. Indeed, Manski
(2004) argues forcefully and convincingly that expectations data are necessary to distinguish
alternative models in economics.
    As an illustration, take the case of finance, where data on expectations of asset returns have
been rejected as uninformative (e.g. Cochrane, 2011). Yet there is mounting evidence that
expectations are highly consistent across different surveys of different types of investors, that
they have a fairly clear extrapolative structure, that they predict investor behavior, and that they
are useful in predicting returns (e.g., Greenwood and Shleifer, 2014). Most important,
                                                 2
expectations of returns obtained from surveys are negatively correlated with measures of
expected returns obtained from rational expectations models. The trouble seems to be with
conventional rational expectations models of asset prices, not with expectations data.
    The message we take from this discussion is that expectations data can be used to address
two questions: 1) do expectations affect behavior? and 2) are expectations rational? The
questions are related. If expectations do not affect behavior, it matters little whether they are
rational or not. If however expectations do affect behavior, the question of their rationality
becomes quite relevant, since it allows us to consider alternative models of belief formation
underlying economic decisions.
    In this paper, we try to answer these questions for the case of corporate investment. We use
new data assembled by John Graham and Campbell Harvey at Duke University to examine
expectations formed by Chief Financial Officers of large U.S. corporations and their relationship
to investment plans and actual investment of these firms. The Duke data are based on quarterly
surveys of CFOs which, among other things, collect information on earnings growth
expectations and investment plans. We match these data with Compustat to get information on
actual investment and other accounting variables. We also consider earnings forecasts made by
Wall Street financial analysts regarding individual firms, which happen to be highly correlated
with CFO forecasts.
    To organize our discussion, we present a simple Q-theory based model of investment, but
one relying on actual expectations rather than stock market data. We then conduct a number of
empirical tests suggested by the model of the relationship between earnings growth expectations
and investment growth, both in the aggregate and firm-level data. The results suggest that
expectations are statistically and substantively important predictors of both planned and actual
investment, and have explanatory power beyond traditional variables such as market-based
proxies of Tobin’s Q, discount rates, measures of financial constraints or uncertainty. We then
conduct a number of empirical tests on the rationality of expectations. In our data, expectations
do not appear to be rational in the sense that—both in the aggregate and at the level of individual
firms—expectational errors are consistently predictable from highly relevant publicly available
information, such as past profitability. Some evidence points to the extrapolative structure of
earnings expectations, similar to the evidence from finance.
                                                 3
    Our paper is related to several very large strands of research. Most clearly, it is related to a
large literature on determinants of investment, such as Barro (1990), Hayashi (1982), Fazzari,
Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Morck et al. (1990), Lamont (2000), and many others. Four
papers are particularly closely related to our work. Cummins, Hassett and Oliner (2006) replace
the traditional market-based Tobin’s Q used in investment equations by Q computed using
analyst expectations data, and find that the fit of the equation is much better. Guiso, Pistaferri,
and Suryanarayanan (2006) use direct expectations data on Italian firms to study the relationship
between expectations, investment plans, and actual investment. Arif and Lee (2014) use
accounting data to show that high aggregate investment precedes earnings disappointments, and
argue that fluctuations in investor sentiment account for the evidence. Greenwood and Hanson
(2015) study specifically the shipping industry, and find evidence of boom-bust cycles driven by
volatile (and incorrect) expectations and investment that follows them.
    Our paper is also related to research on expectations in macroeconomics. A large literature
studies inflation expectations and their rationality (e.g. Figlewski and Wachtel, 1981; Zarnowitz,
1985; Keane and Runkle, 1990; Ang, Bakaert, and Wei, 2007; Monti, 2010; Del Negro and
Eusepi, 2011; Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2012, forthcoming; Smets, Warne, and Wouters,
2014). Souleles (2004) finds that consumer expectations are biased and inefficient, yet are strong
predictors of household spending. Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2015) present a model of
“social dynamics” in beliefs about home prices, and match the model to survey expectations data.
Fuhrer (2015) shows that survey expectations improve the performance of DSGE models. Some
research suggests that analyst expectations of corporate profits are rational at very short horizons
(Keane and Runkle, 1998), although the overwhelming majority of studies reject rationality of
analyst forecasts (De Bondt and Thaler, 1990; Abarbanell, 1991; La Porta, 1996; Liu and Su,
2005; Hribar and McInnis, 2012). There is also a literature on expectations shocks in
macroeconomics, which generally maintains the assumption of rational expectations (Lorenzoni,
2009; Angeletos and La’O, 2009; Levchenko and Pandalai-Nayar, 2015).
    Perhaps most closely related to our work is research in behavioral finance, where biases in
expectations have been examined for many years (e.g., Cutler, Poterba, and Summers, 1990;
DeLong et al. 1990). Some of the recent papers include Amronin and Sharpe (forthcoming),
Bacchetta, Mertens and Wincoop (2009), Hirshleifer and Yu (2012), and Greenwood and Shleifer
                                                 4
(2014), to which we return later. Several of these papers find that investor expectations are
extrapolative. In the bond market, Piazzesi, Salomao, and Schneider (2015) use data on interest
rate forecasts and also find substantial deviations from rationality. Vissing-Jorgensen (2003) and
Fuster et al. (2011) are two recent Macro Annual papers that also address expectations formation
and rationality.
    In the next section, we briefly summarize some of the evidence on the relationship between
investor expectations and asset prices, and address some of the criticisms of expectations data.
Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents a simple Q-theory model of expectations and
investment that organizes our empirical work. Section 5 follows with the basic empirical results
on expectations and investment. Section 6 examines the structure of expectations. Section 7
concludes with a brief discussion of implications of the evidence for macroeconomics.


2. Recent Research on Expectations and Asset Prices in Finance

    Before turning to our main results on investment, we briefly summarize recent research on
expectations and stock market returns, which illustrates the usefulness of expectations data. In
recent models with time-varying expected returns (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999; Lettau
and Ludvigson, 2001), expected returns (ER) are given by required returns, which in turn depend
on consumption: investors require higher returns when consumption is low (relative to some
benchmark), and lower returns when consumption is high. This research does not generally use
data on expectations. Rather, it adopts a rational expectations approach in which ERs are
determined by the model itself, so the ER is inferred from the joint distribution of consumption
and realized returns.
    As discussed in the introduction, recent work has started to use actual expectations data. For
our purposes, the most relevant paper is Greenwood and Shleifer (2014). They use data on
expectations of returns from six different surveys of investors, including a Gallup survey,
investor newsletters, and the survey of CFOs of large corporations that we use in the current
paper. The paper reports four main findings relevant to our analysis, which we summarize in
Tables 1 and 2.
    First, expectations of aggregate stock returns are highly correlated across investor surveys,
despite the fact that different datasets survey different investors and ask somewhat different
                                                5
questions (see Table 1). These measured expectations are also highly positively correlated with
equity mutual fund inflows. Survey expectations are thus hardly misleading or uninformative:
why would they otherwise be strongly correlated across groups, across questions, and with fund
flows?
   Second, return expectations appear to be extrapolative: they are high after a period of high
market returns, and low after a period of low market returns (see Table 1 and Figure 1).
   Third, and critically, expectations of returns are strongly negatively correlated with
model-based measures of the ER (see again Table 1). Put simply, when investors expect returns
to be high, models predict that the ER is low. A plausible interpretation of this finding is that
model-based ER does not actually capture expectations.
   Fourth, when expectations of returns are high, and the ER is low, actual returns going
forward are low (see Table 2). To us, this piece of evidence points to the interpretation, dating
back to Campbell and Shiller (1987, 1988), that high market valuations and consumption reflect
overvaluation and excessive investor optimism (as directly measured by expectations), and
portend reversion going forward. Model-based ER, in other words, does not measure
expectations, but rather proxies for overvaluation.
   We draw two lessons from this analysis. At the most basic level, direct survey estimates of
expectations are useful: they have a well-defined structure across different surveys, and they
predict fund flows as well as future returns. Second, to the extent that survey estimates actually
measure expectations is accepted, the evidence points against rational expectations models of
stock market valuation. Actual expectations are strongly negatively related to the measures of
expected returns that these models generate. In the remainder of this paper, we consider some
related findings for corporate investment.


3. Data for Studying Expectations and Investment

   Our empirical analysis of corporate investment draws on two main categories of data: 1) data
on expectations, primarily of future profitability, and 2) data on firm financials and investment
activities. We focus on non-financial firms in the United States. We collect data both at the
aggregate and at the firm level, and all data are available at quarterly frequencies. Appendix B
provides a list of the main variables, including their construction and the time range for which
                                                 6
each variable is available.


3.1 Expectations Data

    We have data on the expectations of two groups of people: CFOs and equity analysts. We
first describe these data and then show that expectations of CFOs and equity analysts are highly
correlated.

A. CFO Expectations
    Our data on CFO expectations come from the Duke/CFO Magazine Business Outlook
Survey led by John Graham and Campbell Harvey, which was launched in July 1996 and takes
place on a quarterly basis. Each quarter, the survey asks CFOs their views about the US economy
and corporate policies, as well as their expectations of future firm performance and operational
plans.2 Starting in 1998, the CFO survey consistently asks respondents their expectations of the
future twelve month growth of key corporate variables, including earnings, capital spending, and
employment, among others. The original question is presented to the CFOs as follows:
      Relative to the previous 12 months, what will be your company's PERCENTAGE CHANGE
during the next 12 months? (e.g., +3%, -2%, etc.) [Leave blank if not applicable]
      Earnings: ________; Cash on balance sheet: ________; Capital spending: ________;
      Prices of your product: ________; Number of domestic full-time employees: ________;
      Wage: ________; Dividends: ________...
(Selected items are listed as examples. For a complete listing, please refer to original
questionnaires posted on the CFO survey’s website.)
     We use CFOs’ answers on earnings growth over the next twelve months as the main proxy
for CFO expectations of future profitability. As the survey does not ask for expectations beyond
the next twelve months, we will explain in Section 4 how we interpret and extract information
from earnings expectations over the next twelve months.
     We then use CFOs’ answers on capital spending growth in the next twelve months as a
proxy for firms’ current investment plans. In the empirical analysis, we investigate how
investment plans relate to expectations of future profitability. We adopt this approach in light of

2
  Graham and Harvey (2011) provide a detailed description of the survey.   Historical questionnaires are available at
http://www.cfosurvey.org.
                                                              7
well documented lags between decisions to invest and actual investment spending (Lamont,
2000). With lags in investment implementation, current expectations about future profitability
may not translate into capital expenditures instantly. Instead, they will affect current investment
plans, and show up in actual investment spending with some delay. As a result, it can be more
straightforward to detect the impact of earnings expectations by looking at investment plans. We
discuss this issue in more detail in Sections 4 and 5.
      Our analyses use both aggregate time series and firm-level panel data. Aggregate variables
are revenue-weighted averages of firm-level responses, and they are published on the CFO
survey’s website. While the survey does not require CFOs to identify themselves, some
respondents voluntarily disclose this information. It is then possible to match a fraction of the
firm-level responses with data from CRSP and Compustat to perform firm-level tests. For
example, Ben-David, Graham, and Harvey (2013) use matched firm-level data to study how
managerial miscalibration affects corporate financial policies. Because there are privacy
restrictions associated with these data, Graham and Harvey helped us implement firm-level
analysis using a subsample of their matched dataset. The firm-level data we use has 1,133
firm-year observations, spanning from 2005Q1 to 2012Q4. 3 We exclude firms that have
negative earnings in the past twelve months because in that case earnings growth is not
well-defined. We also winsorize outliers at the 1% level.

B. Analyst Expectations
      We obtain data on equity analysts’ expectations of future firm performance from the
Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES) dataset. Beginning in the 1980s, IBES collects
analyst forecasts of quarterly earnings per share (EPS) for the next one to up to twelve quarters.
We take consensus EPS forecasts (i.e. average forecast for a given firm-quarter in the future) and
compute forecasts of total earnings by multiplying by the number of shares outstanding. To
compare the results with those using CFO expectations, we compute analyst expectations of
future twelve months earnings growth. We calculate aggregate analyst expectations of future
twelve months earnings growth by summing up expected future earnings of all firms in the next
four quarters, and then divide by the sum of earnings of all firms in the past four quarters. We
calculate firm-level analyst expectations of future earnings growth by taking the forecast of total
3
    The number of observations in our firm-level regressions can be smaller because some respondents do not answer all questions.
                                                                 8
firm earnings in the next four quarters, and then divide by total earnings in the past four quarters.
We exclude firms that have negative earnings in the past twelve months when calculating
expected future earnings growth.
   The sample with analyst expectations covers both a longer time span and a larger set of firms.
We set the start date of the aggregate time series and firm panel to be 1985Q1 because some of
the quarterly Compustat data items we use only become systematically available around 1985
and because aggregate analyst forecasts have some outliers before 1985. We set the end of the
sample to be 2012Q4 so we can match expectations to realized next twelve month earnings
growth with accounting data ending in 2013Q4. In total, we have 145,281 firm-level
observations of expected earnings growth over the next twelve months, and we winsorize
outliers at the 5% level.

C. Correlation between CFO and Analyst Expectations
   The expectations of CFOs and analysts with respect to next twelve month earnings growth
are highly correlated. Figure 2 shows aggregate time series of expected next twelve month
earnings growth from the CFO survey and from analyst forecasts. The raw correlation between
these two series is 0.65. At the firm level, the raw correlation between CFO and analyst
expectations of next twelve month earnings growth is 0.4 if we demean by firm, and 0.3 if we
demean by both firm and time. The high correlation between expectations of CFOs and analysts
indicate that expectations data are consistent and meaningful, and expectations of both groups
incorporate information about general business outlook shared by managers and the market.


3.2 Firm Financials Data

   We collect aggregate data on firm assets and investment from the Flow of Funds (Table F.102
and Table B.102) and the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), and firm-level data
from Compustat. A key variable in our analysis is realized earnings, which we use to assess the
accuracy of earnings expectations of CFOs and analysts. While Compustat mainly records
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) earnings, managers and analysts often use
so-called “pro forma earnings” (also called “Street earnings”) which adjust for certain
non-recurring items (Bradshaw and Sloan, 2002; Bhattacharya, Black, Christensen, Larsen,
2003). To make sure we use the same measure of earnings as CFOs and analysts, we collect
                                                  9
realized earnings from IBES Actuals files, which closely track earnings as reported by
companies in their earnings announcements. These are the numbers that analyst forecasts aim to
match and the earnings metric that managers tend to use the most.4 In the rest of the paper we
refer to IBES actual earnings as “earnings”, and GAAP earnings as “net income”.
    Table 3 presents summary statistics of firms for which we have firm-level CFO expectations
(Panel A) and analyst expectations (Panel B), as well as all non-financial firms in Compustat
(Panel C). For comparability, the statistics in Panel B and Panel C are generated based on the
time period for which we have firm-level CFO expectations (i.e. from 2005 through 2012). We
can see that firms with analyst expectations are mostly larger than the median Compustat firm,
and firms with CFO expectations are generally even larger. Firms with CFO and analyst
expectations also appear to be more profitable than firms in the full Compustat sample in terms
of net income, but otherwise very similar in terms of sales, investment, book-to-market, and Q.


4. Expectations and Firm Investment: Empirical Specifications

    We motivate our empirical specification with a basic Q-theory model. A firm is run by a risk
neutral owner who discounts the future by factor 𝛽 < 1,5 and the firm’s horizon is infinite. In
the model, we interpret each period 𝑡 to be twelve months. The firm’s output in period 𝑡 is
obtained by combining capital and labor using a constant returns to scale production function
𝐴𝑡 𝐾𝑡𝛼 𝐿1−𝛼
        𝑡   . At the beginning of period 𝑡, the owner hires labor 𝐿𝑡 at wage 𝑤 and makes
decisions about investment during this year 𝐼𝑡 . Investment takes one year to implement, so
𝐾𝑡+1 = (1 − 𝛿)𝐾𝑡 + 𝐼𝑡 , where 𝛿 is capital depreciation rate. The firm’s optimal policy in year 𝑡
maximizes the expected present value of earnings:

                       𝑚𝑎𝑥{𝐼𝑠 ,𝐿𝑠}𝑠≥𝑡 𝔼𝑡 {∑            𝛽 𝑠−𝑡 [𝐴𝑠 𝐾𝑠𝛼 𝐿1−𝛼
                                                                      𝑠   − 𝑤𝐿𝑠 − 𝐶(𝐼𝑠 , 𝐾𝑠 )]}
                                                 𝑠≥𝑡

subject to 𝐾𝑠+1 = (1 − 𝛿)𝐾𝑠 + 𝐼𝑠 . We assume the commonly used quadratic investment costs:
                                                                 2
                                                          𝑏 𝐼𝑠
                                        𝐶(𝐼𝑠 , 𝐾𝑠 ) − 𝐼𝑠 = ( − 𝑎) 𝐾𝑠 ,
                                                          2 𝐾𝑠

which allow for convex adjustment costs (𝑏 > 0) and displays constant returns to scale.

4
  We performed detailed checks and verified that IBES actual earnings indeed appear to be closest to forecasts by managers and
analysts, in terms of accounting treatment, magnitude, variance, and variation over time.
5
  The assumption of risk neutrality and constant discount rate is for simplicity of exposition. The framework can be extended to
incorporate time-varying discount rates, as derived in Lettau and Ludvigson (2002). In our empirical analysis in Section 4.2 and
Section 4.3, we will explicitly consider time-varying discount rates.
                                                                10
     In the optimization problem above, the operator 𝔼𝑡 (. ) denotes the owner’s expectations
conditional on his information at the beginning of year 𝑡, computed according to his possibly
distorted beliefs. We allow for departures from rational expectations, but restrict to beliefs that
preserve the law of iterated expectations. By standard arguments, Appendix A shows that the
firm’s optimal investment chosen at the beginning of year 𝑡 is described by:

                                   𝐼𝑡       1    𝛽 𝔼𝑡 [∑𝑠≥𝑡+1 𝛽 𝑠−(𝑡+1) Π𝑠 ]
                                      = (𝑎 − ) +                             .                                                 (1)
                                   𝐾𝑡       𝑏    𝑏          𝐾𝑡+1

where Π𝑠 = 𝐴𝑠 𝐾𝑠𝛼 𝐿1−𝛼
                   𝑠   − 𝑤𝐿𝑠 − 𝐶(𝐼𝑠 , 𝐾𝑠 ) denotes the firm’s earnings in year s. Equation (1)
corresponds to a generic Q-theory equation with quadratic adjustment costs, which takes the
form 𝐼𝑡 /𝐾𝑡 = 𝜂 + 𝛾𝑄𝑡 .
     To estimate Equation (1), ideally we would like to know expectations of earnings in all
future periods. This is unfortunately not feasible in practice. For instance, CFOs only report
expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. Formally, in the CFO survey we only
have information about 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 ), namely expectations at the beginning of year 𝑡 about earnings
Π𝑡 in the following twelve months (which are not yet known, so expectations are well-defined).
With respect to investment, we have information on: i) planned investment over the next twelve
months, and ii) actual capital spending in each quarter. We denote investment plans for the next
twelve months as 𝐼𝑡𝑝 , which captures the plan made at the beginning of the year about
investment in the rest of the year.
     Given implementation lags in the investment process, it may be most straightforward to test
how expectations at a given point in time affect firms’ investment plans.6 Accordingly, we
approximate Equation (1) by

                                                  𝐼𝑡𝑝           𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 )
                                                      ≈ 𝜃0 + 𝜃1                                                                (2)
                                                  𝐾𝑡              𝐾𝑡

This approximation is reliable if expectations about the level of future earnings display
significant persistence, namely 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 )/𝐾𝑡 is not too far from 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡+1 )/𝐾𝑡+1 and more


6
  Plans are particularly helpful in the context of our data, where we observe forward looking expectations once a quarter rather
than once a year. With lags in investment implementation, it is unlikely that expectations in a given quarter will be immediately
reflected in capital spending in the same quarter, or even fully incorporated into capital spending in the next quarter. In
comparison, investment plans would be more responsive to contemporaneous expectations. When managers become more
optimistic, they would revise their plans upward. As plans get implemented over time, the impact on actual capital expenditures
can show up with some delay. For this reason, it is more straightforward to start testing the impact of expectations by looking at
investment plans.
                                                                  11
generally for earnings further away in the future. We find this assumption to be plausible based
on information in the data. Empirically earnings over assets are relatively persistent, and
moreover, are perceived to be very persistent based on analyst forecasts. The IBES dataset
provides analysts’ forecasts of future earnings for up to twelve quarters. With firm-level forecasts,

we               find                  𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑖,𝑡+1 )/𝐾𝑖,𝑡+1 = 0.83𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑖,𝑡 )/𝐾𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡            and

𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑖,𝑡+2 )/𝐾𝑖,𝑡+1 = 0.73𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑖,𝑡 )/𝐾𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜂𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 . Aggregate persistence implied by analyst

forecasts is similar. In addition, lagged profitability is not significant if included in these

regressions and neither does it affect coefficients on 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑖,𝑡 )/𝐾𝑖,𝑡 . These results suggest that

next one year expectations incorporate a significant amount of information about medium to long
term expectations. We showed in Section 3 that CFO and analyst expectations are highly
correlated, and it is probable that their beliefs share common structures.
     Given this corroborating evidence, it appears that within the limitations of our data,
Equation (2) is a reasonable approximation of Equation (1). For the purpose of our empirical
analysis, it is convenient to log-linearize Equation (2) and express it in growth rates, since all
variables in the CFO survey are in terms of percentage change in the next twelve months relative
to the past twelve months. By expressing Equation (2) in growth rates we can directly employ
these variables, without using them to reconstruct levels. If we denote logs by lowercase
variables, then derivations in Appendix A show that our equation for investment plans can be
approximated as:
                 𝑝
                𝑖𝑡 − 𝑖𝑡−1
                ⏟                    ≈ 𝜇1        [𝔼𝑡 (𝜋𝑡 ) − 𝜋𝑡−1 ]
                                                 ⏟                            + (1 − 𝜇1 )(𝑘𝑡 − 𝑘𝑡−1 )   (3)
         planned investment growth          expectations of earnings growth
              in the next 12m                       in the next 12m

where 𝜇0 , 𝜇1 are log-linearization constants (𝜇1 > 0). The left hand side term is planned
investment growth in the next twelve months, which is available from the CFO survey. The first
term on the right hand side of Equation (3) is expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve
months, which we also observe directly in the data. This specification is very similar to previous
studies of investment growth such as Barro (1990), Lamont (2000), and many others.
     The intuition of Equation (3) is as follows: When firms think that earnings will increase by a
lot in the next twelve months, they also tend to believe that future earnings will be higher for a
sustained period of time. As a result, they want to invest more, which leads to an immediate
                                                              12
increase in planned investment. In Equation (3) we need to control for the change in capital stock
because both investment and profitability are affected by the size of capital stock. We can also
arrive at a specification very similar to Equation (3) in a simpler setting with time to build but
without adjustment costs.7 Empirically we use Equation (3) to map a basic investment model to
testable predictions in our dataset. We refrain from testing the parameter restrictions implied by a
strict adherence to the approximated Q equation.
     While investment plans are a convenient starting point to detect the impact of expectations,
for Equation (2) to be informative about how expectations influence investment, it must also be
the case that plans are closely related to realizations. In Section 5.3, we show that investment
plans are highly correlated with actual capital spending over the planned period. In other words,
a significant fraction of capital spending over the next few quarters appears to be determined by
ex ante investment plans, consistent with previous findings by Lamont (2000). To the extent that
there is a close correspondence between investment plans and realized investment over the
planned period, it would also be of interest to test how current expectations translate into actual
capital spending in the next twelve months. This additional test allows us to further assess
whether expectations have a substantial impact on actual investment activities. We present results
from these tests in Section 5.3.


5. Expectations and Investment

     In this section, we test the relationship between investment decisions and earnings
expectations. We focus on CFO expectations, and provide supplementary results using
expectations of equity analysts. We begin by studying investment plans. In Section 5.1 we
consider the role of expectations at the aggregate level, and in Section 5.2 we consider the role of


   One might also consider an alternative approximation of Equation (1) of the following form 𝐼𝑡−1 / 𝐾𝑡−1 ≈ 𝜃̂0 + 𝜃̂1 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 )/𝐾𝑡
7

where 𝐼𝑡−1 denotes realized investment in the past twelve months, and 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 ), as before, is current expectations of earnings in
the next twelve months. This approximation is reasonable under two conditions. As in the case of Equation (2), it should be that
expectations over future earnings are stable. Moreover, it has to be that respondents received little information and barely updated
their beliefs in the past twelve months, so that current expectations about next twelve month earnings, namely 𝔼𝑡 (Π𝑡 ), is close to
expectations four quarters ago about earnings over the same period, namely 𝔼𝑡−1 (Π𝑡 ). We find this approximation to be less
tenable for several reasons. First, from time to time new information arrives over a twelve month period that has a significant
impact on people’s beliefs. (This can happen even if earnings processes are highly persistent, for example, if it is a random walk.)
Second, given implementation lags in real world investment activities, actual capital spending over a twelve month period tends
to be particularly influenced by decisions made at the beginning of the period. As a result, realized capital spending in year 𝑡 − 1,
𝐼𝑡−1 , may not be well explained by expectations at the end of year 𝑡 − 1. In light of these observations, we use the approximation
in Equation (2) in the rest of our analysis.
                                                                  13
expectations at the firm level. Then, in Section 5.3 we evaluate the relationship between plans
and realized investment, and document the link between expectations and actual capital
spending.


5.1 Expectations and Investment Plans: Aggregate Evidence

    Figure 3 visually represents the association between aggregate CFO expectations and
aggregate investment. Panel A plots CFOs’ expectations of next twelve month earnings growth,
along with planned investment growth in the next twelve months. Panel B adds to Panel A actual
aggregate investment growth in the next twelve months. We see that there is a strong
comovement between earnings expectations and investment plans, and between investment plans
and actual capital spending. At the very least, expectations data do not appear to be
uninformative noise.
    We then estimate versions of Equation (3) using quarterly regressions:

                                 ̂ q = α + βEq∗ [∆Earnings] + λXq + ϵq
                                ∆CAPX 𝑡        𝑡                 𝑡     𝑡


       ̂ q is planned investment growth in the next twelve months reported in quarter q 𝑡 ,
where ∆CAPX 𝑡


and Eq∗ 𝑡 [∆Earnings] is CFO expectations of next twelve month earnings growth reported in

quarter q 𝑡 . Xq𝑡 includes past change in capital stock as shown in Equation (3), as well as a set

of additional controls we discuss below. We use Newey-West standard errors with twelve lags.8
     Table (4) columns (1) and (2) report our baseline results. We find that CFOs’ earnings
expectations have significant explanatory power for firms’ investment plans, both statistically
and economically. A one standard deviation increase in earnings growth expectations is
associated with a 0.8 standard deviation increase in planned investment growth.9 Put differently,
a one percentage point increase in CFO expectations is accompanied by a 0.6 percentage point
increase in planned investment growth. 10 Quantitatively, CFO expectations have major

8
   We check the autocorrelation structure of the errors: Autocorrelations are mostly limited to the first four lags, due to the
overlapping structure of our data; autocorrelations after four lags are minimal. Our empirical results are not sensitive to
alternative choices of Newey-West lags.
9
   At the aggregate level, during the period where we have CFO expectations data, the standard deviation of planned investment
growth is about 0.05, and the standard deviation of earnings growth expectations is 0.07. 0.07*0.6/0.05=0.8.
10
   Due to lags in investment implementation it is also possible that, at a given quarter, part of the capital spending that firms
expect to make in the next twelve months are determined by decisions made, for example, in the last quarter, and therefore
affected by expectations then. In aggregate data, we can include lagged expectations, in which case current expectations and past
expectations with two lags are significant, and jointly highly significant. Unfortunately, it is difficult to include lagged
                                                                  14
explanatory power for aggregate investment.
     In interpreting these results, three issues arise. First, how do CFO expectations relate to
traditional proxies of Tobin’s Q? Do data on managers’ expectations contain information beyond
market price-based measures of Q? Second, is the role of expectations robust to controlling for
alternative theories of corporate investment? Third, could the correlation between expectations
and investment reflect a reverse causality problem, whereby investment affects expectations of
future earnings rather than the other way around? In the following, we address these issues by
augmenting our baseline regressions.
     Some variables may affect investment but are likely to do so only through their influence on
expectations, such as information relevant for predicting future product demand. In principle, a
large part of expectations are formed, perfectly or imperfectly, based on observable information,
instead of being exogenous innovations. Thus a flexible enough function of observable
information should be able to approximate expectations. The focus of our present analysis is to
test the extent to which expectations as a whole, as measured in our data, affect firms’ investment
decisions. It is not specifically about the impact of variations in expectations which are not
explained by observables (so called “expectatxional shocks”). Accordingly, we do not explore
whether our expectations variables can or cannot be driven out by a full set of factors that are
primarily used to explain expectations. Instead, we emphasize controls that represent alternative
determinants of investment (such as discount rates, financial constraints, etc.).11


5.1.1. CFO Expectations and Market-based Proxies for Tobin’s Q
     We begin with a comparison of CFO expectations and traditional proxies of Tobin’s Q. This
exercise helps us assess whether expectations data contain additional information relative to
standard market-based Q measures. In Table 4 column (3), we include the empirical proxy of Q.
In line with previous research, the explanatory power of equity Q is very weak. It is well known


expectations in firm-level tests, since we do not always observe individual firms continuously. Therefore, in the baseline
specifications we include only current expectations.
11
   We thank our discussant Chris Sims for the suggestion of a more careful examination of the role of expectational shocks, as
well as the feedback among different variables, through VARs. To the extent that expectations experience a meaningful amount of
exogenous shocks above and beyond reactions to observable information (so that what appear to be expectational shocks is not
simply measurement error), studying expectational shocks may improve identification. It would also be ideal to have a longer
time series (we currently only have 57 quarterly observations of CFO expectations and 112 quarterly observations of analyst
expectations) to reliably estimate the dynamic relationships. In our first-step analysis, we study the impact of measured
expectations as a whole to show the basic core facts. The investigation of expectational shocks is an interesting issue that we
leave to future research.
                                                                 15
that equity Q is highly persistent and does not line up well with fluctuations in investment
activities. In our context, to explain investment growth, the direct theoretical counterpart is not Q
in levels, but the log change in Q. Barro (1990) shows changes in Q are almost equivalent to
stock returns. He finds that changes in Q from the beginning of year 𝑡 − 1 to the beginning of
year 𝑡 is highly correlated with investment growth in year 𝑡, and stock returns from the
beginning of year 𝑡 − 1 to the beginning of year 𝑡 perform incrementally better. In column (4),
we include past twelve month stock returns. The coefficient on this variable is positive and
statistically significant, as predicted by theory. The coefficient on CFO expectations remains
large and highly significant.12 The views of CFOs appear to contain a substantial amount of
additional information for investment plans not captured by equity Q.
     Philippon (2009) finds that a proxy of Q obtained from bond yields is also highly correlated
with investment activities. Philippon’s bond Q series end in 2007, which is five years before the
end of our sample. However, bond Q is highly correlated with credit spread. For example, the
correlation between changes in bond Q and changes in credit spread over four quarters is 0.84. In
column (5), we include changes in credit spread in the past four quarters in lieu of bond Q. In
addition, credit spread can be relevant as a control also because it may reflect credit availability
and financial constraints. The coefficient on this variable is negative and significant—consistent
with theory—but CFO expectations retain significant explanatory power.
     Overall, CFO expectations explain investment plans beyond market-based Q proxies,
statistically and economically. Indeed, CFOs may possess information that markets participants
either do not possess or process imperfectly. To the extent that managers’ and markets’ views
differ, it is natural that managers’ beliefs have a major impact on investment decisions. As we
show in Section 5.3, this result also extends to actual capital spending.


5.1.2. CFO Expectations and Alternative Theories of Investment
     We now test the role of expectations against alternative theories of investment. We introduce
a set of variables motivated by these theories, which are the key controls in our analysis.

Time-varying Discount Rates

12
   As illustrated in Section 4, proxies of Q are supposed to represent the Q model precisely, whereas survey data can only
represent it approximately. Thus it may not be surprising that Q proxies remain significant in regressions that include survey
expectations.
                                                                 16
     A prominent idea in traditional finance holds that variations in required returns, or discount
rates, are central to explaining investment in both financial and real assets (e.g. Cochrane 1991,
2011). Lamont (2000) postulates that firm investments rise and fall in response to changes in
discount rates so that high investment growth is associated with low future stock returns. Lettau
and Ludvigson (2002) argue that time-varying risk premia, as proxied for by the
consumption-wealth ratio (known as cay), can forecast future investment growth. In Table 4
columns (6) to (8), we control for three common measures of discount rates: log dividend yield,
cay, and the surplus consumption ratio as constructed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). cay is
somewhat significant, surplus consumption is not, and dividend yield tends to enter with the
wrong sign. The explanatory power of CFO expectations is unaffected. We get similar results if
we include these variables in past twelve month changes instead of in levels.
     We can also control for risk premia implied by long run risks models, as constructed by
Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2014). Unfortunately their series is annual, which leaves
us with few observations. We interpolate the series to quarterly frequencies in multiple ways and
find it tends to enter with the wrong sign. Taken together, none of these variables compare in
their explanatory power to CFO expectations, and their inclusion does not have much of an
influence on the coefficient on expectations.13
     Because proxies for discount rates are generally quite persistent, their coefficients can suffer
from Stambaugh (1999) biases. In our case, Stambaugh bias will tend to attenuate the
coefficients on discount rates toward zero or make them have the wrong sign.14 In Appendix C
Table C6, we report Stambaugh bias adjusted results, using a multivariate version of the
bootstrap method in Baker, Taliaferro, and Wurgler (2006). The bias adjusted results are very
similar.

Financing Constraints
     A well-known empirical result, dating back to Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), is that
investment is positively correlated with recent firm cash flows. The leading interpretation is that

13
   Our results also resonate with recent findings by Sharpe and Suarez (2013) and Kothari, Lewellen, and Warner (2014) that
changes in discount rates and user cost of capital have limited impact on investment, and that corporations appear to apply
constant hurdle rates in making investment decisions.
14
   Stambaugh bias arises when predictor variables are relatively persistent, and innovations in predictor variables and outcome
variables are correlated. In theory, investment should be high when discount rates are low. Thus we would expect a negative
coefficient on discount rates. To the extent that innovations in investment and discount rates are negatively correlated, Stambaugh
bias will be upward, pushing the coefficient on discount rates closer to or above zero.
                                                                   17
financially constrained firms invest more when high cash flows increase internal resources. In
column (9), we control for cash flows in the past twelve months.15 We can include cash flow
variables either in levels or in changes, and results are similar: The coefficient on expectations
barely changes, and the coefficient on past cash flows tends to be insignificant. This result
confirms earlier findings by Cummins et al. (2006) that unveil the fragility of financial constraint
variables once earnings expectations are taken into account.

Economic Uncertainty
     A blooming literature studies the impact of uncertainty on economic activities when
investment is irreversible or has fixed adjustment costs (Leahy and Whited, 1996; Guiso and
Parigi, 1999; Bloom, Bond, and Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom, 2009, among others). During periods
of high uncertainty, the theory goes, managers do not want to exercise the option of investing:
they prefer to wait for better times and information. It is legitimate to ask whether our measure
of CFO expectations still matters when we include proxies for uncertainty in our regression.
     In Table 4 column (10), we include stock price volatility as a standard uncertainty proxy
following Leahy and Whited (1996) and Bloom, Bond, and Van Reenen (2007), together with
economic policy uncertainty as measured by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013). We can use these
variables in levels or in past twelve month changes. In either case, these uncertainty proxies have
only weak explanatory power, and the coefficient on CFO earnings expectations remains highly
significant.
     In Table 4 columns (11) and (12), we additionally control for past GDP growth and past
investment growth. In the last column, we include multiple controls together. The statistical and
economic significance of CFO expectations remains largely intact.
     Overall, these tests illustrate that CFO earnings expectations have significant explanatory
power that is not accounted for by variables capturing alternative theories, such as time-varying
discount rates, financial constraints, and uncertainty. As we show below, similar results hold
when we connect expectations to actual capital spending. Our results suggest that expectations
data provide substantive information about fluctuations in aggregate investment, and changes in
expectations can be central to understanding investment activities.

15
   Here we use past net income rather than pro forma earnings to be conservative, since the actual internal resources that firms
gain from cash flows need to deduct most of the extraordinary items. Results using either form of profit metric to control for past
cash flows are very similar.
                                                               18
5.1.3. Reverse Causality
    One possible concern is our baseline results could be affected by reverse causality.
Specifically, if a firm plans to invest a lot in the next twelve months, managers might also expect
earnings to increase as investment leads to more output and sales. This mechanism seems
unlikely to be driving our results. First, investment in the next twelve months generally does not
translate into output and sales immediately. Second, even if it does, investment is an incremental
addition to the capital stock. It is unlikely that a one percent increase in investment (which
increases the firm’s capital stock by much less than one percent) can instantly lead to a one
percent or more increase in firm earnings, as would be required to match the magnitude of
coefficients in the data.
    We further address the reverse causality concern in supplementary tests, drawing on another
question in the CFO survey, which asks respondents to rate their optimism about the US
economy on a scale from 0 to 100 (with 0 being the least optimistic and 100 the most optimistic).
In Appendix C Table C1, we show that CFOs’ optimism about the US economy is significantly
positively correlated with investment. It is hard to argue that firms’ investment plans will
mechanically cause CFOs to be more optimistic about the US economy. Instead, this result is
very much in line with previous findings that firms’ expectations and sentiments appear to be a
key driver of investment activities.


    In Appendix C Table C2, we present the same set of tests using analyst expectations. We find
analyst expectations are also significantly correlated with investment plans, although not
surprisingly the magnitude of the relationship is smaller; the coefficients on analyst expectations
are generally about one half of the size of the coefficients on CFO expectations. The evidence
suggests that expectations elicited from different sources are consistent, and there are general
views shared by managers and the market that play an important role in shaping aggregate
investment dynamics.


5.2 Expectations and Investment Plans: Firm-level Evidence

    In Table 5, we repeat our analysis at the firm level. As before, we start with CFO data. We
estimate
                                                19
                            ̂ i,q = α + ζ𝑖 + βE𝑖,q
                           ∆CAPX               ∗
                                                     [∆Earnings𝑖 ] + λXi,q𝑡 + ϵi,q𝑡
                                 𝑡                 𝑡


We report baseline results with firm fixed effects. Results are very similar without fixed effects,
or with dynamic panel estimators.16 Table 5 shows that at the firm level, CFO expectations
continue to have substantial explanatory power for investment decisions. The response of a
firm’s investment plans to CFO expectations is similar in magnitude to the relationship unveiled
in the aggregate analysis of Table 4: When CFOs expect earnings growth to increase by one
percentage point, planned investment growth increases by 0.4 percentage points on average. We
then compare CFO expectations with firm-level Q and past twelve month firm stock returns. We
use the book-to-market ratio as a proxy for firm-level required returns, and all other firm-level
controls directly correspond to their aggregate counterparts in Table 4. After including these
controls, alone or together, CFO expectations remain statistically and economically significant.
We also examine results adding time fixed effects and the findings are similar.
      In Appendix C Table C3 we replicate the firm-level analysis with analyst expectations. The
results show that analyst expectations about a firm’s earnings growth can also explain investment
plans. As before, the size of the coefficients on analyst expectations is about one half of that on
CFO expectations. While CFO expectations play a more dominant role, business outlook shared
by managers and specialist analysts is nonetheless informative about investment decisions.


5.3 From Plans to Realized Investment

      A premise for our analysis in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 is that investment plans are key
determinants of actual capital spending. With lags in investment implementation, expectations in
a given quarter may not translate into realized investment instantly, so changes in plans can help
us pinpoint the impact of expectations, and plans will turn into capital expenditures over a period
of time. In this section, we evaluate this proposition empirically. In Figure 3 Panel B it is evident
that, at the aggregate level, plans and realized investment over the planned period are closely
related. The raw correlation between the two series is 0.78.17 Figure 3 Panel B also shows that

16
    To the extent that strict exogeneity may not be satisfied, fixed effect estimators may be biased in finite sample. In our context,
it will bias the coefficient on earnings expectations downwards. Regressions without fixed effects and those using dynamic panel
methods show that the bias does not appear to be very important. Given that we do not always continuously observe individual
firms in the CFO sample, it is difficult to take first differences and use lagged instruments. Instead, for dynamic panel estimations
we apply the forward orthogonal deviations (FOD) transformation as in Arellano and Bover (1995).
17
    Figure 2 uses aggregate investment as measured by private non-residential fixed investment from NIPA. We can alternatively
use capital expenditures data from Flow of Funds or Compustat, and results are very similar.
                                                                    20
realized investment is highly correlated with investment plans fitted on CFO expectations.
Expectations are a key driver not only of investment plans, but also of actual capital spending.
    In Table 6 and Table 7, we present a full set of results using CFO earnings expectations in a
given quarter to forecast actual investment growth in the next twelve months, both in the
aggregate and at the firm level. We find that expectations, and CFO expectations in particular,
have substantial forecasting power for realized next twelve month investment. Both in the
aggregate and at the firm level, a one percentage point increase in CFO earnings growth
expectations predicts a 0.6 percentage point increase in actual investment growth in the next
twelve months. The performance of past stock returns and changes in credit spread has some
improvements, but expectations data retain significant power; they are very informative about
realized capital spending both alone and in the presence of a list of important controls.


    Taken together, evidence in this section shows that expectations data are highly relevant for
understanding corporate investment. They are not simply noise, but contain considerable
information for explaining investment activities beyond a host of traditional variables.


6. Are Expectations Rational?

   Since expectations shape investment, it is critical to understand their determinants. We now
take a first step in analyzing the structure of CFO and analyst expectations about future earnings
growth. In particular, we check whether expectations of managers and market participants are
consistent with rational benchmarks, or are systematically biased in predictable ways.
   The simplest test of rational expectations is to run a regression with realized future earnings
growth on the left hand side and ex ante expectations on the right hand side. In our context, such
tests take the form:
                                            ∗
                        ∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 ⏟
                        ⏟                  E𝑖,q 𝑡
                                                  [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑖 ] + 𝜔𝑖,𝑡+1
                       realized next 12m            expected next 12m
                        earnings growth              earnings growth

where 𝑖 is a firm index, ∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑖 denotes realized earnings growth in the next twelve
             ∗
months, and E𝑖,q 𝑡
                   [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑖 ] denotes expectations of next twelve month earnings growth

reported in quarter q 𝑡 . The test can be augmented by including on the right hand side a set of
variables that are within time 𝑡 information set.
                                                 21
     Rational expectations postulate that 𝛼 = 0 and 𝛽 = 1 (and a zero coefficient on any other
variable in time 𝑡 information set). Using both CFO and analyst expectations, we find β to be
significantly lower than one, and a list of variables known at time 𝑡 enter significantly. This
finding, however, does not necessarily mean that expectations are excessively volatile relative to
outcomes. It could be that expectations are measured with error, which would cause a downward
bias in β.
     An alternative approach is to study the predictability of ex-post expectational errors. If
expectations are rational, forecast errors should be orthogonal to all information available at the
time when the forecast is made, and forecast errors should be unpredictable. If, on the other hand,
expectations are systematically biased, then ex post errors would be predictable using
information available ex ante. In this case, the structure of error predictability could help us
understand potential sources of excessive optimism and pessimism.
     To take a first look, consider Figure 4. Panel A shows errors in aggregate CFO expectations
about next twelve month earnings growth against past year corporate profitability. Panel B shows
the same series using analysts’ expectations data. 18 The figures show a striking pattern:
expectational errors appear to be systematic and recurring. In particular, they are consistent with
the presence of excessive optimism in good times and excessive pessimism in bad times: future
realized earnings growth systematically falls short of expectations when past earnings are high,
and exceeds expectations when past earnings are low.19
     To statistically corroborate the patterns in Figure 4, we present regressions of expectational
errors on past profitability. Column (1) of Table 8 Panel A reports the results using CFO data.
Column (1) of Table 9 Panel A reports the results using analyst data. In both cases, high past year
profitability is correlated with over-optimism, while low past year profitability is correlated with
over-pessimism.20 The magnitude of the bias is large. A one standard deviation increase in past


18
   The errors are computed as aggregate realized next twelve month earnings growth – aggregate CFO (analyst) expectations of
next twelve month earnings growth. As we cannot identify the full set of firms that answer the CFO survey in each quarter, this
sample may differ from the full sample with which we use to compute aggregate realized earnings growth. For robustness, to
make sure that aggregate earnings growth patterns are representative, we alternatively compute aggregate earnings growth by
taking the mean or median earnings growth in each quarter. We find this makes very little difference, and we get consistent
empirical results in all cases.
19
   Note that earnings in quarter 𝑡 are typically announced several weeks into quarter 𝑡 + 1, thus we use earnings from quarter
𝑡 − 5 through 𝑡 − 2 to compute past year profitability, so as to ensure that all information in the predictor variable is strictly in
the information set of CFOs and analysts when they make forecasts in quarter 𝑡.
20
   To address concerns that past year profitability is relatively persistent (though it is much less persistent than variables like
discount rate proxies), we present bootstrap bias adjusted results in Appendix C Table C7. We find very similar results.
                                                                   22
profitability is associated with a 0.6 standard deviation increase in the magnitude of CFOs’
expectational errors.21 Figure 5 further illustrates these results with scatter plots of expectational
errors against past profitability. It shows that the bias is present throughout the sample period,
and not driven by a single outlier event.
     Column (2) in Panel A of Tables 8 and 9 correlate expectational errors with past GDP growth
to check whether over-optimism and over-pessimism are predictable by aggregate economic
performance. We also find higher past GDP growth is associated with over-optimism, and vice
versa (although the statistical significance on past GDP growth is a bit lower).22
     One way to interpret these results is that expectations depart from rationality in the direction
of being extrapolative: when CFOs or analysts observe good or bad earnings realization, they
think that similar realization persists into the future and fail to correct for mean reversion. To
illustrate, we separately examine, and then compare, how actual future earnings growth and
expected future earnings growth correlate with past year profitability. When past year earnings
over assets increase by one percentage point, actual earnings growth in the next twelve months
on average slows down by 0.12. However, CFOs only expect next twelve month earnings growth
to slow down by about 0.03. The difference between the true and perceived reversion
corresponds to the coefficient of -0.09 in Panel A column (1).
     We find very similar results at the micro level. In Table 8 Panel B we examine expectational
errors of individual CFOs. We use past year firm profitability and GDP growth as main
predictors of expectational errors. Consistent with previous evidence at the aggregate level,
expectational errors of individual CFOs are also strongly correlated with firm profitability and
general economic conditions, in a way that appears to be extrapolative. At the firm level, as past
year earnings over assets increase by one percentage point, next twelve month earnings growth
tends to slow down by 0.06, whereas CFOs only expect it to slow down by 0.01 on average. This
results in a difference of -0.05, as shown by Panel B column (1).
     Note that profitability is likely to be heterogeneous across firms, and the normal level of
earnings over assets can be quite different for established firms than for young firms, and for
firms in different industries (this can be of particular concern when we turn to the analyst sample,

21
   During the period where we have CFO expectations, the standard deviation of past year earnings/asset is 0.88, and the
standard deviation of expectational errors is 0.13. 0.88*0.09/0.13=0.6.
22
   To be conservative, past twelve month GDP growth also ends at quarter t-2 because GDP is reported with a lag,
                                                                 23
which is much more heterogeneous than the CFO survey sample). To account for firm-specific
average profitability, we include firm fixed effects. In the setting of error predictability
regressions, strict exogeneity required by traditional fixed effect estimators may not be satisfied.
Under the null of rational expectations, only sequential exogeneity will be satisfied. We perform
robustness checks using dynamic panel estimators as in Arellano and Bover (1995),23 and results
are very similar. For standard errors in firm-level tests, we always cluster by firm and we double
cluster by both firm and time whenever the length of the panel makes it appropriate to do so.
      In columns (5) and (6) of Table 8 Panel B, we report results adding time fixed effects, which
helps us assess the extent to which expectational errors load on the idiosyncratic component of
firm profitability. By teasing out aggregate shocks, time fixed effects may also attenuate issues in
rational expectations tests when the panel is relatively short (this can be a concern with the CFO
panel, which spans seven years and 28 quarters, and is less of a concern with the analyst panel,
which covers 28 years and 112 quarters).24 We find that CFOs seem to significantly extrapolate
the idiosyncratic component of past profitability. Together, results in Table 8 show that the
extrapolative structure of CFO expectations appears pervasive. Past year economic conditions,
and both the aggregate and the idiosyncratic component of firm profitability, are all correlated
with CFOs’ expectational errors.
      In Table 9, we perform the same set of tests as in Table 8 using analyst expectations. The
results are similar: Analysts also tend to over-estimate next twelve month earnings growth when
past year firm profitability is high and when past year economic conditions are favorable, and
under-estimate future earnings growth when the past year is rough.
      At first glance, the patterns in CFO and analyst expectations are quite consistent with
extrapolative biases observed in financial markets. As shown by Greenwood and Shleifer (2014),
many market participants—including both individual and institutional investors, as well as CFOs
surveyed by Graham and Harvey—tend to extrapolate stock price trends formed in the past year.
They generally think that past year’s trend would continue, whereas in reality it tends to revert.
As explained in Section 2 and shown in Figure 1, investors tend to become significantly more


23
   The forward orthogonal deviations (FOD) transformation studied by Arellano and Bover (1995) is most helpful as our CFO
panel contains gaps.
24
   One possible concern is that time fixed effects may not completely tease out aggregate shocks if different firms are affected
differently by an aggregate shock. For this to affect our results, it has to be that firms which happen to have a profitable past year
are hit harder by an adverse aggregate shock, and vice versa. We do not find very compelling evidence for this concern.
                                                                   24
optimistic about stock market performance in the next twelve months when market returns in the
past year are high, and vice versa (Figure 1 Panel A). Corporate CFOs are equally extrapolative
in their expectations about next twelve month market returns (Figure 1 Panel B). Piazzesi,
Salomao, and Schneider (2015) also find that bond market investors tend to perceive interest rate
trends to be more persistent than they are. The extrapolative tendency in expectations formation
resonates with the well-known representativeness bias in human judgment (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1972; Tversky and Kahneman, 1974), which can lead people to view events similar to
recent experiences as typical and likely, and to discount scenarios that are different from the
prevailing situation (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny, 2015).

     While our evidence is consistent with extrapolation in earnings expectations, other factors
may contribute to apparent deviations from rationality. In the following, we address a set of
possible concerns.


6.1 Alternative Explanations of Deviations from Rationality

A. Misinterpretation of Survey Question
     First, we would like to make sure that the apparent errors in expectations do not simply
reflect respondents misinterpreting the survey question. This could be a concern for CFO
expectations, as CFOs are directly asked to provide forecasts of earnings growth in the next
twelve months, and there could be alternative definitions of next twelve month earnings growth.
This is not an issue, however, for analyst expectations, since analysts provide forecasts of total
earnings in specific future quarters, and we compute the implied expected next twelve month
earnings growth by combining their forecasts with actual past earnings; we then compare this
variable to realizations to test forecast accuracy.25
     To be specific, while the CFO survey asks about earnings growth in the next twelve months
defined as the percentage change of earnings in the next twelve months relative to earnings in the
past twelve months, respondents could instead provide expectations about earnings twelve
months from now relative to current earnings. If this were true, when we compare survey


25
   In other words, in the case of analysts, we compute expected next twelve month earnings growth = analyst forecasts of
earnings in the next twelve months/actual earnings in the past twelve months, and compare it to realized next twelve month
earnings growth = actual earnings in the next twelve months/actual earnings in the past twelve months. We can alternatively
normalize analyst forecasts of next twelve month earnings by current assets, and results are very similar.
                                                                25
responses to actual earnings growth in the next twelve months—which we follow the survey
question to define as earnings in the next twelve months over earnings in the past twelve
months—we might get spurious errors. For clarity of exposition, we denote next twelve month
earnings growth defined by the survey as
∆Earnings𝑡 = earnings in the next 12 months/earnings in the past 12 months.
We denote the alternative interpretation as ∆Earnings𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑡 = earnings 12 months from now/
current earnings, and we denote CFO responses as E𝑡CFO .
     We provide two checks to show that respondents do not appear to misinterpret the question.
First, Figure 2 shows that CFO responses and analyst expectations are quite consistent with each
other when analyst expectations are computed following the survey definition of next twelve
month earnings growth. However, if we instead compute analyst expectations of earnings four
quarters from now relative to current earnings, the result looks much more different from CFO
responses. Second and more importantly, if we compute actual earnings four quarters from now
relative to current earnings (namely ∆Earnings 𝑎𝑙𝑡 ) and compare it to CFO responses, then CFOs
would appear much less accurate in their forecasts. In particular, while aggregate CFO responses
are 0.54 correlated with ∆Earnings𝑡 , it is only 0.1 correlated with ∆Earnings𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑡 . In addition, if
we construct expectational error as ∆Earnings𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑡 − E𝑡CFO , this variable is still predictable by
past twelve month profitability.26 Across all robustness checks, we find actual CFO responses
are closest to the survey’s intended definition of next twelve month earnings growth, and by
comparing CFO responses to ∆Earningst we obtain the most conservative results with respect
to deviations from rationality.

B. Asymmetric Loss Functions
     A common concern with forecast data is respondents might have asymmetric loss functions
that cause them to report expectations that deviate from their objective views. For instance,
analysts may want to please firm management and release upward biased forecasts (Lim, 2001).
In the case of CFOs, reputational or other “publicity” considerations are unlikely to be at play, as
individual responses in the CFO survey are never published. From this perspective, CFOs should

26
  Relatedly, to test the accuracy of earnings expectations, it is highly important that we use the same earnings measure as CFOs
and analysts. As mentioned in Section 3, we use pro forma actual earnings from IBES instead of GAAP earnings. The earnings
measures we use are the ones CFOs report in earnings announcements and the ones analysts generally aim to match. In addition,
we check that they are closest to CFO and analyst forecasts in terms of magnitude, variance, and variation over time. When
compared to GAAP earnings, CFO and analyst expectations appear to be much less accurate, and error predictability remains.
                                                                  26
not have much incentive to bias their responses for signaling purposes.
     The main challenge for explanations with asymmetric loss functions is to account for the
time varying nature of expectational errors. Commonly used specifications of asymmetric loss
functions (such as the LINEX function, and the Lin-Lin function under certain assumptions)
generally yield optimal forecasts that are linear in objective expectations and conditional
variance of the forecast variable. Given that conditional volatility of earnings tends to be higher
in bad times, for asymmetric loss functions to generate more “pessimism” in bad times and more
“optimism” in good times, over-predicting must be more costly than under-predicting. In this
case, however, we would expect reported expectations to be consistently biased downwards
(with the magnitude increasing in the size of the conditional variance), which is not the case for
either CFOs or analysts.27
     While we do not find compelling reasons why asymmetric loss functions can drive our
results, we nevertheless perform a set of robustness checks. In Table 8 and Table 9 we control for
various proxies of volatility, including the VIX index and recent stock price volatility. We find
that the volatility terms do not enter significantly, and our main results are unchanged. This
evidence suggests that it is the level of past earnings that affects systematic forecast errors,
whereas uncertainty plays a minor role.

C. Risk Neutral Probability Weighting
     Another possible concern is that CFOs might be reporting expectations not under physical
probabilities, but under certain types of risk neutral probabilities. Reporting expectations of
future earnings growth is distinctively different from pricing, or calculation of expected returns
of an asset. In the context of pricing, future cash flows may be discounted using a stochastic
discount factor, or correspondingly, weighted by risk neutral probabilities. In the context of
forecasting future earnings growth, it is not plausible that any discounting is present and that
there is an associated stochastic discount factor from optimizing theories.28 It is possible that
certain scenarios might be more salient in people’s minds that lead to distorted probability

27
   One might also consider alternative scenarios where CFOs and analysts have time-varying loss functions. For this to explain
our results, it has to be that people prefer to under-predict in bad times and to over-predict in good times. We do not find
compelling reasons why it is optimal to follow this strategy.
28
   In addition, to the extent that high earnings are associated with low SDF (i.e. in general earnings are high in good states),
earnings growth under risk neutral probabilities (which is always a well-defined mathematical object, though its economic
interpretation may be unclear) will be consistently lower than earnings growth under physical probabilities. We find no evidence
that either CFOs or analysts appear to be persistently pessimistic.
                                                                   27
weighting, but this explanation would fall into the category of cognitive biases and non-rational
expectations (Bordalo et al. 2012).

D. Conditional Expectations vs. Other Conditional Moments
   Properties of rational expectations tests hold under the assumption that respondents provide
conditional expectations of variables of interest. One concern could be that respondents might be
reporting conditional medians, conditional modes, or other conditional moments instead of
conditional expectations. For medians in particular, we can perform robustness checks with least
absolute deviations regressions, which yield similar results to OLS. More generally, for this type
of problem to affect our results, it has to be that following high past profitability the moment
people report is greater than the conditional mean, and vice versa. We check the distribution of
future earnings growth conditioning on past profitability, and do not find any evidence that
conditional medians and modes follow this pattern (Appendix C Figure C1 plots the distribution
of next twelve month earnings growth given a certain level of past profitability). Although we
are not able to rule out the possibility that respondents report some other moments that happen to
behave this way, it is not obvious what these moments could be and why respondents across
different groups all prefer to use them. Certainly, more precise elicitation of expectations will be
highly beneficial, as stressed by Manski (2004), but within available data, we do not find
compelling evidence that the observed over-optimism and over-pessimism could be explained by
respondents reporting alternative conditional moments.

E. Information Rigidities and Rational Inattention
     Finally, recent research points to other frictions that can affect expectations formation,
including information rigidities (Mankiw and Reis, 2002) and inattention (Sims 2003, 2010).
While these frictions are important in many economic settings, they may not be natural
explanations for the extrapolative errors in CFOs’ and analysts’ earnings expectations. Although
managers and analysts may not pay full attention to information such as GDP growth or inflation,
it is not quite plausible that past firm earnings are not in their information set, or that such
information just slips their minds. After all, earnings are quite important for firms, as well as for
management compensation. Similarly, analysts, who are designated to forecast future earnings
and whose performance is judged in part by the accuracy of their forecasts, are also unlikely to

                                                 28
be inattentive to earnings.29

     In sum, our evidence points to systematic extrapolative biases in CFO and analyst
expectations. While we cannot definitively rule out that some combinations of limited sample
span, measurement error, and more complicated versions of informational frictions and loss
functions could account for some these results, extrapolation stands out as the most parsimonious
explanation. The findings also echo accumulating evidence in finance that extrapolation arises in
many settings, and appears to be a common psychological tendency in expectations formation.


7. Summary and Implications

     Our analysis of data on earnings expectations and investment yields two basic conclusions.
First, expectations data appear to be extremely helpful in understanding corporate investment
plans and actual investment, more so than some traditional measures of determinants of
investment.         Second, several empirical tests appear to reject the rational expectations
benchmark, pointing to the extrapolative nature of expectations.
     At a minimum, the evidence endorses Manski’s (2004) call for collecting and using
expectations data to evaluate economic theories. Our project would not have been possible
without John Graham and Campbell Harvey’s CFO data. But as is often the case with a
preliminary analysis and with limited data, there are many questions that we cannot address with
the limited data we have.
     Yet even our preliminary results suggest some directions for future work. The finding that
expectations do so well in accounting for investment plans and actual investment suggests a
possible strategy for reviving the Q-theory of investment. It is well known that the standard
Q-theory investment equation does not work well in levels, and requires first differencing to
have some explanatory power (Barro 1990). Our findings, along with earlier research by
Cummins et al. (2006), suggest that the problem may be not with the Q-theory itself, but with the
stock market based measures of Tobin’s Q. This is not entirely surprising in light of the growing
evidence of noisiness and non-fundamental fluctuations of stock prices (Shiller 1981, Morck et


29
   We also test the extent to which expectational errors are predictable by the forecast itself or by past forecasts. We find that
higher forecasts are associated with less-than-expected actuals, and vice versa. However, this result could be especially
susceptible to the influence of measurement errors, as any random measurement error of the forecast would mechanically affect
expectational errors. Thus we interpret it with extra caution.
                                                                 29
al. 1990). A measure of investment opportunities based on actual expectations of corporate
managers does much better in explaining investment, regardless of whether the equation is
estimated in levels or in changes. A constructive way to revive Q-theory is to start with data on
expectations, and not on stock market valuations.
    The second direction suggested by our evidence, as well as by the previous work, is the need
to construct plausible models of expectations. In macroeconomics, in particular, such models
have to come to grips with some version of the Lucas critique, which was applied initially
precisely to Cagan’s and other models of adaptive expectations. In our view, market participants
might be backward-looking and extrapolative to some extent, but surely they also have some
ideas of how the economy evolves that are forward-looking. Developing models along these
lines is an open problem. Our own approach has been to use psychological models of
expectations that incorporate both forward and backward looking elements (e.g., Bordalo et al.
2013; Gennaioli et al. 2015), but this research is still some way from being ready for a
macroeconomic model.
    The larger question of course is whether expectations have a significant role to play in
macroeconomic modeling. A recent literature in macroeconomics considers expectations
“shocks”, and discusses the extent to which they can contribute to economic fluctuations
(Beaudry and Portier, 2004; Angeletos and La’O, 2009; Lorenzoni, 2009; Barsky and Sims, 2012;
Angeletos and La’O, 2013; Levchenko and Pandalai-Nayar, 2015). Our perspective is quite
different; the evidence suggests that expectations have a fairly precise extrapolative structure,
and do not just vibrate randomly. They are not noise; there is a systematic pattern of errors.
Moreover, we believe – and our evidence seems supportive of this belief – that market
participants make common expectational errors. Here we show that these errors are common to
analysts and CFOs; we suspect the beliefs of policy makers are highly correlated with those of
market participants. It seems to us that, as a consequence, plausible models would consider
common errors among many economic agents, which therefore would have potential aggregate
effects.
    The final question is whether such errors can account for some part of macroeconomic
fluctuations, such as aggregate overbuilding in important sectors like the housing market, or
prolonged recessions with a lack of corporate investment and hiring. Our data have limitations
                                               30
for quantifying how the erroneous component of expectations affects investment, since the
rational level of investment is not observable, but has to be inferred from making additional
assumptions about the decision makers’ environment and information, which requires extra
discretion. It is a further step still that a common error translates into aggregate investment
distortions. We leave this to future work.




                                              31
Reference
Abarbanell, Jeffery S. “Do Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts Incorporate Information in Prior Stock
Price Changes?’’ Journal of Accounting and Economics 14 (1991): 147–65.
Amromin, Gene, and Steven A. Sharpe. “Expectation of Risk and Return among Household
Investors: Are Their Sharpe Ratios Countercyclical?” Management Science (forthcoming).
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei. “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or Surveys
Forecast Inflation Better?” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, no. 4 (2007): 1163-1212.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La'O. “Noisy Business Cycles.” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 24, no. 1 (2009): 319-378.
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Jennifer La'O. “Sentiments.” Econometrica 81, no. 2 (2013):
739-779.
Arellano, Manuel, and Olympia Bover. “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of
Error-components Models.” Journal of Econometrics 68, no. 1 (1995): 29-51.
Arif, Salman, and Charles MC Lee. “Aggregate Investment and Investor Sentiment.” Review of
Financial Studies 27 no. 11 (2014): 3241-3279.
Bacchetta, Philippe, Elmar Mertens, and Eric Van Wincoop. “Predictability in Financial Markets:
What Do Survey Expectations Tell Us?” Journal of International Money and Finance 28, no. 3
(2009): 406-426.
Baker, Malcolm, Ryan Taliaferro, and Jeffrey Wurgler. “Predicting Returns with Managerial
Decision Variables: Is There a Small-Sample Bias?” Journal of Finance 61, no. 4 (2006):
1711-1730.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.”
Working Paper (2013).
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, Ivan Shaliastovich, and Amir Yaron. “Volatility, the Macroeconomy,
and Asset Prices.” Journal of Finance 69, no. 6 (2014): 2471-2511.
Barro, Robert J. “The Stock Market and Investment.” Review of Financial Studies 3, no. 1 (1990):
115-131.
Barsky, Robert B., and Eric R. Sims. “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
Innovations in Consumer Confidence.” American Economic Review 102, no. 4 (2012):
1343-1377.
Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier. “An Exploration into Pigou's Theory of Cycles.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 51, no. 6 (2004): 1183-1216.
Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey. “Managerial Miscalibration.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, no. 4 (2013): 1547-1584.
Bhattacharya, Nilabhra, Ervin L. Black, Theodore E. Christensen, and Chad R. Larson.
“Assessing the Relative Informativeness and Permanence of pro forma Earnings and GAAP
Operating Earnings.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, no. 1 (2003): 285-319.

                                                32
Bloom, Nicholas. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77, no. 3 (2009): 623-685.
Bloom, Nick, Stephen Bond, and John Van Reenen. “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics.”
Review of Economic Studies 74, no. 2 (2007): 391-415.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. “Salience Theory of Choice under Risk.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics (2012).
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. “Salience and Asset Prices.” American
Economic Review 103, no. 3 (2013): 623-628.
Bradshaw, Mark T., and Richard G. Sloan. “GAAP versus the Street: An Empirical Assessment of
Two Alternative Definitions of Earnings.” Journal of Accounting Research 40, no. 1 (2002):
41-66.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. “Understanding Booms and Busts in
Housing Markets.” Working Paper (2015).
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane. “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior.” Journal of Political Economy 107, no. 2
(1999): 205-251.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. “Cointegration and Tests of Present Value Models.”
Journal of Political Economy 95, no. 5 (1987): 1062-1088.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends.”
Journal of Finance 43, no. 3 (1988): 661-676.
Cochrane, John H. “Production-based Asset Pricing and the Link between Stock Returns and
Economic Fluctuations.” Journal of Finance 46, no. 1 (1991): 209-237.
Cochrane, John H. “Presidential Address: Discount Rates.” Journal of Finance 66, no. 4 (2011):
1047-1108.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. “What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about
Information Rigidities?” Journal of Political Economy 120, no. 1 (2012): 116-159.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations
Formation Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts”. American Economic Review
(forthcoming).
Cummins, Jason G., Kevin A. Hassett, and Stephen D. Oliner. “Investment Behavior, Observable
Expectations, and Internal Funds.” American Economic Review 96, no. 3 (2006): 796-810.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers. “Speculative Dynamics and the
Role of Feedback Traders.” American Economic Review 80, no. 2 (1990): 63-68.
De Bondt, Werner, and Richard H. Thaler. “Do Security Analysts Overreact?” American
Economic Review 80, no. 2 (1990): 52-57.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann. “Noise
Trader Risk in Financial Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 4 (1990): 703-738.
Del Negro, Marco, and Stefano Eusepi. “Fitting Observed Inflation Expectations.” Journal of

                                               33
Economic Dynamics and Control 35, no. 12 (2011): 2105-2131.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, Bruce C. Petersen. “Financing Constraints and Corporate
Investment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988): 141-206.
Figlewski, Stephen, and Paul Wachtel. “The Formation of Inflationary Expectations.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 63, no. 1 (1981): 1-10.
Fuhrer, Jeff. “Expectations as a Source of Macroeconomic Persistence: Evidence from Survey
Expectations in Dynamic Macro Models.” Working Paper (2015).
Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson. "Natural Expectations, Macroeconomic
Dynamics, and Asset Pricing." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 26, no. 1 (2011): 1-48.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. "Neglected Risks: The Psychology of
Financial Crises." Working Paper (2015).
Greenwood, Robin, and Samuel G. Hanson. “Waves in Ship Prices and Investment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130, no. 1 (2015): 55-109.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer. “Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns.” Review
of Financial Studies 27, no. 3 (2014): 714-746.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, “The Duke/CFO Business Outlook Survey.”
http:www.cfosurvey.org (2011).
Guiso, Luigi, and Giuseppe Parigi. “Investment and Demand Uncertainty.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 144, no. 1 (1999): 185-227.
Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Raghu Suryanarayanan. “Investment Plans.” Working Paper
(2006).
Hart, Albert Gailord, Franco Modigliani, and Guy Orcutt (Eds.). The Quality and Economic
Significance of Anticipations Data (1960). National Bureau of Economics Research.
Hayashi, Fumio. “Tobin's Marginal Q and Average Q: A Neoclassical Interpretation.”
Econometrica 50, no. 1 (1982): 213-224.
Hirshleifer, David, and Jianfeng Yu. 2012. “Asset Pricing in Production Economies with
Extrapolative Expectations.” Working Paper (2012).
Hribar, Paul, and John McInnis. “Investor Sentiment and Analysts' Earnings Forecast Errors.”
Management Science 58, no. 2 (2012): 293-307.
Kahneman, Daniel. “Subjective Probability: Judgement of Representativeness.” Cognitive
Psychology 3 (1972): 430-454.
Keane, Michael P., and David E. Runkle. “Testing the Rationality of Price Forecasts: New
Evidence from Panel Data.” American Economic Review 80, no. 4 (1990): 714-735.
Keane, Michael P., and David E. Runkle. “Are Financial Analysts' Forecasts of Corporate Profits
Rational?” Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 4 (1998): 768-805.
Kothari, S. P., Jonathan Lewellen, and Jerold B. Warner. “The Behavior of Aggregate Corporate
Investment.” Working Paper (2014).
                                               34
Lamont, Owen A. “Investment Plans and Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 55, no. 6 (2000):
2719-2745.
La Porta, Rafael. “Expectations and the Cross-section of Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 51,
no. 5 (1996): 1715-1742.
Leahy, John V., and Toni M. Whited. “The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Some Stylized
Facts.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28, no. 1 (1996): 64-83.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson. “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected Stock
returns.” Journal of Finance 56, no. 3 (2001): 815-849.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson. “Time-varying Risk Premia and the Cost of Capital: An
Alternative Implication of the Q Theory of Investment.” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, no.
1 (2002): 31-66.
Levchenko, Andrei A., and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. “TFP, News, and ‘Sentiments’: The
International Transmission of Business Cycles.” Working Paper (2015).
Lim, Terence. “Rationality and Analysts' Forecast Bias.” Journal of Finance 56, no. 1 (2001):
369-385.
Liu, Jing, and Wei Su. “Forecasting Analysts’ Forecast Errors.” Working Paper (2005).
Lorenzoni, Guido. “A Theory of Demand Shocks.” American Economic Review 99, no. 5 (2009):
2050-2084.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis. “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 4 (2002):
1295-1328.
Manski, Charles F. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72, no. 5 (2004): 1329-1376.
Monti, Francesca. “Combining Judgment and Models.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42,
no. 8 (2010): 1641-1662.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, Robert W. Vishny, Matthew Shapiro, and James M. Poterba.
“The Stock Market and Investment: Is the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (1990): 157-215.
Muth, John F. “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements.” Econometrica 29, no.
3 (1961): 315-335.
Philippon, Thomas. “The Bond Market's q.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, no. 3 (2009):
1011-1056.
Piazzesi, Monika, Juliana Salomao, and Martin Schneider. “Trend and Cycle in Bond Premia.”
Working Paper (2015).
Prescott, Edward. “Should Control Theory be Used for Economic Stabilization?” in Karl Brunner
and Alan Meltzer, eds., Optimal Policies, Control Theory, and Technological Exports, Vol. 7,
Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics (1977):
13-38.

                                                35
Sharpe, Steven A., and Gustavo A. Suarez. “The Insensitivity of Investment to Interest Rates:
Evidence from a Survey of CFOs.” Working Paper (2013).
Shiller, Robert J. “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends?” American Economic Review 71, no. 3 (1981): 421-436.
Sims, Christopher A. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50,
no. 3 (2003): 665-690.
Sims, Christopher A. “Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics.” Handbook of Monetary
Economics 3 (2010): 155-181.
Smets, Frank, Anders Warne, and Rafael Wouters. “Professional Forecasters and Real-time
Forecasting with a DSGE Model.” International Journal of Forecasting 30, no. 4 (2014):
981-995.
Souleles, Nicholas S. “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption: Micro
Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys.” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 36, no. 1 (2004): 39-72.
Stambaugh, Robert F. “Predictive Regressions.” Journal of Financial Economics 54, no. 3 (1999):
375-421.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.”
Science 185, no. 4157 (1974): 1124-1131.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette. “Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ‘Irrationality’ Disappear
with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 18, no. 1
(2003): 139-208.
Zarnowitz, Victor. “Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic Forecasts.” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics 3, no. 4 (1985): 293-311.




                                               36
Figures and Tables

       Figure 1. Stock Market Expectations of Investors and CFOs and Past Stock Returns

The dashed line denotes S&P 500 index returns in the past twelve months. In Panel A, the solid line denotes expectations from the
Gallup survey (% optimistic - % pessimistic about performance of the stock market in the next twelve months). In Panel B, the solid
line denotes the average response in the CFO survey, to the question “Over the next year, I expect the average annual S&P 500 return
will be: ___.” Frequency is quarterly.


                          Panel A. Expectations in Gallup Survey and Past Year Stock Returns




                           Panel B. Expectations in CFO Survey and Past Year Stock Returns




                                                                37
       Figure 2. Expectations of Next Twelve Month Earnings Growth by CFOs and Analysts
The solid line is aggregate CFO expectations of next twelve month earnings growth from the CFO survey. The dashed line is
aggregate analyst expectations of next twelve month earnings growth computed from analyst EPS forecasts. Frequency is quarterly.




                                                               38
                      Figure 3. CFO Earnings Growth Expectations and Investment
The plots below present aggregate CFO expectations of future earnings growth, aggregate planned investment growth, and aggregate
actual investment growth. In Panel A, the solid line is aggregate CFO expectations of next twelve month earnings growth. The solid
line with circles is aggregate planned investment growth in the next twelve months. In Panel B, the solid line is planned investment
growth in the next twelve months fitted on contemporaneous CFO earnings growth expectations. The solid line with circles is
aggregate planned investment growth in the next twelve months. The dashed line is actual growth of private non-residential fixed
investment in the next twelve months. Frequency is quarterly.

                                Panel A. CFO Earnings Expectations and Investment Plans




                   Panel B. CFO Earnings Expectations, Investment Plans, and Realized Investment




                                                                 39
        Figure 4. Errors in Earnings Expectations and Past Profitability: Time Series Plots
The plots below show aggregate errors in earnings expectations and past twelve month corporate profitability. In both panels, the
dashed line is aggregate earnings over assets in the past twelve months. In Panel A, the solid line is aggregate earnings growth in the
next twelve months minus aggregate CFO expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. In Panel B, the solid line is
aggregate earnings growth in the next twelve months minus aggregate analyst expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve
months. Series are linearly detrended. Frequency is quarterly.


                       Panel A. Errors in CFO Expectations and Past Year Profitability over Time




                     Panel B. Errors in Analyst Expectations and Past Year Profitability over Time




                                                                  40
           Figure 5. Errors in Earnings Expectations and Past Profitability: Scatter Plots
Scatter plots of aggregate errors in earnings expectations against past twelve month corporate profitability. Variables are identical to
those in Figure 4. Frequency is quarterly.


                      Panel A. Scatter Plot of Errors in CFO Expectations on Past Year Profitability




                    Panel B. Scatter Plot of Errors in Analyst Expectations on Past Year Profitability




                                                                   41
              Table 1. Correlations among Different Measures of Investor Expectations
                    of Stock Market Returns and Model-based Expected Returns
This table shows correlations between different measures of investor expectations about future aggregate stock market returns, as
well as correlations between survey expectations and discount rate proxies. Survey expectations variables are described in detail in
Greenwood and Shleifer (2014). CFO Survey refers to the Duke/CFO Magazine Survey, and AAII refers to surveys run by the
American Association of Individual Investors. Investor Intelligence aggregates opinions expressed in newsletters published by
institutional investors. Shiller denotes the survey led by Robert Shiller, and Michigan is University of Michigan Survey of
Consumers. Horizon of survey expectations is mostly the next twelve months (Gallup, CFO survey, Shiller); the AAII survey asks
about next six month expectations, and the horizon in Investor Intelligence and the Michigan survey varies. Among the discount rate
proxies, log(D/P) denotes log dividend yield, cay refers to the consumption-wealth ratio in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and surplus
consumption is constructed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Discount rate proxies are presented in a way so that the value is
increasing in model-based expected returns (we use the negative of surplus consumption because high surplus consumption should be
associated with low expected returns). Numbers in brackets denote p-values on the hypothesis that the correlation between the two
series is zero.



                                                                                       Investor
                                        Gallup      CFO Survey           AAII                         Shiller      Michigan
                                                                                     Intelligence
   CFO Survey                            0.77
                                        [0.000]
   AAII                                  0.64            0.56
                                        [0.000]        [0.000]
   Investor Intelligence                 0.60            0.64             0.55
                                        [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]
   Shiller                               0.39            0.66             0.51           0.43
                                        [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.000]
   Michigan                              0.61           -0.12             0.60           0.19          -0.56
                                        [0.003]        [0.922]          [0.003]        [0.395]        [0.020]
   Log(D/P)                              -0.33          -0.44            -0.31           -0.19         -0.55         -0.57
                                        [0.000]        [0.003]          [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.006]
   cay                                   0.02            0.14            -0.02           -0.19         0.37           0.00
                                        [0.776]        [0.380]          [0.788]        [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.988]
   -Surplus Consumption                  -0.48          -0.53            -0.28           -0.05         -0.67         -0.74
                                        [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.191]        [0.000]       [0.000]
   Past 12m Stock Returns                0.78            0.36             0.37           0.43          0.05           0.44
                                        [0.000]        [0.018]          [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.578]       [0.042]
   Equity Fund Flows                     0.70            0.71             0.41           0.20          0.33           0.40
                                        [0.000]        [0.000]          [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.068]




                                                                 42
                     Table 2. Expectations of Stock Returns and Realized Future Stock Returns
        This table presents results from Table 6 in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014). The regressions are 𝑅𝑡𝑥 = 𝑎 + 𝑏𝑋𝑡 + 𝑢𝑡 where 𝑅𝑡𝑥
        denotes next twelve month stock market returns (in excess of the risk free rate), and X is a predictor variable. The independent
        variables include measures of expectations from investor surveys and discount rate proxies. Selected investor expectations variables
        are starred to indicate that they are rescaled versions of the raw data. The rescaled versions can be interpreted in units of nominal
        stock returns. Details see Greenwood and Shleifer (2014). The regressions are monthly. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve
        lags. In columns (1) to (6), for each measure of survey expectations, we show the p-value on the test that b = 1 (which is the null
        under rational expectations).


                                                            Realized Next 12m Aggregate Stock Market Returns
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)                   (8)             (9)

Gallup*                          -1.985
                                (-1.370)
CFO Survey                                    -0.021
                                             (-0.670)
AAII*                                                       -1.655
                                                           (-0.892)
Investor Intelligence*                                                    -1.534
                                                                         (-2.323)
Shiller*                                                                               -0.612
                                                                                      (-0.228)
Michigan                                                                                             -0.081
                                                                                                    (-3.964)
Log(D/P)                                                                                                          0.072
                                                                                                                 (1.424)
cay                                                                                                                            3.095
                                                                                                                              (3.031)
-Surplus Consumption                                                                                                                       0.958
                                                                                                                                          (4.147)
[p-val, b=1]                    [0.040]        [0.000]     [0.154]      [0.000]     [0.550]    [0.000]
N                                 132            39           285         579         123         22        579                 579         579
R2                               0.057          0.03         0.015       0.036       0.004      0.342       0.03               0.107       0.116
                                t-statistics in parenthesis. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.




                                                                         43
                                                   Table 3. Summary Statistics
    Summary statistics of firms covered in the CFO survey sample, analyst forecast sample, and full Compustat sample. Mean, median,
    standard deviation, and selected percentiles are presented. For comparability, all statistics are based on the sample period for which
    we have CFO expectations (2005 to 2012).

Variable                                           Mean            Std          5%           25%          50%          75%            95%
                                                                       Panel A. Sample with CFO Expectations
CFO expectations of
                                                    0.07          0.19         -0.25         0.02         0.10         0.15           0.30
next 12m earnings growth
Realized next 12m earnings growth                   0.09          0.48         -0.60         -0.11        0.09         0.26           0.85
Realized next 12m earnings/asset                    0.06          0.06         -0.02         0.03         0.06         0.10           0.16
CFO expectations of
                                                    0.05           0.23         -0.3           0           0.3          0.1            0.5
next 12m capital spending growth
Asset                                            21,808.42 101,176.00          80.48        541.10      1,959.22     6,453.33      44,791.00
Market value                                     14,326.91     48,370.41       75.81        550.28      1,843.50     6,848.73      45,621.37
Q                                                   1.51          0.73          0.67         0.99         1.35         1.84           2.97
BTM                                                 0.49          0.31          0.16         0.29         0.41         0.60           1.06
Annual net income/asset                             0.03          0.17         -0.18         0.02         0.06         0.10           0.18
Annual sales/asset                                  1.09           0.67         0.27         0.61         0.92         1.38           2.55
Annual capx/asset                                   0.04          0.03          0.01         0.02         0.03         0.05           0.11
Annual capx growth                                  0.13          0.53         -0.52         -0.18        0.06         0.33           1.11
                                                                         Panel B. Sample with Analyst Forecasts
Next 12m earnings growth implied by
                                                    0.16          0.34         -0.31         -0.01        0.12         0.28           0.81
analyst EPS forecasts
Realized next 12m earnings growth                   0.09          0.47         -0.65         -0.12        0.09         0.30           0.86
Realized next 12m earnings/asset                    0.07          0.05          0.00         0.04         0.06         0.10           0.16
Asset                                            6,355.03      26,367.43       114.72       401.15      1,178.22     3,835.99      26,735.00
Market value                                     6,610.21      23,094.48      129.51        473.98      1,287.45     3,887.96      25,692.68
Q                                                   1.53          0.83          0.65         0.93         1.29         1.90           3.27
BTM                                                 0.51          0.32          0.14         0.29         0.45         0.66           1.10
Annual net income/asset                             0.06          0.07         -0.03         0.03         0.06         0.10           0.17
Annual sales/asset                                  1.12          0.63          0.32         0.64         1.00         1.46           2.37
Annual capx/asset                                   0.05          0.04          0.01         0.02         0.04         0.07           0.15
Annual capx growth                                  0.17          0.55         -0.54         -0.17        0.08         0.38           1.20
                                                                             Panel C. All Compustat Firms
Asset                                            3,021.22      16,706.02        0.44        25.34        201.06      1,278.93      12,105.00
Market value                                     3,684.34      16,780.76       17.35        107.49       433.32      1,726.60      14,127.71
Q                                                   1.53          0.91          0.61         0.88         1.24         1.90           3.51
BTM                                                 0.55          0.38          0.11         0.28         0.47         0.73           1.24
Annual net income/asset                            -0.11          0.39         -0.87         -0.11        0.02         0.07           0.15
Annual sales/asset                                  1.01          0.70          0.10         0.47         0.89         1.41           2.40
Annual capx/asset                                   0.05          0.04          0.00         0.01         0.03         0.06           0.14
Annual capx growth                                  0.16          0.68         -0.69         -0.28        0.04         0.42           1.53


                                                                      44
            Table 4. CFO Earnings Growth Expectations and Investment Plans: Aggregate Evidence
                                                       ̂ 𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽E𝑡∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠] + 𝜆𝑋𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡 . E𝑡∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠] is aggregate CFO expectations
This table presents aggregate quarterly regression ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋
of earnings growth in the next twelve months. ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋̂ 𝑡 is aggregate planned investment growth in the next twelve months. All control variables are
measured at the end of quarter t-1. Past twelve month stock returns is index returns from the end of quarter t-5 to the end of quarter t-1. Past twelve
month aggregate credit spread change is log change in credit spread from the end of quarter t-5 to the end of quarter t-1. Past twelve month changes
in stock volatility and bloom policy uncertainty index, as well as past twelve month asset growth, are calculated in the same way (i.e. as the log
difference between values at the end of quarters t-5 and t-1). Past twelve month change of net income/asset is net income from t-4 to t-1 normalized
by asset at the end of quarter t-5 minus normalized net income in the previous four quarters. Past twelve month GDP (investment) growth is the log
difference between GDP (investment) in quarters t-4 through t-1 and GDP (investment) in the previous four quarters. A constant is included but not
reported, and a linear time trend is included. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.



                                                               Planned Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)


  CFO Expectations of                          0.6313         0.5959           0.5869      0.4235         0.4853          0.5997          0.5435
  Next 12m Earnings Growth                      (9.39)        (11.65)          (11.40)     (7.21)         (12.83)         (11.79)         (9.78)
  Q                                                                            0.0532
                                                                               (1.68)
  Past 12m Agg. Stock Returns                                                              0.1082
                                                                                           (3.64)
  Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                          -0.0352
                                                                                                          (-2.26)
  Log(D/P)                                                                                                                0.0271
                                                                                                                          (0.62)
  cay                                                                                                                                    -0.9700
                                                                                                                                          (-1.86)
  Past 12m Asset Growth                                       0.2181           0.1461      0.0784         0.2643          0.2481          0.2536
                                                               (3.97)          (2.39)      (1.89)         (5.88)          (2.97)          (3.92)
  Observations                                    56             56              56          56             56              56              56
  R-squared                                     0.616          0.660           0.672        0.741          0.685           0.663           0.674
                                t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.




                                                                          45
                                          Table 4. Continued

                                             Planned Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                             (8)         (9)      (10)        (11)        (12)     (13)


CFO Expectations of                        0.5969    0.5429      0.5301     0.5882      0.5573    0.4315
Next 12m Earnings Growth                  (11.37)     (8.20)    (14.03)      (8.55)     (16.72)   (8.21)
Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                     -0.0447
                                                                                                  (-1.49)
Surplus Consumption                        0.0154
                                           (0.30)
Past 12m Change of Net Income/Asset                  0.0433                                       -0.0433
                                                      (1.70)                                      (-1.03)
Past 12m Agg. Stock Vol Change                                  -0.0044                           0.0421
                                                                 (-0.37)                          (2.51)
Bloom Policy Uncertainty Index                                  -0.0328                           -0.0303
(Past 12m Change)                                                (-2.11)                          (-2.23)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                                         0.6118                2.3154
                                                                             (0.77)               (1.89)
Past 12m Investment Growth                                                              -0.1300   -0.5391
                                                                                        (-2.26)   (-2.69)
Past 12m Asset Growth                      0.2114    0.1716      0.2376     0.0547      0.3859    0.4349
                                           (3.40)     (3.25)     (4.22)      (0.29)      (6.21)   (3.59)
Observations                                 56          56        56          56         56        56
R-squared                                  0.660      0.672      0.694       0.666       0.667    0.739
               t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.




                                                    46
                                           Table 5. CFO Earnings Growth Expectations and Investment Plans: Firm-level Evidence
                                                       ̂ 𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜂𝑖 + 𝛽E𝑖,𝑡
 This table presents firm-level quarterly regression ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋                    ∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠]                      ∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠]
                                                                                               + 𝜆𝑋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 . E𝑖,𝑡             is firm-level CFO expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months.
    ̂
 ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is firm-level planned investment growth in the next twelve months. All control variables are measured at the end of quarter t-1. Past twelve month firm stock returns, change of net income/asset,
 change of stock volatility, investment growth, and asset growth are firm-level counterparts of variables defined in Table 4. A constant is included but not reported, and firm fixed effects are included. Standard
 errors are clustered by firm. R-squared excludes firm fixed effects.

                                                                                                  Planned Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)       (8)                            (9)           (10)            (11)

CFO Expectations of                              0.4200         0.4259          0.4639          0.3487           0.3887          0.3713         0.4172         0.3420         0.4139         0.4233          0.3149
Next 12m Earnings Growth                         (4.44)         (4.50)          (4.40)          (3.25)           (3.94)          (3.99)         (4.25)         (3.16)         (4.35)         (4.28)          (2.80)
Q                                                                               0.0384
                                                                                (1.53)
BTM                                                                                             -0.2303
                                                                                                 (-4.32)
Past 12m Firm Stock Returns                                                                                      0.0833
                                                                                                                 (3.49)
Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                                                    -0.1130                                                                     -0.1391
                                                                                                                                  (-4.39)                                                                     (-2.99)
Past 12m Change of Net Income/Asset                                                                                                             0.0025                                                        0.0025
                                                                                                                                                (2.23)                                                        (1.16)
Past 12m Firm Stock Vol Change                                                                                                                                 -0.0905                                       -0.0148
                                                                                                                                                                (-2.87)                                       (-0.33)
Bloom Policy Uncertainty Index                                                                                                                                 -0.0764                                        0.0385
(Past 12m Change)                                                                                                                                               (-2.35)                                       (0.96)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                                                                                                                                           1.0087                          0.6293
                                                                                                                                                                              (1.86)                          (0.95)
Past 12m Investment Growth                                                                                                                                                                   0.0010           0.0048
                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.05)           (0.19)
Past 12m Asset Growth                                           0.1163          0.1089          0.0529           0.0626          0.0964         0.0929         0.0393         0.0800         0.1276           0.0008
                                                                (1.37)          (1.15)          (0.63)           (0.69)          (1.17)         (0.97)         (0.40)         (1.00)         (1.39)           (0.01)
Observations                                      850             834             740             761              764            834             809           719             834            790              692
R-squared                                        0.095           0.104           0.125           0.139            0.132          0.132           0.114         0.115           0.109          0.105            0.132
Number of id                                      194             190             171             172              176            190             187           168             190            187              164
                                                                        t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
                                                                                                           47
   Table 6. CFO Earnings Growth Expectations and Realized Investment Growth: Aggregate Evidence
This table presents aggregate quarterly regression ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽E𝑡∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠] + 𝜆𝑋𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡 . E𝑡∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠] is aggregate CFO expectations
of earnings growth in the next twelve months. ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋𝑡 is next twelve month growth in private non-residential fixed investment. All control
variables are the same as those in Table 4. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.


                                                           Realized Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)


 CFO Expectations of                        0.7041        0.5903          0.5853     0.2799        0.2611         0.6278         0.4569
 Next 12m Earnings Growth                   (5.40)         (8.14)         (8.41)      (3.52)        (3.20)         (7.38)         (5.74)
 Q                                                                        0.0278
                                                                          (0.37)
 Past 12m Agg. Stock Returns                                                         0.1975
                                                                                      (4.20)
 Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                     -0.1035
                                                                                                   (-3.82)
 Log(D/P)                                                                                                         0.2202
                                                                                                                   (2.68)
 cay                                                                                                                             -2.4272
                                                                                                                                 (-2.27)
 Past 12m Asset Growth                                    0.7021          0.6645     0.4473        0.8382         0.9458         0.7909
                                                           (6.48)         (3.53)      (3.43)       (11.72)        (10.36)         (8.32)
 Observations                                 57             57            57           57            57            57             57
 R-squared                                   0.380         0.610          0.611       0.748         0.719          0.721          0.655
                              t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.




                                                                     48
                                          Table 6. Continued

                                             Realized Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                             (8)           (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)     (13)


CFO Expectations of                        0.5899     0.3727       0.3725    0.5563      0.5913   0.2168
Next 12m Earnings Growth                    (8.43)        (3.42)   (6.22)     (3.94)     (6.57)   (2.08)
Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                     -0.0995
                                                                                                  (-2.43)
Surplus Consumption                        -0.0097
                                           (-0.06)
Past 12m Change of Net Income/Asset                   0.1779                                      0.0487
                                                          (3.06)                                  (0.88)
Past 12m Agg. Stock Vol Change                                     -0.0362                        0.0405
                                                                   (-3.15)                        (2.40)
Bloom Policy Uncertainty Index                                     -0.0501                        -0.0154
(Past 12m Change)                                                  (-2.48)                        (-1.12)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                                          2.8443               3.2147
                                                                              (1.68)              (1.88)
Past 12m CAPX Growth                                                                     0.0032   -0.2927
                                                                                         (0.02)   (-1.21)
Past 12m Asset Growth                      0.7063     0.5112       0.7221    -0.0570     0.6980   0.3239
                                            (7.22)        (5.00)   (9.00)    (-0.12)     (2.40)   (0.67)
Observations                                  57           57        57        57          57       57
R-squared                                   0.610         0.717    0.695      0.675       0.610   0.795
               t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.




                                                     49
                                   Table 7. CFO Earnings Growth Expectations and Realized Investment Growth: Firm-level Evidence
                                                                              ∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠]                    ∗ [∆𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠]
 This table presents firm-level quarterly regression ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝜂𝑖 + 𝛽E𝑖,𝑡               + 𝜆𝑋𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡 . E𝑖,𝑡             is firm-level CFO expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months.
 ∆𝐶𝐴𝑃𝑋𝑖,𝑡 is firm-level actual capital expenditure growth in the next twelve months. All control variables are the same as those in Table 5. A constant is included but not reported, and firm fixed effects are
 included. Standard errors are clustered by firm. R-squared excludes firm fixed effects.

                                                                                                 Realized Investment Growth in the Next Twelve Months
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)                           (9)           (10)            (11)

CFO Expectations of                             0.5970          0.5930          0.5482          0.4069           0.3787          0.4118         0.6137         0.3243         0.5622         0.6043          0.3610
Next 12m Earnings Growth                        (5.13)          (5.04)          (3.94)          (3.23)           (3.08)          (3.47)         (4.99)         (2.53)         (4.61)         (4.83)          (2.53)
Q                                                                               0.1298
                                                                                (1.88)
BTM                                                                                             -0.5246
                                                                                                 (-4.51)
Past 12m Firm Stock Returns                                                                                      0.3047
                                                                                                                 (4.32)
Past 12m Credit Spread Change                                                                                                   -0.3801                                                                     -0.1354
                                                                                                                                 (-4.62)                                                                     (-1.43)
Past 12m Change of Net Income/Asset                                                                                                            -0.0003                                                       0.0002
                                                                                                                                                (-0.08)                                                      (0.05)
Past 12m Firm Stock Vol Change                                                                                                                                -0.4806                                       -0.3511
                                                                                                                                                               (-5.76)                                       (-3.24)
Bloom Policy Uncertainty Index                                                                                                                                -0.0844                                        0.0493
(Past 12m Change)                                                                                                                                              (-0.96)                                       (0.54)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                                                                                                                                           2.4608                         2.8272
                                                                                                                                                                              (1.22)                         (1.35)
Past 12m CAPX Growth                                                                                                                                                                        -0.2917         -0.3074
                                                                                                                                                                                             (-4.68)         (-4.26)
Past 12m Asset Growth                                           0.3565          0.2850          0.1675           0.1914          0.3300         0.3371         0.1248         0.2582         0.6969          0.4428
                                                                (1.83)          (1.36)          (0.78)           (1.00)          (1.69)         (1.69)         (0.65)         (1.36)          (4.59)         (2.48)
Observations                                      852             845             760             784              788            845             819           741             845            810             717
R-squared                                        0.043           0.054           0.063           0.086            0.103          0.125           0.057         0.175           0.060          0.152           0.271
Number of id                                      193             193             172             176              180            193             189           170             193            187             166
                                                                        t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by firm.

                                                                                                           50
                                     Table 8. Predicting Errors in CFO Expectations
     Quarterly regressions of errors in CFO expectations of next twelve months earnings growth on past profitability and past economic
     conditions. In Panel A, the dependent variable is aggregate earnings growth in the next twelve months minus aggregate CFO
     expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. Independent variables include aggregate earnings/asset and GDP
     growth in the four quarters prior to quarter t-1. Controls include VIX by the end of quarter t-1 and aggregate stock volatility as of
     quarter t-1. In Panel B, the dependent variable is firm-level earnings growth in the next twelve months minus firm CFO
     expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. Independent variables include firm-level earnings/asset in the four
     quarters prior to quarter t-1, and volatility of firm stock in quarter t-1. A constant is included by not reported. In Panel A, standard
     errors are Newey-West with twelve lags. In Panel B, standard errors are clustered by firm. R-squared excludes firm and time fixed
     effects.

                                                        Panel A. Aggregate Evidence

                                                               Realized – CFO Expected Next 12m Earnings Growth
                                                         (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)


            Past 12m Earnings/Asset (%)               -0.0881                        -0.0915                   -0.0882
                                                       (-6.48)                       (-8.85)                    (-7.42)
            Past 12m GDP Growth                                      -3.2999                     -3.6632                         -4.2078
                                                                     (-3.06)                     (-3.38)                         (-3.30)
            VIX                                                                      -0.2552     -0.3288
                                                                                     (-1.51)     (-1.46)
            Agg. Stock Index Vol                                                                               -0.0089           -0.4101
                                                                                                                (-0.02)          (-1.52)


            Observations                                 57              57            57           57            57               57
            R-squared                                  0.335          0.225          0.361        0.266         0.335            0.269
                              t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.


                                                        Panel B. Firm-level Evidence

                                                                 Realized – CFO Expected Next 12m Earnings Growth
                                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)


Past 12m Firm Earnings/Asset (%)               -0.0511                               -0.0500                            -0.0324            -0.0353
                                               (-5.14)                               (-5.22)                            (-3.40)            (-3.56)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                                -4.1472                           -2.811
                                                                   (-2.44)                           (-1.75)
Firm Stock Vol                                                                       0.3959          0.2229                                0.5299
                                                                                      (1.74)         (0.94)                                (1.13)
Firm Fixed Effects                                Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                Y                    Y
Time Fixed Effects                                                              No                                                  Yes
Observations                                     606                 651               594            638                 606               594
R-squared                                       0.082               0.032             0.103          0.033                0.037            0.050
Number of id                                     142                 147               139            144                 142               139
                                       t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors clustered by firm.


                                                                           51
                                   Table 9. Predicting Errors in Analyst Expectations
     Quarterly regressions of errors in analyst expectations of next twelve months earnings growth on past profitability and past economic
     conditions. In Panel A, the dependent variable is aggregate earnings growth in the next twelve months minus aggregate analyst
     expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. In Panel B, the dependent variable is firm-level earnings growth in the
     next twelve months minus analyst expectations of earnings growth in the next twelve months. All control variables are the same as in
     Table 8. A linear time trend is included. A constant is included by not reported. In Panel A, standard errors are Newey-West with
     twelve lags. In Panel B, standard errors are clustered by firm and time. R-squared excludes firm and time fixed effects.

                                                       Panel A. Aggregate Evidence

                                                         Realized – Analyst Expected Next 12m Earnings Growth
                                                       (1)              (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)              (6)


            Past 12m Earnings/Asset (%)             -0.0456                         -0.0550                -0.0467
                                                     (-3.68)                        (-6.16)                (-3.76)
            Past 12m GDP Growth                                     -1.3940                   -1.1277                       -1.6171
                                                                    (-1.70)                   (-1.67)                       (-1.64)
            VIX                                                                     -0.2904   -0.3260
                                                                                    (-1.73)   (-2.52)
            Agg. Stock Index Vol                                                                           -0.0991          -0.1116
                                                                                                           (-0.47)          (-0.51)


            Observations                              106             112             91        91           106              112
            R-squared                                0.144           0.057          0.245     0.078         0.150           0.062
                             t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are Newey-West with twelve lags.


                                                       Panel B. Firm-level Evidence

                                                               Realized – Analyst Expected Next 12m Earnings Growth
                                               (1)                  (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)


Past 12m Firm Earnings/Asset (%)             -0.0080                                -0.0081                         -0.0061           -0.0062
                                             (-7.43)                                (-7.36)                         (-6.71)           (-6.63)
Past 12m GDP Growth                                               -1.6167                       -1.6235
                                                                  (-3.83)                        (-3.72)
Firm Stock Vol                                                                      0.0158      -0.0256                               -0.0123
                                                                                     (0.26)      (-0.50)                              (-0.40)
Firm Fixed Effects                              Y                   Y                  Y              Y               Y                 Y
Time Fixed Effects                                                             No                                              Yes
Observations                                 103,930              123,430           100,451     115,120            103,930            100,451
R-squared                                     0.005                0.004             0.006       0.004               0.003             0.003
Number of id                                  4,432                5,080             4,227       4,606               4,432             4,227
                                 t-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors clustered by firm and time.




                                                                          52
