NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MORTALITY COST OF POLITICAL CONNECTIONS
Raymond Fisman
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 21266
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21266

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

We thank the Kent Daniel, Harry DeAngelo, Wouter Dessein, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong, Emir
Kamenica, John Matsusaka, Kevin Murphy, Jay Ritter, Amit Seru, Rene Stulz, Wei Xiong and Jiang
Wang, as well as seminar participants at a number of institutions for insightful comments; Eric Hardy,
Jane Zhao, Jun Xiao and Rong Xu provided excellent RA support. Wang also thanks the China National
Science Foundation and (Grant Number: 71472180) and the Australian Research Council (DP150102339)
for financial support. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Mortality Cost of Political Connections
Raymond Fisman and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 21266
June 2015
JEL No. D73,J81,P26
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between the political connections of Chinese firms and workplace fatalities.
In our preferred specification we find that the worker death rate for connected companies is two to
three times that of unconnected firms (depending on the sample employed), a pattern that holds for
within-firm estimations. The connections-mortality relationship is attenuated in provinces where safety
regulators' promotion is contingent on meeting safety targets. In the absence of fatalities, connected
firms receive fewer reports of major violations for safety compliance, whereas in years of fatal accidents
the rate of reported violations is identical. Moreover, fatal accidents produce negative returns at connected
companies and are associated with the subsequent departure of well-connected executives. These results
provide suggestive evidence that connections enable firms to avoid (potentially costly) compliance
measures, rather than using connections to avoid regulatory response after accidents occur. Our findings
emphasize the social costs of political connections, and suggest that appropriate regulatory incentives
may be useful in mitigating these costs.

Raymond Fisman
School of Business
Columbia University
622 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w21266

There exists a longstanding debate on the social impact of rent-seeking by politically
connected rms. The overall eect hinges to a large extent on whether political ties allow
businesses to circumvent needlessly onerous bureaucratic constraints or to get around regulations that are socially benecial but result in lower rm prots. Yet there is little empirical
evidence to inform our views on this tradeo. In this paper, we examine the link between
rms' political ties and workplace fatalities in China, thus highlighting the cost side of this
tradeo; we also examine the eect of regulator incentives in mitigating these costs.
There have been many anecdotal accounts of substandard working conditions across a
range of industries in China. As some indication of the scale of the problem, China's worker
death rate is over 20 times that of the United Kingdom (Wang, 2011).

This poor safety

record is generally attributed to weak enforcement rather than the absence of adequate laws
and regulations (Phillips, 2010).

For example, a scathing assessment by the International

Labour Organization in 2012 stated that rms in China's construction industry do not meet
international standards, national laws and regulations due to a lack of prevention, illegal
operations, poor preventive and protective measures, lack of provision of personal protection
equipment and eective and regular safety inspections, audits and training.
often implicated in cases of poor safety compliance:
chemical factory that killed 12 workers, the

1

Bribery is

following an explosion at a Nanjing

Wall Street Journal

suggested that corruption

and collusion between...factory owners and local inspectors limit the likelihood that laws
protecting workers will be enforced.

This view is echoed by statements from the national

ministry charged with production safety, whose spokesman stated as recently as 2013 that
protection from local government and corruption...are behind many major deadly accidents.
Others have taken the contrary view - politicians plausibly put more weight on worker welfare
relative to prots than businessmen, so that political ties could lead to

better

treatment of

workers at politically connected rms (see Dong et.al. (2014) for recent evidence from China).
We use data from publicly traded Chinese rms during 2008 - 2013 to examine the empirical relationship between rms' political connections and workplace safety. We begin by
documenting a robust positive correlation between the political ties of executives and worker
deaths.

We dene a company to be politically connected if its CEO or another C-suite

executive previously held a high-level government post; the number of workplace deaths per
employee at connected rms is two to three times higher than at unconnected rms (depending on the sample we employ). This pattern holds in regression specications, both in the
cross-section and also in a rm-year panel with rm xed-eects, where the connection-fatality
relationship is identied from executive turnover. Political connections are not exogenously
assigned, so our main results need be interpreted with some caution. We consider some of

1 See http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f ?p=NORMLEXPUB:13100:0::NO::P13100_COMMENT_ID:3085598,
last downloaded September 5, 2014.

2

the most prominent mechanisms through which this might bias our estimates, including differential rates of death underreporting for connected versus unconnected rms, dierences in
management talent, and the dierential selection of connected executives, and nd limited
support for any of these possibilities.
We go on to examine workplace enforcement actions as a function of political ties. Consistent with our thesis that connections insulate rms from regulatory compliance, we nd
that despite their relatively poor safety records there has never been a public report of a
major workplace safety audit at a connected company (the rate is just under 5 percent at
comparable unconnected rms). We also show that connected rms are ned for pollution
less often, providing further suggestive evidience that that connections help rms circumvent
costly regulations more broadly.
Such insulation from oversight may account, at least in part, for the relatively high profitability that we document among connected rms in our sample.

We delve more deeply

into the link between connections, lax safety compliance, and protability by examining the
eect of fatal accidents on future prots. Share prices of connected rms fall by as much as 9
percent (relative to unconnected rms) in the 30 trading days following a fatal accident. In
the year following such accidents, the prot premium of connected rms disappears, indicating that investors' expectations are validated by subsequent accounting prots. Further, we
show that in the year following worker fatalities, rms are signicantly less likely to employ
connected executives, indicating one direct channel through which fatal accidents may reduce
or eliminate connected rms' prot premium.
Overall, while no single piece of evidence is dispositive, we argue that our full set of ndings
are most easily reconciled with the use of political relationships to (protably) circumvent
safety oversight and regulation, and that this protection is lost in the wake of accidents that
result in worker deaths.
Finally, we explore the eect of strengthened incentives for regulators on worker safety at
connected rms by examining the passage of laws which made ocials' promotion contingent
on meeting safety targets. Exploiting the dierent timing of passage of so-called No safety,
no promotion (NSNP) laws across provinces, we show that stronger regulator incentives
are associated with lower worker death rates, primarily among connected companies. This
relationship holds when we include rm xed eects, province-year xed eects, and provincespecic time trends to control for unobserved trends or shocks to rms or provinces.

We

also nd a drop in pollution nes for connected rms following the passage of NSNP laws,
consistent with substitution amongst forms of rent-seeking by connected rms. (Given the
lack of random assignment of NSNP laws, these results should be seen as suggestive.)
We present a Becker-style audit model that is useful for organizing and interpreting our
full set of results. In our model, regulators trade o the costs of safety monitoring against the

3

career costs of workplace fatalities, while rms weigh the cost of safety compliance versus the
nes (and future oversight) that come with accidents and/or the detection of workplace safety
violations. We add the following assumptions to the standard model: the cost to the regulator
of monitoring connected rms is higher, and connected rms lose their ability to shirk on safety
compliance after fatalities occur. Our simple model yields a set of predictions that are useful
in organizing our empirical results: (a) well-connected rms have more accidents; (b) in the
absence of workplace fatalities, connected rms have fewer audits; (c) connected rms are
more protable; (d) the eect of raising the regulator's (career) cost from workplace fatalities
may have a much greater impact on safety compliance at well-connected rms (owing to a
'bang-bang' shift in enforcement equilibrium); (e) expected prots at connected rms decline
following accidents.
Our work contributes most directly to the literature on the consequences of government
regulation. Many of the empirical contributions in this area have emphasized the negative
impact of onerous regulations on economic growth (see, for example, Djankov et al (2002)
on entry regulation, and Bourlès et al (2010) for product market regulation). An exception
is Bertrand et al (2007), which nds that driver's license applicants in India obtain their
licenses more quickly when given a nancial incentive to do so (and hence are likely to get
licenses through bribery). Furthermore, drivers that likely obtained licenses through bribery
subsequently performed poorly on driving tests. By focusing on worker deaths, we look more
directly at the welfare consequences of regulation; further, we focus on high-level connections
rather than petty corruption.
Our study also contributes to the literature on the social costs and benets of political
rent-seeking by rms, and corruption more broadly. The theoretical foundations of this eld
were laid by Le (1964), Becker and Stigler (1974), and Shleifer and Vishny (1993), which
consider the circumstances where bribery and corruption will be most costly (Olken and
Pande (2012) provide a recent survey). Mauro's (1995) cross-country analysis of corruption
and growth was the rst of many studies over the past couple of decades to explore the
correlates of corruption empirically (see Fisman and Svensson (2007) and Bai et al (2013) for
within-country analyses). This literature has often used the political connections of businesses
- the measure we employ in this paper - as a marker for favorable treatment by government

2

ocials.

While prior research has established the implications of political ties for rm prots,
our study is one of a small number that illustrates the social costs.

2 For

Earlier research on

examples of event study analyses on the value of personal connections, see Fisman (2001), Faccio

(2006), and Goldman et al (2009); for event study evidence from China, see Fan et al (2008). Khwaja and
Mian (2005) study the value of connections in Pakistan with a focus on credit access, while both Olken (2007)
and Goldman et al (forthcoming) emphasize the procurement channel. Borisov et al (2013) provides evidence
on lobbying expenditures as an alternative to personal ties as a source of political connections; Dinc (2005)
emphasizes the critical role of politicians' incentives in governing the behavior of connected rms.

4

the social costs has generally emphasized the welfare consequences of directing government
resources to politically favored rms, either through under-production or the eciency loss of
channeling business to less productive enterprises (see Cingano and Pinotti (2013) and Amore
and Bennedsen (2013) for two recent examples). Ours is the rst to focus on a particularly
tangible form of social cost - worker deaths - and to emphasize the costs of regulatory noncompliance rather than resource misallocation.

While we focus on worker deaths as one

particularly evocative example of social cost, it is likely representative of connected rms'
ability to evade regulation - at society's expense - in other realms.

In China, the head of

the Food and Drug Administration was executed in 2007 for certifying that products were
safe in exchange for bribes, while bribery was also implicated in the infant formula scandal
the following year (Huang, 2012).

Collusion between rms and the local bureaucracy is

similarly blamed for the country's pollution problems, allowing businesses to evade emissions
regulations across a range of industries (Morgan, 2013).
Our paper relates to the concurrent work of Jia and Nie (2013), who investigate the impact
of government decentralization on worker deaths in Chinese coal mines. We view our study
as complementary to theirs: whereas Jia and Nie focus on shifts in political structure and
the resultant eect on collusion between state-owned enterprises and local governments, we
study the rm-level impact of political connections of private businesses (indeed, we nd that
our results are unaected by controlling for state ownership of the enterprises in our sample,
highlighting the fact that the two papers focus on independent channels). We also emphasize
that our work exploits rm-level data, and examines a wider array of industries.
Finally, our work also contributes to the related eld that examines the propensity of
companies to act in a socially responsible manner and the nancial implications of doing
so.

Much of this research has focused on the abnormal returns earned by rms with high

or low measures of social responsibility (see Elfenbein, Margolis and Walsh (2007) for a
survey, Harrison and Kacperczyk (2009) for a recent analysis of social responsibility and
long-run returns, and Hamilton (1995) for an event study of environmental responsibility and
market returns). A separate stream of research focuses on social responsibility as an outcome
variable. Papers in this area have examined correlates of corporate goodness such as nancing
constraints (Hong et.al. (2011)), product market competition (Baron, 2001), and information
asymmetries (Elfenbein et al, 2012). In this paper, we relate political connections both to the
level of company responsibility in the form of worker safety, and also to nancial performance
following worker deaths.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 1 describes the institutional background and the data, including discussions of workplace safety oversight in China and the
channels through which political ties are thought to inuence safety practices. Section 2 provides a simple theoretical framework for organizing our subsequent empirical results; Section

5

3 presents the main results and robustness checks, and Section 4 concludes.

1

Data and institutional background

1.1 Workplace safety oversight in China
3

Chinese worker safety is overseen by a patchwork of governmental authorities and regulations.

The earliest signicant nationwide rules governing worker safety focused on mining, with
the enactment of the Law of the People's Republic of China on Safety in Mines by the
National People's Congress in 1993. As with much legislation in China, the Mining Safety
Law explicitly recognized that worker welfare had to be balanced with the needs of economic
development:  [The law] is formulated for the purpose of ensuring safety in production in
mines, preventing accidents and protecting personal safety of workers and sta at mines and
promoting the development of the mining industry. However, the details of how such highlevel directives were to be put into practice were left to lower-level administrative bodies.
Subsequent national regulation, enacted in 1996, targeted coal mining in particular and
specied conditions for implementation - such as the training of foremen in eective safety
practices - which had to be satised for a mine to obtain an operating license.
nationwide rules that covered all industries were put into eect.

In 2002,

This came with the Law

of the People's Republic of China on Work Safety, which codied worker safety as a set of
statutory rights.

The law was comprised of 97 provisions covering - among other things

- safety measurement, supervision and management of production safety, rescue work and
investigations following accidents, and also laid out the resultant legal liabilities. This law
was supplemented by the Administrative Penalties for the Violation of Production Safety
Laws, passed in 2003 and revised in 2007.

It specied the administrative punishments for

safety violations, including modest nes (up to 100,000 RMB for an individual and 300,000
RMB for a rm; throughout our sample, the renminbi traded in the range of 6.2 to 7.2 RMB
to a US dollar), and, more substantively, license suspensions and mine closures.
Since 2001, the enforcement of workplace safety regulation has been overseen by the
State Administration of Work Safety (SAWS). This was intended to decouple safety oversight
from industrial and mining production ministries. Previously, for example, the Ministry of
Coal Industry had the potentially conicting responsibilities of increasing output as well as
maintaining safety standards.

Since 2005, SAWS has had full ministry status, reporting

directly to the State Council, the highest political body in China. In addition to sanctions
for non-compliant rms, the central government has also mandated since 2006 (2004 for coal)

3 See

Homer (2009) for a detailed history of safety regulation in China focused on - but not limited to - the

mining industry.

6

that rms put aside annual reserves to cover safety costs. For the industries we study, these
funds amount to a substantial fraction of rm revenues. For construction, the requisite safety
fund is 2 percent of costs. In other industries, mandated safety funds are a non-linear function
of revenues or output. For chemical rms, which make up the largest industry in our sample,
safety funds averaged about 0.7 percent of revenues, while for coal mining the average was
just over 1 percent of revenues.
Despite the many regulations on the books and the signicant power vested in SAWS,
China's workplace safety record remains poor by international standards due to ineective
enforcement.

According to SAWS, there were more than 83,000 deaths in workplace acci-

dents in 2009, or roughly one out of every 10,000 workers (China Safe Production Yearbook,
2009). One reason is that, despite the increased ability to set regulations that came with the
2002 Work Safety Law, enforcement is largely left to local safety boards.

These may lack

independence from local ocials, who are evaluated and rewarded on their ability to attract

4

investment and maintain economic growth.

The eectiveness of safety compliance may be

further weakened by corruption at the local level, as suggested by Wang (2006), Johnson
(2006), Epstein (2009) and Sebag-Monteore Clarissa (2012) among others. In this spirit, we
assess the extent to which political ties may have attenuated safety compliance.

1.2 No safety, no promotion laws
We analyze the eects of one signicant shift in the incentives of local regulatory authorities.
Prior to 2004, provincial ocials were evaluated and promoted based on economic growth
(Li and Zhou, 2005). Since 2004, China has followed a safety production targeting system,
whereby the central government assigns a `death ceiling' to each province, and the provincial
government is responsible for allocating the `quota' among municipalities (Peng, 2004). In
response, provinces began adopting No safety, no promotion (NSNP) policies that made
promotion of safety regulators and other local government ocials contingent on meeting the
safety target set for their region by the provincial government. Guodong was the rst province
to adopt this policy in 2005, while others followed suit only much later. As of mid-2014, 11
provincial authorities, out of a total of 31, still had not adopted this approach to providing

5

incentives to safety regulators.

In Appendix Table A1, we list for each province the dates

of the passage and implementation of NSNP policies. We will exploit this dierence across
provinces in ocials' safety incentives to assess whether well-connected rms are less likely to

4 See

Homer (2009), Li and Zhou (2005), Wang (2006), People's Daily (2005), and editorial comments in

the Journal of New Safety (2005) for further details on the administration and enforcement of safety codes.

5 Note

that some provinces had enacted earlier policies on production safety.

were specied for ocials that failed to meet safety quotas.

However, no punishments

For example, Qinghai Province passed Rules

on monitoring production safety in Qinghai Province on Aug 27, 2005 (eective Nov 1, 2005), but without
specifying punishment for failing to meet quotas. We view provinces under such regimes as equivalent to those
without safety interventions.

7

have worker fatalities in locations where local government ocials are evaluated in part based
on worker safety. Further, as Table A1 makes clear, a number of laws were passed during
our sample period of 2008-2013, making it possible to use within-rm changes in

NSNP

laws

to identify the eect of the regulatory environment. Table A1 additionally provides, for each
province, the number of rm-year observations and number of worker deaths, along with
population and income per capita for 2005.
Passage of NSNP laws is, of course, non-random. In unreported analyses, we nd that the
fraction of provincial GDP from coal mining is a strong positive predictor of NSNP laws, but
after this is accounted for, no other province-level attribute (including construction output,
log income per capita, population, worker deaths per capita, or corruption cases per capita)
is correlated with the passage of such laws. When we control for provincial coal output in our
analysis below, our results are unaected. We will also exploit the timing of passage of NSNP
laws to identify their eect, which further mitigates concerns over non-random assignment of
regulator incentives. Nonetheless, given the lack of exogenous variation in local enforcement,
our results on the eects of NSNP should be treated with caution.

1.3 Safety compliance and political connections
Our reference to the use of political connections as a cause of worker deaths in the introduction
can be traced to a number of widely discussed mechanisms. Many of these are outlined in a
research report published by the China Labor Bulletin in 2006, and begin at the point of entry

6

into industry and also for expansion to new locales.

To operate in hazardous industries such

as coal mining and chemicals, a rm must obtain a license which requires dozens of approvals
from individual government oces.

Higher-level connections can facilitate rapid approval,

potentially without the requisite safeguards in place. In construction, rms may subcontract
to low-cost (and unqualied) providers, or employ relatively low-cost unqualied workers.
These are cost-cutting measures that have been tied to bribery of safety regulators, most

7

notably in the arrest of the chief safety ocer of Bangbu City in 2013.

While we do not observe individual share ownership in the companies we study, connected
rms often are thought to provide ownership stakes to local ocials, who are then motivated
to promote prots over safety. Further, once operation begins, connected rms are less likely
to be shut down in response to observed safety violations - a fact we further verify in our
own data.

Finally, as emphasized by Sun (2005) in his assessment of the coal industry in

Chenzhou, powerfully connected mining companies may deter local ocials from monitoring

6 Information
the

specic

on

the

report

Chinese
we

Labor
cite

Bulletin's
may

be

may

be

accessed

accessed

at

directly

http://www.clb.org.hk;
(in

Chinese)

at

http://www.usc.cuhk.edu.hk/PaperCollection/Details.aspx?id=5630

7 See

http://www.ccdi.gov.cn/lzjy/yajs/201307/t20130715_6183.html for a report of this case (last ac-

cessed September 4, 2014).

8

them at all.
This deference to well-connected rms may not continue in the aftermath of fatal accidents,
which generally demand a response.

Indeed, as Kato and Long (2006a and 2006b) note,

management turnover is common following poor nancial performance and as a result of
serious operating or nancial problems of any kind.

This is consistent with our ndings

in Section 3.1.3 on the post-accident protability and high management turnover following
worker fatalities.

Whether this dierentially aects connected rms is ambiguous.

Cao et

al (2011) suggest that well-connected individuals may be insulated from the consequences of
poor performance, implying a muted impact of worker deaths on connected rms. One the
other hand, Wang and Qian (2011) and others have argued that, since rms run by former
public ocials have greater public exposure, extreme events like worker deaths may demand a

greater

response for connected rms. We will examine this question empirically in the results

that follow.

1.4 Data
Our sample includes all publicly traded Chinese rms from the following industries (China
industry classications in parentheses): Coal mining (industry code B01, 25 rms); Petroleum
and Natural Gas Extraction (B03, 2 rms); Ferrous Metals Mining and Dressing (B05, 2
rms); Nonferrous Metals Mining and Dressing (B07, 8 rms); Petroleum Rening and Coking
(C41, 5 rms); Raw Chemical Materials and Chemical Products (C43, 124 rms); Smelting
and Pressing of Ferrous Metals (C65, 34 rms); Smelting and Pressing of Nonferrous Metals

8

(C67, 41 rms); and Construction (E01, 35 rms).

These industries are the regulatory

focus of the State Administration of Work Safety, which is both an indication of the relative
importance of workplace safety and also facilitates the collection of reliable rm-level worker
mortality data, as discussed in greater detail below.
To collect worker death statistics, we began by examining rms' Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) reports, which large publicly traded rms started to provide beginning in 2008.
These reports often disclose any accidents involving worker fatalities. We also reviewed rms'
annual reports, semi-annual reports, quarterly reports and other announcements: while some
rms failed to provide CSR reports, all publicly traded rms are required by the Chinese SEC
to disclose workplace accidents that result in fatalities in some manner. To cross-check the
gures obtained from companies' own disclosures, we utilized data from the ocial website of

9

the State Administration of Work Safety (SAWS) in China

and websites of its local branches,

which provide an accident searching function. According to the Notice on improving acci-

8 The

initial sample included 125 chemical rms, but one chemical rm was dropped because it had zero

sales in two of the sample years, and went bankrupt in 2012.

9 http://media.chinasafety.gov.cn:8090/iSystem/shigumain.jsp

9

dent information report from the State Administration of Workplace Safety, beginning in
2008, all rms in China were required to report workplace deaths to the local branches of
SAWS in a timely manner, which in turn were meant to be publicly disclosed. Prior to 2008,
rms were also required to report such information; however, due to the modest penalties for
non-reporting prior to 2008, these earlier data are very incomplete and thought to be of poor
quality. The lack of signicant penalties similarly aected the disclosure of safety information
in company reports. Owing to these shifts in reporting that took place in 2008, we focus on
the sample period 2008-2013; In our Data Appendix, we provide further details comparing
company and government data sources. (As an indication of the enormous shift in reporting,
the fraction of rms reporting at least one workplace fatality increased eight-fold between
2007 and 2008, as more stringent disclosure rules went into eect.)
For the construction industry, rms are not required to report workplace fatalities to
the public in their CSR or other corporate reports, since construction workers are typically
contract rather than formal employees. We obtain data for this industry through a proprietary
accident-level dataset from the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development of China
(MHUDC). Construction rms are required to report any accident involving fatalities to the
MHUDC and have been required to do so since 2008. These accident-level data were matched
by name to our sample of listed rms. 35 Construction companies contribute a total of 123
rm-year observations to our panel dataset and a total of 243 deaths.
For 57 rm-year observations from 16 rms, death information was not found in government websites or company reports. In these cases, we supplement our data using a media
search based on the WiseSearch (www.wisers.com) database. WiseSearch, located in Hong
Kong, has broad coverage of newspaper reporting in China, including stories from more than
2,000 newspapers, covering over 80 percent of province-level newspapers, city newspapers and
all national nancial newspapers.

These 57 rm-year observations contribute 11 deaths to

our full-sample total of 1332, a reported death rate that is far lower than that of rm-year
observations from ocial or company sources.
Finally, we note that for accidents involving three or more worker deaths - dened by
SAWS as severe - there is a high level of consistency between CSR and corporate reports
and those provided by SAWS, and in no case was a severe accident reported in the media but
not in ocial sources.
Our nal dataset is comprised of 1475 rm-year observations, with a total of 1332 worker
fatalities. This represents an annual worker death rate for the overall sample of about 0.65
workers per ten thousand, somewhat below the national average of 0.93. While this may seem
puzzling given our focus on safety-regulated industries, it is a natural result of sampling only
from publicly traded companies.
We dene four measures of worker mortality:

10

Deathscy , total worker fatalities at company

c

during calendar year

y ; DeathRatecy = 1, 000 ∗ Deathscy /Employmentcy ,

measure, gives worker mortality scaled by employment;

denoting whether there was at least one fatality at rm

c

in year

y ; and an indicator for rm-

years when at least one severe accident (three or more fatalities) occurs,
several extreme observations for

DeathRate

our favored

I(Deathscy > 0), an indicator variable
Severecy .

Owing to

we winsorize this variable at the 1 percent level.

For the full sample, at least one fatality occurs in 13.5 percent of rm-year observations.
In Figure 1, we show the frequency distribution of

Deaths

for these 199 non-zero observations.

While there are some very high fatality rm-year observations concentrated in mining and
construction (all but one 15+ fatality observations are in these industries), most observations
are clustered in the single digits.
In 284 accidents that led to a total of 1146 deaths (out of the total of 1332 in our rm-year
panel data), we were able to pinpoint the precise date of the accident. The discrepancy owes
to the fact that in some cases CSR or other corporate reports provided only annual aggregates
or failed to provide exact dates; in a subset of these cases where only aggregate information
was provided, we were unable to determine the precise date of an accident through media
accounts.

We focus on the 284 accidents with precise event dates in our market reaction

analysis below.
Our measure of political connections is based on the previous employment histories of top
executives at each rm. We dene a company to be connected if a senior manager held a highlevel government post prior to joining the rm. Information on top executive teams is provided
by companies' annual reports, based on year-end employment. To construct this measure, we
collected the resumes of senior managers for our sample of rms from Wind Information, the
largest vendor of raw nancial data in China. We focus on the backgrounds of the Chairman,

,

Vice-Chairman, CEO and Vice-CEOs at each company, positions roughly equivalent to Csuite executives at an American rm. These resumes provide employment histories, including
past positions in government. We dene a rm-year indicator variable,
equal to one if a senior executive on December 31 of year

y-1

at rm

c

Connectedcy ,

to be

previously served as

mayor or vice-mayor (Tingju Ji in Chinese) in the city where the company is located, or

10

as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank.

In practice, over

90 percent of our connected executives came from the municipal bureaucracy, so we lack the
statistical power to examine the heterogeneous eects of connections based on the level of
government.
We make a couple of observations about the timing of data on connections and accidents.
First, we measure connections at the beginning of each calendar year; the possibility of midyear executive turnover introduces classical measurement error in

Connected, most plausibly

10 Lower-level bureaucrats that run smaller sectors or departments within a municipality (Ke Ji
would not necessarily outrank workplace safety authorities.

11

in Chinese)

biasing our results downward. Second, the fact that we use beginning-of-year observations
on political connections - that necessarily precede accidents - will be particularly important
in the specications that include rm xed-eects, since it ensures that a new executive will
have been in place for at least a short period of time prior to the occurrence of fatal accidents
that we may attribute to his employment at the rm.
Firms are not required to disclose workplace safety violations uncovered by regulators.
As a measure of safety enforcement - albeit an imperfect one - we collected safety violation

11

information using a media search of the WiseSearch (www.wisers.com) database.

Saf etyV iolcy

as an indicator variable denoting whether company

y.

safety violation in year

c

We dene

was reported for a major

This skews our list of violations toward relatively severe ones,

and also toward large and visible rms. As a second proxy of regulatory enforcement (which
simultaneously captures the extent of compliance), we collected a list of nes for environmental
violations for our sample rms from the Institute of Public & Environmental Aairs, a non-

12

prot organization located in Beijing.
year

y

where rm

We dene an indicator variable

c was ned for environmental non-compliance.

P ollutecy

to denote a

For 87 rm-year observations

(5.6 percent of the sample) during 2008-2011, the Institute of Public and Environmental
Aairs listed no information in violations, so for regressions involving

Pollute

our sample is

comprised of 1388 observations. (Our results are insensitive to coding these as zeros.)
During our sample period, the government held signicant ownership stakes in a number
of publicly traded rms, including many in our sample.

Plausibly, the composition of a

company's top executive team is correlated with ownership status, so it is important to
control for government holdings. We dene

StateOwnership to be the fraction of equity held

by government entities of all levels (municipal, state, and central) either directly or through
state owned enterprises.

These data are taken from CSMAR at GTA, a Shenzhen-based

nancial data vendor.
To examine the eects of regulator incentives, we dene the variable
province-year variable denoting whether province
law in year

y.

We dene

N SN Ppy

p

N SN Ppy

to be a

had passed a No safety, no promotion

as beginning in the rst full year that a law was in eect.

(Our results are insensitive to dening

NSNP

instead on the basis of the fraction of days that

a law was in eect during its year of passage.)
Finally, we collected data to construct control variables, including stock price, return on as-

11 We

rst use a combination of company name (including both the abbreviated name and the full name)

and some key Chinese words that refer to safety violations, specically: Anquan Shengchan, Xingzheng Chufa,
Fakuan, Tingchan, Zhengdun, Tingye, Zhenggai, Jinggao) to download all possible newspaper reports. This
produced 6265 stories which were then processed by research assistants at Nanjing University to manually
code information on safety violations, since some downloaded documents turned out to be false positives.

12 This

organization has devoted considerable eort to collecting environmental violation information

from a range of sources,

mainly media reports and from its cooperation with dierent branches of

Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People's Republic of China.
http://www.ipe.org.cn/about/about.aspx (last accessed on September 1, 2014).

12

The list may be found at

sets (ROA), total assets, and investment (dened as the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets) from CSMAR at GTA. We obtain total employment gures from Resset, a Beijing-based
nancial data vendor. For total assets, sales, and employment, we use gures from the beginning of year

y, while we employ lagged values for the ow variables ROA and investment.

asset and employment gures are used to construct
a measure of rm

The

CapIntcy = log(Assetscy /Employeescy ),

c 's capital intensity in year y.

Table 1A presents summary statistics for the rm-year panel data.

We further show

these summary statistics for the full sample split into politically connected and unconnected
rm-year observations in Table 1B. Of particular note, politically connected rms have, on
average, .084 worker deaths per 1,000 employees each year, whereas the comparable gure for
unconnected rms is 0.024 deaths per 1,000 employees. Politically connected rms are also
larger, as measured by employees or sales, an issue that we will take up in detail below. State
ownership is also correlated with political connections - the mean level of state ownership is
nearly 80 percent higher for

Connected = 1

rms. Connected rms are more protable, as

measured by return on assets, consistent with the prior literature on the value of political
ties. Finally, connected rms have signicantly higher rates of major safety violations, but as
we will see shortly this is simply due to the fact that fatalities - which are far higher among
connected rms - tend to trigger reports of safety violations.
In Table 1C, we limit the sample to rms where there is variation in

Connected

over the

sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected executive. For
this set of rms, which we dene as the

V ar(Connected) > 0

sample, dierences between

connected and unconnected rms are generated by executive turnover. Here we nd the two
groups are much more balanced on observables - connected and unconnected rms are of
similar size (based on employment or sales) and have comparable rates of investment (though
state-controlled rms employ connected executives a higher fraction of the time).

We still

nd, however, that connected rms are more protable, though the (unconditional) dierence
is signicant only at the 10 percent level. Further, the dierences in death rates remain large
and highly signicant in this subsample, a pattern that will be reected in our within-rm
regression results below. There is no signicant dierence in workplace violations between
connected and unconnected rms, though we show below that this gap is considerably wider
for rm-year observations where no fatalities occur.
Before proceeding to the model that we will use to organize our results, we provide a
graphical overview of the main patterns in our data in Figures 2A and 2B, using the full sample
and the subsample of companies that have within-rm variation in

Connected

respectively.

For ease of exposition, we group together industries with fewer than 50 rm-year observations
in the category

Other.

The patterns are fairly similar across the two gures.

With the

exception of smelting non-ferrous materials, where fatalities are virtually non-existent, worker

13

mortality is higher in connected versus unconnected rms. This dierence is smallest for coal
mining. One possible reason for this is that given the relative isolation of coal mines, underreporting of fatalities is a more of a concern. This explanation is borne out in media reports
of rms - particularly those with ties to local governments - attempting to coerce victims'
families into maintaining silence (see, for example, Graft in China Covers Up Toll of Coal
Mines,

2

New York Times, April 10, 2009).

Theoretical framework

To provide a basic framework for our analysis, we present a simple Becker-style audit model
that captures many of the stylized facts that we document in our empirical analysis.

The

reader focused exclusively on our empirics may wish to proceed directly to Section 3.
We employ a two period model of rm

i 's

production with xed (non-safety) costs (Ci )

and revenues (Ri ). At the beginning of period 1, rms make the decision of whether to hire
a connected executive and whether to shirk on safety expenditures, which are set at a level

si

mandated by regulators (and known to all parties). Production then takes place for two

periods.
To begin, we make the extreme assumption that safety regulators' incentives are such
that unconnected rms

always

comply with requisite safety expenditures, while connected

rms never do. We will turn to the question of regulator incentives below, and endogenize
the compliance decision. The pay of unconnected executives is normalized to zero, and we
model connected executives as taking a share

α

of prots, which they earn as a result of the

cost savings they generate. We further simplify the analysis by modeling the probability of a
fatal accident as occuring with probability

p

for rms that fail to make safety expenditures

and zero for those that do. The cost of a fatal accident is a ne

F,

and we further assume

that following worker fatalities connected individuals lose their inuence (and hence are also
of no value to rms).

We presume that period 1 operations are unaected by fatalities,

eectively assuming that the accident occurs at the end of the period (or alternatively that
the repercussions only accrue at that point).
We allow for rms to have diering costs of safety compliance, but drop subscripts for
and C to focus on heterogeneity based on safety costs.

R

This set of assumptions yields the

following two-period prots for connected versus unconnected rms:

E(πi ) =




2(R − C − si ), if Connectedi = 0

 (1 − α)(R − C) + p(R − C − s − F ) + (1 − p) [(1 − α)(R − C) − pF ] , if Connected = 1
i
i
(1)

14

For unconnected rms, this expression is straightforward to interpret: prots are revenues
less total costs (non-safety and safety) in each period. For connected rms, the rst term is
operating prots in period 1.
connection, earning

R − C − si

If an accident occurs (with probability

in the second period, and also paying a ne

occurs, the rm maintains its connection, again earning

p

must pay a ne

F

p ),

(1 − α)(R − C),

the rm loses its

F. If no accident

and with probability

if an accident occurs in period 2.

A rm will hire a connected executive if

E(πi |Connected = 1)−E(πi |Connected = 0) ≥ 0,

i.e.,

si ≥ (R − C)α + pF

(2)

This reductionist description of political connections has a number of properties  both
assumptions and predictions of the model  that we can evaluate in our empirical analyses:
1. Based on the assumption that it is more costly to monitor connected rms, it follows
immediately that connected rms shirk on safety at higher rates than unconnected
rms.
2. Also by assumption, connected rms are more protable, given that the value created
by avoiding safety expenditures is split between the rm and the connected executive
himself.
3. Connections are more prevalent among rms that face higher safety costs since condition
(1) is satised for a larger set of parameter values

{C, R, α}.

4. An accident at a connected rm leads to a decline in expected prots, as a result of the
ne incurred and loss of savings on safety costs in the second period.
We now incorporate regulator incentives into our model that will allow for partial auditing of
both connected and unconnected rms. This will help to provide an intuition for dierences
in the death rates and audit outcomes of connected versus unconnected rms, and how this
dierence is aected by increased costs (to the regulator) of non-compliance. Our approach
is in the spirit of a standard Becker (1974) deterrence model (and also related to public
nance models of tax auditing; see Andreoni et al (1998) for an overview), where an interior
solution requires mixed strategies by both auditors and rms.
the probability that a rm of type
probability of an audit by

i

chooses to shirk on safety expenditures by

anc

if

ri

and the

qi .
ai for auditing rm i. We
Connectedi = 1, and assume

We assume that a regulator faces an audit cost
audit cost as

In our model, we represent

Connectedi = 0

and

ac

if

will denote the
that

anc < ac .

This dierence may be driven by the greater inuence costs to a regulator from auditing a

15

company run by a politically powerful individual.

Alternatively, well-connected businesses

Guanxi )

may face lower transactions costs in bribing public ocials, as existing relationships (

between connected CEOs and regulators will facilitate illicit transactions owing to a higher
level of trust (See Li (2011)) for an in-depth discussion ).
This audit cost must be weighed against the career consequences of worker deaths that
may occur in the absence of safety compliance. We assume that both the decision by the rm
to shirk and the decision by the regulator to conduct an audit are made at the beginning
of period 1 (and apply to both periods), and denote the career cost to the regulator of a
fatal accident in any period by

Di .

We further assume that if a fatality occurs in period

1, the rm faces sucient scrutiny that in period 2, safety costs
accidents take place.

Thus, retaining

p

si

are incurred and no

as the probability of accident given shirking, in

a mixed strategy equilibrium the regulator's decision to audit is dictated by the equality

ri [pDi + (1 − p)pDi ] = ai ,

p

since the probability of a fatal accident occuring in period 1 is

while the probability in period 2 (conditional on no accident in period 1) is
yields the following condition on the probability that rm

ri ≤

i

(1 − p)p.

This

shirks:

ai
p(2 − p)Di

(3)

a suciently high (or
D suciently low), we obtain a corner solution where all rms of type i shirk and regulators
The expression holds with strict equality for mixed strategies. With

audit with probability zero.
For an unconnected rm, the mixed strategy equilibrium requires that the audit rate

qi

satisfy the condition that expected prots from shirking and compliance are equal, that is:

qi [2(R − C − si ) − F ]+(1−qi ) [(R − C) + p(R − C − si − F ) + (1 − p) [(R − C) − pF ]] = 2(R−C−si )
The rst bracketed term shows expected prots in the event that the rm is audited (identical to the prots under compliance, as an audited rm must pay a ne
incurring safety cost

in addition to

si ) while the second term shows expected prots if no audit occurs (sim-

ilar to the expression for
on

F

Connected

rms in (1) above). This yields the following condition

qi :
F
1
=1+
qi
(si − pF )(2 − p)

(4)

qi ∈ (0, 1) a mixed strategy equilibrium may hold only with suciently high safety
costs such that si > pF . Assuming that this condition holds, expression (4) has a number
of intuitive properties: the audit rate qi is decreasing in the ne F, as rms will require less
Since

16

frequent auditing if the consequences of getting caught are more severe; higher safety cost

si

results in a higher audit rate, as rms will be more tempted to shirk to avoid this cost; and
a higher accident probability reduces the probability of audit as rms will be more likely to
face penalties even in the absence of an audit.
For connected rms, we rst consider the case where the audit cost
is such that

ac ≥ p(2 − p)D

ac

for connected rms

: this leads to a corner solution where connected rms shirk and

unconnected rms are in a mixed strategy equilibrium with audit probability and shirking
rate dened by (3) and (4).
If the cost of fatalities to the auditor

D

increase such that connected rms are no longer at a

corner solution, then the model is no longer consistent with dierent audit rates for connected
versus unconnected rms, nor is it consistent with the higher protability of connected rms
(or higher pay for connected executives).

To see why this is the case, observe that for a

mixed strategy to be supported, a rm must be indierent between shirking and compliance.
But a connection generates value only when a rm decides to shirk (since its audit rate will
be lower).

Hence, in this second case we expect to see a convergence in audit rates

and

in protability of connected and unconnected rms. Further, once prots of connected and
unconnected rms converge, connected executives can no longer extract a higher share of
prots.
Our model makes thus the following additional predictions that we may examine in the
data:
1. If the cost of auditing connected rms,

ac ,

is initially very high (sucient to generate a

zero audit corner solution), connected rms will receive very few nes, despite having
higher accident probabilities.
2. If the implementation of NSNP laws led to a large increase in

D, we may observe a large

drop in worker deaths at connected rms and a convergence with the worker death rate
at unconnected rms. This is the result of a shift among connected rms from corner
solution to mixed strategy equilibrium.
3. Following implementation of NSNP laws, prots at connected rms will converge with
the prots of unconnected rms.
4. Following implementation of NSNP laws, fewer rms will employ connected executives
(and the pay of connected executives will decline), since connections no longer generate
higher rm prots.
As we will show in our empirical results, the latter two predictions are not borne out in our
data: rms continue to hire connected executives after the implementation of NSNP laws,
and connected rms continue to earn a premium relative to unconnected rms in provinces

17

that institute stronger safety incentives. These patterns can be reconciled, however, with a
richer model that allows for substitution eects in how rms deploy their connections. We
present evidence in favor of such substitution eects in our empirical analysis below, as nes
for environmental violations go down

just among connected rms

following the passage of

NSNP laws. That is, instead of using connections to shirk on safety, rms use connections to
shirk on pollution abatement.

3

Empirical Results

3.1 Political connections, worker deaths, and rm prots
3.1.1 Connections and worker deaths
We begin by extending our analysis of the patterns revealed in Figure 2, relating

Connected

to worker fatalities, in a regression framework. Our baseline specication is as follows:

Deathscy

= β0 + β1 × Connectedcy + β2 × StateOwnershipcy
+β3 × CapIntcy + β4 × ROAcy−1 + β5 × log(Sales)cy
+β6 × Investmentcy−1 + εcy

(5)

We include xed eects for year, industry, and province in most specications, and will
further augment these controls with rm xed-eects in some cases. In most of our specications, we will assume a normally distributed disturbance term. While we begin by showing
results with various monotonic transformations of
of our analyses we will focus on

DeathRatecy

Deaths

as the outcome variable, for most

(workplace deaths per 1,000 employees) as

our measure of workplace fatalities. Finally, to deal with concerns of unobserved dierences
between connected and unconnected rms, we also present results using the sample of companies that have within-rm variation in

Connected, where the eect of connections is identied

from executive turnover; we denote this set of rms as the

V ar(Connected) > 0

sample.

Before turning to standard OLS specications, we rst show our main results in Table
2 using a count model for

Deaths,

assuming a negative binomial distribution (a Poisson

distribution is a poor t for the death distribution in the data). In all specications in all
tables, we cluster standard errors by rm. We begin with a specication with no covariates.
The coecient on

Connected

is very large in magnitude - its coecient of 1.953 implies a death

1.953

incidence rate for connected companies that is just over 700 percent (e
signicant at the 1 percent level.

Connected

) of the baseline,

Adding controls in column 2 reduces the coecient on

to 1.7754 (a 578 percent increase relative to baseline, signicant at the 1 percent

level), while the further addition of province, year, and industry xed eects has little impact

18

on the coecient (column 3).

In column 4 we include rm xed-eects.

This demanding

specication limits our sample to those rms with at least one non-zero value of

Deaths

(otherwise, the xed eect in our negative binomial estimation is undened). This yields a
smaller eect, albeit one that is still statistically signicant and large in magnitude, implying
that the death incidence rate for connected rms is 216 percent of the baseline. When we
employ the

V ar(Connected) > 0 sample, the coecient falls marginally to 1.52 (a 458 percent

increase relative to baseline), signicant at the 1 percent level, while adding rm xed eects
to this specication reduces the coecient on
other coecient, apart from our size proxy of
of

Connected

to 0.855. It is noteworthy that no

log(Sales), is consistently a signicant predictor

Deaths.
We next present a set of OLS specications in Table 3, rst using

the dependent variable.

log(1 + Deaths)

as

In column 1 we present results using the full set of controls in

Equation (5), as well as industry, year, and province xed eects. The coecient of 0.282 is
signcant at the 1 percent level; the coecient is virtually identical when we limit the sample
to

V ar(Connected) > 0 rms (column 2) and increases to 0.37 with the inclusion of rm xed

eects (column 3). In columns 4-6 we show results based on our preferred outcome variable
of

DeathRate

(deaths per 1,000 employees). The coecient on

0.05 across all specications. Given the average

DeathRate

Connected

among

is approximately

Connected = 0

rms of

0.024, this implies a worker death rate that is three times higher at connected rms. For the

V ar(Connected) > 0
coecient on

sample, the mean

Connected

in columns 7-9 we use
at rm

c

in year

DeathRate

among unconnected rms is 0.039, so the

implies a more than two-fold dierence in worker death rate. Finally,

I(Deathscy > 0),

an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality

y, as the dependent variable.

The coecient on

Connected

is in the range of

0.1 across all specications, though not signicant at conventional levels for the specication
using the

V ar(Connected) > 0 sample without rm xed eects (p =0.12).

In Appendix Table

A2, we provide an alternative approach to dealing with the diering attributes of connected
versus unconnected rms based on propensity score matching.

This yields a dierence in

death rate that is comparable to what we nd in our OLS regressions. Finally, in Appendix
Table A3 we add industry-specic time trends to each of our specications; the coecient on

Connected

is virtually unchanged across all specications, indicating that dierential industry

13

trends are not responsible for our results.

3.1.2 Connections and regulatory enforcement
In our simple audit model, it is regulators' high cost of monitoring connected rms that
leads to more fatalities. As we explain in Section 1, rms are not required to disclose safety
violations, so we use cases of major government safety investigations reported in the media

13 Our

results are also unchanged if we include controls for leverage or stock price volatility.

19

as our measure of enforcement actions.

We are interested, in particular, in dierences in

reported violations in years when no fatalities occur, since workplace deaths themselves may
trigger an audit.

Connected

In Table 4, we provide the crosstab of

showing the average safety violation rate,

SafetyViol,

for the

(violation rates are uniformly lower in the full sample, since

I(Deathscy > 0),
V ar(Connected) > 0 sample
and

SafetyViol

is correlated with

rm size). There are two striking patterns. First, in the absence of worker fatalities, there
is no public report of a safety violation when a rm employs a connected executive. In the
absence of a connection, the rate is 4.6 percent.

Owing to the small number of non-zero

observations, standard regression techniques are inappropriate for assessing this dierence.
We use Fisher's exact test to assess the dierence, which generates a p-value of 0.11.

We

observe a very dierent pattern in rm-years when fatalities occur, when the rates of reported
safety violation are virtually identical for connected and unconnected rms (16 versus 15.8
percent).
We also consider a second measure of the extent of monitoring based on whether a rm
was ned in year
we focus on the

y

for environmental noncompliance,

V ar(Connected) > 0

P ollutecy .

As with safety violations,

sample because the strong correlation between nes

and size raises particular concerns of balance in the connected and unconnected samples.
The raw dierence in

P ollute

between connected and unconnected rms is -0.099 (0.170

14

versus 0.071, p-value for the dierence in means is 0.02).

In Table 5, we show that this

relationship remains signicant across various regression specications. Column 1 shows the
simple bivariate correlation between

Connected

and

Pollute.

The relationship is virtually

unchanged with the addition of controls for size, capital intensity, and so forth in column
2, while the further addition of year, industry, and province xed eects (column 3) reduces
the magnitude of the coecient on

Connected

to -0.071, signcant only at the 10 percent

level. But this, in a sense, may over-control for rm attributes - connections may be clustered
in industries (or provinces) where environmental or safety violations are common, and the
inclusion of xed eects absorbs this relevant between-industry or province variation.

3.1.3 Connections and rm prots
A nal prediction of our model is that connected rms enjoy higher protability as a result
of protection from regulatory oversight.

(It is important to note that, given the breadth

of benets that rms potentially extract from connections, shirking on safety regulation is
unlikely to be the only reason for greater protability.) In the rst two columns of Table 6,
we show that this pattern holds for both the full and

V ar(Connected) > 0

samples. For the

full sample, we nd that connections are associated with a 1.7 percentage point increase in

14 There

is no dierence between the two groups for the full sample, resulting from the fact that unconnected

rms are much smaller on average than connected rms.

20

ROA (signicant at the 1 percent level),

V ar(Connected) > 0

while for the

sample the eect

is a 1.1 percentage point increase (about 20 percent), signicant at the 10 percent level..
In columns 3-4, we more directly tie rm protability to our model of safety monitoring
by looking at prots in

y+1

as a function of both connections and its interaction with the

y.

occurrence of worker fatalities in year

The eect is

ex ante

ambiguous. In the organizing

framework we present above, if connected individuals lose their ability to circumvent costly
safety compliance after fatalities occur, then an accident should lead to a relatively large
prot decline among connected rms (and potentially the departure of connected executives,
whose connections are no longer valuable). A plausible alternative is that connections serve
to insulate rms from regulatory backlash following worker deaths, in which case one would
expect the value of well-connected rms to fare relatively well after an accident. (Similarly,
given the high accident rates at connected rms, a fatality represents a lesser surprise to the
market, and its eect should thus have been largely incorporated into market prices.)
The data favor the 'loss of privilege' view of connections. For the full sample, the coecient
on the interaction term,

Connected ∗ I(Deaths > 0),

is negative (signicant at the 1 percent

level) and of approximately the same magnitude as the direct eect of

V ar(Connected) > 0
the direct eect of
in year
in year

y,
y.

Connected.

For the

sample, the interaction term is negative and nearly twice the size of

Connected,

indicating that if an accident occurs at a connected company

in expectation prots will be lower in

y+1

than if it had been unconnected

(Our results in the previous section further argue against connections serving

to protect rms from regulatory backlash following worker deaths: while we observed zero

SafetyViol ) at connected rms in the absence
accidents occur SafetyViol is identical for connected

reports of workplace safety investigations (
of worker deaths, in years where fatal

and unconnected rms, suggesting that connections do not insulate rms from post-accident
regulatory responses.)
As an alternative approach to studying the impact of accidents on protability, we also
look at market reaction to news of fatal accidents (which are, by denition, unexpected).
We dene the accident date as

t=1

and examine the subsequent change in share price as

this information is incorporated by investors.

In most cases the formal announcement of

worker deaths comes much later than the accident itself, so it is critical in our analyses to
allow for a fairly long event window. Further, for a number of cases, multiple fatal accidents
occur within a single month of one another for a single rm. These instances are clustered
in the construction industry, which has a very high accident rate: the 37 construction rms
in the sample generated 143 of the 284 identiable accidents in the dataset.

To prevent

double-counting of returns that follow multiple temporally adjacent accidents, we proceed
as follows: proceeding forward from each company's rst accident in the sample, we drop
accidents that occurred within 30 trading days of the initial accident. We then proceed to the

21

next accident (that has not been dropped) - by denition more than 30 trading days following
the rst - and repeat the process.

There are 41 instances of accidents clustered within 30

trading days, 33 in construction, and leads to the deletion of 64 observations (sometimes
more than two fatal accidents occurred within 30 trading days). We also dene a variable to
account for the full set of fatalities taking place at company
initial accident

a, M onthlyDeathsca .

c

within a month following each

Finally, we omit the 10 observations where trading

was suspended following the accident or insucient pre-event data were available to calculate
abnormal returns.
In Figure 3, we present cumulative abnormal returns (CARs), estimated using a standard
four-factor model, i.e., Fama-French three factors and also the Carhart momentum factor,
over event windows of up to 30 trading days following each accident date.

Since the rate

of fatal accidents is much higher for connected rms, the event study sample has a higher
fraction of

Connected = 1

observations (24.8 percent of the total) relative to our rm-year

sample.
We show CARs for the full sample and also for the sample divided based on

Connected.

For the full sample, there is only a very small negative market response following an accident.
For the subsample of

Connected = 0

rms, the average CARS from [1,1] to [1,30] are slightly

positive, though in no case signicantly dierent from zero. By contrast, for the

1

Connected =

subsample we observe a steady decline in rm value from the date of an accident. There is

good reason to expect this delay in investor response: in most cases, the fatalities were not
disclosed by the company at the time the accidents occurred, nor were they reported in the
media outlets covered by WiseSearch, so news may be slow to reach the market.
The regression results in Table 7 echo the patterns observed in Figure 3 - politically connected rms suer relatively large declines in market value following worker deaths, with the
decline increasing over the 30 trading days following each accident. Over a three day window
following an accident, connected rms decline by about 1.4 percent more than unconnected
rms do.

This dierence widens to more than 8 percent after 30 trading days.

cient on

Connected

The coef-

is signicant at least at the 10 percent level across all windows.

We

note additionally that total deaths in the 30 trading days after the accident is also negatively
correlated with returns, though the coecient on

log(M onthlyDeathsca )

does not approach

statistical signicance in any event window.
In our model, we assume that connections lose their value after fatal accidents, and rms
no longer benet from employing them. More generally, it is very common in China for highlevel rings to take place following negative company news of any kind (see Yan (2004) among
many other media reports for a reference), further reinforcing the prediction that connected
executives (and any residual value they generate) will depart following a fatal accident.
For a company that is politically connected in year

22

y−1, we nd that the likelihood that the

company is still connected in year
during

y−1

y

is 19 percentage points lower if a fatal accident occurred

(64.0 percent versus 44.7 percent).

In Table 8, we examine the relationship

between worker deaths and the loss of political connections in a regression framework using
the following specication, which captures the relationship between fatalities in year
political connections at the beginning of year

Connectedcy

y:

= β0 + β1 × I(Deathscy−1 > 0) + β2 × Connectedcy−1
+β3 × CapIntcy−1 + β4 × ROAcy−1
+β5 × log(Sales)cy−1 + β6 × Investmentcy−1 + εcy

For the full sample, the coecient on

y -1 and

(6)

I(Deathscy−1 > 0) in column 1 is -0.073 (signicant

at the 1 percent level) indicating that a rm is 7 percentage points less likely to be connected in
the year following a fatal accident. This sample includes many rms that are never connected
during 2008-2013; in column 2 we focus on the
coecient on

I(Deathscy−1 > 0)

eects in column 3.

V ar(Connected > 0)

sample, where the

is -0.248, and is virtually identical when we add rm xed

15

In closing this section, it is important to note that while fatal accidents often trigger the
departure of connected individuals, executives themselves tend to fare well in the managerial
labor market after accidents occur. In the 26 instances in our sample where political connections are lost in the year following a fatal accident, we nd that in 19 cases the connected
individuals went on to take other high-level positions at other rms (in two cases at the parent
company to the listed rm). In four cases the connected manager retired completely (though
these executives were already in their late 50s) and in three cases the connected managers

16

went on to work at semi-governmental agencies.

The fact that connected executives do well

in the managerial labor market after presiding over workplace disasters can help to reconcile
the relative lack of concern for safety by connected managers with the fact that it often leads
to their dismissal.
In summary, our analysis of the link between worker safety and rm prots indicates that,
while connected rms are more protable overall, this prot premium is lost following fatal
accidents.

These patterns are broadly consistent with the framework presented in Section

2, where connections are prot-enhancing in expectation, but lead to relatively low prots

15 We

nd, in results not reported, that worker deaths are also correlated with the departure of other

(unconnected) executives. However, this relationship is statistically very weak (p-value=0.29), and controlling
for turnover of unconnected executives has no eect on the results we report in Table 8.

16 These

patterns are consistent with other accounts of the careers of connected executives forced to depart

from companies in the wake of scandals: they often reappear a short while later in high-level positions at other
rms. One extreme example is that of Zhixing Gao, a former politician who, in 2001, served as vice-CEO of
Chenjiashan Coal when an accident at one of the company's mines killed 38 workers. He went on to serve
as CEO of Huangling Coal, where an explosion killed 24 miners in 2004. A number of such cases have been
documented by Chu (2008).

23

following a negative worker safety realization.

3.2 Main results - discussion
The fact that our results in Table 3 survive the inclusion of rm xed-eects raises the issue of
whether executives can reasonably produce such rapid changes in operational outcomes. We
begin by noting that the relatively rapid impact of top executives on rm-level outcomes is in
line with the earlier literature on CEO turnover. Bertrand and Schoar (2003), for example,
show that individual CEOs bring idiosyncratic nancial and operational styles to how they
run a company, a result that has been rearmed in subsequent work. Morten Bennedsen,
Pérez-González, Nielsen and Wolfenzon (2007) further nd large performance changes in a
dierence-in-dierences analysis of CEO transitions, consistent with the view that the impact
of leadership changes may be felt very quickly. Bloom et al (2013) provide an indication of
how such rapid change is possible: in their study, Indian textile rms randomly assigned to
be taught `better management' by consultants improved their total factor productivity by
over 20 percent, as a result of higher output and more ecient use of inventories.
The scale of government-mandated safety funds provide some indication of the level of
savings that rms might (relatively quickly) achieve by shirking on compliance. As noted in
Section 1.1, construction rms are mandated to hold 2 percent of construction project costs for
safety compliance, coal mining rms an average of over 1 percent of revenues, and an average
of 0.7 percent of revenues in chemicals, the largest industry in our sample. If connections allow
rms to reduce these expenditures substantially, it may allow for a relatively rapid increase in
protability, albeit at a greater risk to workers. (While, as we observed earlier, rms maintain
political ties for multiple reasons, it is nonetheless noteworthy that construction and coal are
also the two sectors with the highest proportion of rms employing connected executives,
employing connected executives in 20 and 11 percent of rm-year observations respectively.)
These gures also give some indication of whether the prot premium enjoyed by connected
rms could plausibly be accounted for in signicant part by savings on safety expenditures.
Recall that return on assets is approximately 1 percentage point higher for connected rms
in our

V ar(Connected) > 0

sample (the dierence in return on sales is marginally higher,

about 1.5 percentage points).

If connections allow rms to shirk on a sizable fraction of

their mandated safety funds, this alone may account for a reasonably large fraction of this

Connected

prot premium.

And this is only on the basis of reduced costs, whereas lower

compliance may also allow for increased output. (When we consider the relationship between

log(OperatingCosts)

and connections, controlling for sales, we nd that the cost margin

dominates, though our estimates of the revenue eect of connections are extremely noisy, so
we cannot rule out an impact on that margin as well.)

24

The higher protability of connected rms is also helpful in at least partially refuting one of
the most obvious alternative explanations for their poor safety records, namely that connected
executives are simply incompetent. If this were the case, one might expect connected rms to
earn lower prots as well. While this does not fully rule out the 'incompetence hypothesis',
the prot premium of connected rms does contradict the most straightforward form of it.
We return to this question below in our robustness section, where we will also look at the
educational qualications of connected executives.
Finally, before proceeding to an analysis of the impact of regulator incentives on worker
deaths, we comment on the limits imposed by our focus on publicly traded rms, and our
emphasis on worker deaths rather than worker safety more broadly.

Both limitations are

imposed by data availability - we have been unable to obtain data on connections at private
rms, and rm-level data on injuries are unavailable even for publicly traded rms. As we
note in the Data section, worker deaths are likely much higher at private companies overall.
We do not, however, have a clear prediction as to whether the correlation between connections
and worker deaths is likely to be stronger or weaker among private rms. To the extent that
all publicly traded rms are more carefully scrutinized - regardless of their political ties - we
would expect that our results here underestimate the eect of political connections in the
broader sample of all Chinese rms. On the other hand, the high-level connections among
executives in our sample rms are likely to be very rare among (smaller) private rms. This
may bias upward our assessment of the positive link between connections and worker deaths.
Apart from questions of data availability, we choose to study worker deaths rather than
injuries because it is a less gameable outcome - we will return to the issue of under-reporting
of deaths (which does occur) in the robustness section below, but note at this point that it is
generally more dicult to avoid disclosing deaths relative to injuries. There is reason to expect
that the two would be positively correlated, and indeed they are at the province-level. Using
province-year data on worker deaths and workplace injury claims from the China Labour

17

Statistical Yearbooks, we look at the death-injury 'elasticity' over the years 2006-2011.

In a

log-log specication including both province and year xed eects, the coecient on provincelevel deaths is 0.20 (signcant at the 10 percent level) in predicting worker injuries, indicating
a positive relationship between the two, even after accounting for country-wide changes in
safety and province-level dierences in mix of industry and so forth (of course, if we omit
these controls the relationship is much, much stronger). Thus, while our focus in this paper
is on the extreme outcome of fatalities, deaths may plausibly be related to the broader social
cost of worker harm.

17 2012

data were not available at the time of writing.

25

3.3 The eect of No Safety, No Promotion laws
We now examine whether the relationship between political connections and worker deaths
is aected by the existence of No safety, no promotion (NSNP) reforms that limited the
promotion opportunities of regulators who failed to meet safety targets. Plausibly, this made
it costlier for regulators to turn a blind eye to unsafe working conditions at a rm. As we
observed in our discussion of a standard audit model in Section 2, this may have a disproportionate impact on worker safety at connected rms if, prior to the passage of NSNP legislation,
they were largely unmonitored. For previously unmonitored rms, strengthened regulator incentives can cause a relatively large change in rm behavior as auditor and (connected) rm
switch from a corner (no-audit) solution to mixed strategies.

DeathRate

As a preliminary overview of the data, in Table 9 we show the average of

for

company-year observations in provinces that, at some point during 2008-2013, pass a NSNP
law, disaggregated by

NSNP

status and

Connected.

In the rst column, we begin by simply

looking at whether worker deaths are lower after the passage of

NSNP. Overall, the death rate

is nearly 50 percent lower post-NSNP. This pattern is hard to distinguish from the secular
decline in worker deaths across the sample period: death rates dropped from 0.037 per 1,000
employees in 2008 to 0.011 in 2013.

Connected

In columns 2 and 3, we disaggregate these gures by

status (again for the sample of provinces that pass NSNP laws during our sample

period). Here, we nd that connected rms experience a decline in

DeathRate

of 86 percent,

as compared to just 30 percent for unconnected rms.
In Table 10 we show that this disproportionate impact of NSNP laws on connected rms
holds in a regression framework. In column 1, we show results using the full sample and our
standard controls (including industry, year, and province xed eects).

Connected

The coecient on

is 0.079, about 65 percent higher than in the comparable specication in Table 3,

Column 4 which provides the average eect of connections on worker deaths for both NSNP
and non-NSNP rm-year observations. The coecient on

Connected*NSNP

is negative, sig-

nicant at the 1 percent level, and its value, -0.087, implies an eect of connections on worker

N SN P = 1 observations of very close to
V ar(Connected) > 0 rms and in column 3 we

deaths for

zero. In column 2 we limit the sample

to

add rm xed eects.

The pattern is

very similar across all specications - a large, positive direct eect of connections, and an
approximately osetting eect from the interaction

Connected*NSNP.

In Appendix Table

A4, we add a number of further robustness checks: we limit to sample to only provinces that
pass NSNP laws during 2008-2013; include province-specic time-trends, province-year xed
eects, and interaction controls for

Connected ∗ log(GDP percapita)

and

log(Sales) ∗ N SN P .

In all of these additional specications, the main results are virtually unchanged.
If the value of connected executives is realized through their ability to circumvent safety
regulation, it follows that the prot premium of connected rms should decline after the

26

passage of NSNP laws. To examine this possibility, we use
in columns 4-6 of Table 10.

nected*NSNP

ROA

The results are inconclusive:

as the dependent variable

while the coecient on

Con-

is insignicant in all specications, the standard error is large so we can say

little about the impact of NSNP on prots.

One reason that the impact of safety-focused

incentives on prots might be muted is because rms shift to deploying their connections to
other forms of rent-seeking. In columns 7-9, we use

Pollute

as the outcome variable. The

patterns in this set of regressions indicate that connected rms' lower rate of nes for environmental violations documented in Table 5 comes entirely from
direct eect of

Connected

NSNP= 1

observations: the

in these specications is close to zero, while the coecient on the

interaction term indicates that for rms in

N SN P = 1

provinces, the rate of environmen-

tal nes at connected rms is about 15 percentage points lower than for unconnected rms
(though the dierence is no longer statistically signicant with the inclusion of rm xed
eects in column 9 (p-value of 0.12)).
Overall, our results in this section indicate a large reduction in worker fatalities for connected rms in provinces that pass NSNP laws; by contrast, there is virtually no eect of the
laws on unconnected rms.

Our analysis of the eect of NSNP laws on rm prots is too

noisy to draw any conclusions; however, we also argue that there is evidence that the prot
eects could be limited as rms shift to deploying their connections in other ways, notably
in evading enforcement of environmental regulations.

3.4 Identication concerns
One can rarely nd a source of essentially random variation in political ties across rms, so
we are limited to using observational data in this paper. This naturally limits the strength
of claims we may make around causation. In this section, we attempt to confront what we
view as the primary alternative explanations for the patterns we observe in the data. First,
the dierence in measured death rates between connected and unconnected rms may result
from dierential rates of under-reporting. Second, prior political experience may be correlated
with unobserved dierences in managerial attributes. Third, the selection of executives into
rms with high probability of worker deaths may result in an upward bias in our results if
companies hire former politicians in anticipation of future worker deaths.

We argue that,

while our ndings cannot rule out these alternatives, they are hard to reconcile with our full
set of results.
Given that fatal accidents may lead to nes and invite greater scrutiny, rms may attempt
to cover up or otherwise under-report worker deaths. For example, a

New York Times

article

in 2009 describes the near-successful attempt by a mine owner in Hebei province to hide an
accident that killed 35 miners in 2008. (Since the mining company involved was not publicly

27

traded, it is not in our dataset. This is a critical distinction, since publicly listed rms are
generally held to a higher degree of oversight and disclosure.)
may bias our results downward since, as the

Times

Concerns of underreporting

article suggests, it may be easier for well-

connected companies to avoid disclosing worker deaths. Our results are only biased upward
if well-connected companies face greater media or regulatory scrutiny.
Our main approach to assessing whether our ndings are the result of dierences in disclosure for politically connected rms is to focus on severe (Deaths

≥ 3)

accidents that are

more dicult - though not impossible - to hide from authorities and hence less subject to
underreporting.

We present these results in Table 11, which indicates - across a range of

specications - a robust, positive, and statistically signicant correlation between
and severe accidents.

Connected

Given the base rate of severe accidents for unconnected rms of 2.7

percent (4.9 percent in the

V ar(Connected) > 0

sample), the coecient on

Connected

im-

plies a rate of severe accidents that is more than three times higher for connected rms for
both the full and

V ar(Connected) > 0

samples. (It is also worth observing that the gap in

worker death rates between connected and unconnected rms is lower in mining industries
where, based on media reports, underreporting is of greater concern. This suggests that, if
anything, underreporting biases our results toward zero.)
We next consider whether our results can plausibly be explained by dierences between
connected and unconnected executives in their competence or interest in dealing with worker
safety. It is unlikely that such unobserved dierences are driven by a general lack of managerial
acumen among connected managers. If this were the case, we would expect their rms to be
poorly run more broadly and hence less protable, whereas as previously noted we observe
higher prots at connected companies in the data.

Rather, we are concerned specically

with managers' ability to implement worker safety measures, and incentives aecting protsafety tradeos.

To explore the possible eect of the executives' competence in executing

worker safety, we included age and industry experience of executives as additional controls
in our regressions.

We argue that age proxies for seniority and experience, while industry

background captures an executive's familiarity with the industry's safety practices.
additional controls have little eect on our ndings.

These

Further, if connected executives are

chosen for risk-taking or are otherwise aggressive in their management style, we would not
expect rms under their control to be targeted with fewer nes or investigations for regulatory
infractions, as we document in Section 3.1.2.
Connected executives could face additional incentives to shirk on regulations as a result
of future political career concerns, to the extent that connected managers are more likely to
seek public oce in the future. Jia and Nie (2012), for example, emphasize the incentives of
provincial governors to promote economic growth, even at the expense of worker safety. It is
important to note that the existence of such career concerns still leads to a positive eect of

28

Connected

on worker mortality rates, which is broadly consistent with our thesis. In practice,

though, we believe the data are more easily reconciled with political ties making it easier for
rms to elude safety regulations, rather than generating direct incentives to reduce safety. A
standard career concerns model, as described in Jia and Nie (2012), would lead managers with
political aspirations to increase employment or output in the interests of economic growth,
rather than boosting prots, as we nd in our data.

We nd no evidence consistent with

the career concerns hypothesis in the data: neither employment nor sales is correlated with
connections in our

V ar(Connected) > 0

sample.

A nal class of identication concerns relates to the selection of executives into rms
with diering worker safety risk proles. Firms may choose to hire connected executives to
manage the fallout if they anticipate workplace deaths in the future, perhaps as a result of
new projects or changes in safety policies; this would create an upward bias in our estimate
of the eect of connections on worker deaths. However, this selection story would also predict
a more muted impact of accidents on share price for connected rms, since this is exactly the
scenario for which connected executives have been hired. This contradicts the evidence we
report in Section 3.1.3.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, we document a robust positive correlation between the political ties of executives
and worker fatalities at publicly traded Chinese companies. This pattern holds in the cross
section and also for within-rm changes in political connections. Despite poor safety records,
connected rms are targeted less often for safety investigations or ned for environmental noncompliance, and they are more protable than their unconnected counterparts. The impact of
No safety, no promotion laws indicate that strengthening regulators' incentives for oversight
may help to weaken the ability of connected rms to avoid costly safety compliance.
Overall, we argue that our results are best explained by a simple audit model framework
where well-connected companies using their political relationships to circumvent safety oversight and regulation. By documenting the impact of business-politics ties on a high-stakes
social outcome - employee deaths - our results provide an important contribution to our
understanding of the impact of political connections on social welfare, and may serve as a
counterweight to the benign ecient grease view of corruption.
We recognize that our empirical approach - based purely on observational data - has its
shortcomings, and we reiterate that one must take care in making any causal statements
based on our ndings.

The scarcity of available evidence is, however, some indication of

the diculty in studying the questions we confront in this paper.

Our ndings represent

only one small step in our eorts to better understand the welfare consequences of closer

29

business-government relations.

Throughout the paper, we deliberately avoid making any

claims about overall welfare, as that would involve a much larger cost-benet assessment of
the role of political connections in Chinese commerce.

While we highlight the social costs

of this aspect of China's economic system, the country is by many measures one of history's
great development success stories.
Yet we also do not see our paper as narrowly about the tragic consequences of workplace
fatalities for aected workers and their families. The stark dierence in safety outcomes at
connected rms may be, we suggest, representative of such rms' broader ability to circumvent
welfare-enhancing regulations, not simply skirt red tape. Similar opportunities may exist in
the many other domains where prot motives conict with social welfare - everything from
environmental oversight to food safety to predatory lending laws. The exploitation of political
ties by businesses may have rst-order negative welfare consequences. We hope that more
research, in China and elsewhere, can help to better understand the extent to which this is
in fact the case.

30

References
[1] Amore Mario and Morten Bennedsen,2013, "The value of local political connections in a low-corruption environment",

Journal of Financial Economics

110:

387-402.
[2] Andreoni, James, Brian Erard and Jonathon Feinstein, 1998, Tax Compli-

Journal of Economic Literature, 36(2), 818-860.

ance,

[3] Areddy, James.2010, Accidents Plague China's Workplaces,

The Wall Street

Journal, July 28.
[4] Bai, Jie , Seema Jayachandran, Edmund J. Malesky, and Ben Olken. 2013. Does
Economic Growth Reduce Corruption?

Theory and Evidence from Vietnam.

Unpublished manuscript.
[5] Baron, D., 2001. Private politics, corporate social responsibility, and integrated
strategy.

Journal of Economics & Management Strategy

[6] Becker, Gary S. 1974, "Crime and punishment:

10-1, 7-45.

An economic approach", in

Essays in the Economics of Crime and Punishment. UMI, . 1-54.
[7] Becker, Gary, and George Stigler. 1974. Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and the
Compensation of Enforcers.
[8] Bennedsen

Morten,

Journal of Legal Studies, 3(1), 1-19.

Francisco

Pérez-González,

Kasper

Nielsen

and

Daniel

Wolfenzon, 2007, Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession
Decisions and Performance,

Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, Vol. 122 No.

2, 647-691.
[9] Bertrand Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna and Sendhil Mullainathan,
2007, Obtaining a Driver's License in India:
Studying Corruption,

An Experimental Approach to

The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

MIT Press, vol.

122(4), pages 1639-1676, November.
[10] Bertrand Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with Style:
Eect of Managers on Firm Policies.

Quarterly Journal of Economics,

The

118(4),

pp. 1169-208.
[11] Bond, Stephen, 2002, Dynamic panel data models: a guide to micro data methods and practice,

Portuguese Economic Journal, Issue 1, pp. 141-162.

31

[12] Borisov, Alex, Eitan Goldman, and Nandini Gupta. 2013. The Value of (Corrupt)
Lobbying. unpublished manuscript.
[13] Bourlès, Renaud. et al. 2010, Do Product Market Regulations in Upstream
Sectors Curb Productivity Growth?: Panel Data Evidence for OECD Countries,
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 791, OECD Publishing. doi:
10.1787/5kmbm6s9kbkf-en
[14] Cao Jerry, Michael Lemmon, Xiaofei Pan, Meijun Qian and Gary Tian, 2011,
Political Promotion, CEO Incentives, and the Relationship between Pay and
Performance, Working Paper.
[15] China Safe Production Yearbook, 2009, Coal Mining Industry Press, Beijing,
China.
[16] Chu Ren, 2008, Who should be responsible for coal mine accidents?

Journal of

Chongqing Institute of Technology, Vol.22 No.4 pp. 66-69
[17] Cingano Federico and Paolo Pinotti, 2013. "Politicians At Work: The Private
Returns And Social Costs Of Political Connections,"

Economic Association,

Journal of the European

European Economic Association, vol. 11(2), pages 433-

465, 04
[18] Dinc, Serdar, 2005. Politicians and Banks: Political Inuences on GovernmentOwned Banks in Emerging Markets.

Journal of Financial Economics,

77, pp.

453-479.
[19] Djankov Simeon,

Rafael La Porta,

Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes and Andrei

Shleifer, 2002. The Regulation Of Entry,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

MIT Press, vol. 117(1), pages 1-37, February.
[20] Dong Zhiqiang, Zijun Luo and Xiahai Wei, 2014, Employee Benets with Chinese
Characteristics: Evidence from Private Firms in China, Working paper.
[21] Elfenbein, Daniel, Raymond Fisman, and Brian McManus, 2012, Charity as
a substitute for reputation:

Economic Studies, 79 (4):

Evidence from an online marketplace,

Review of

1441-1468.

[22] Elfenbein H., Margolis, J., , and J. Walsh, 2007, Does It Pay To be Good? A
Meta-Analysis and Redirection of the Relationship between Corporate Social
and Financial Performance, Harvard Business School Working Paper.

32

[23] Epstein,
lies

Gady,

behind

2009,

China's

The

price

modern-day

of

corruption:

villains,

The

A

systemic

Forbes,

evil

Oct

30.

(http://www.forbes.com/2009/10/30/china-coal-corruption-communist-partybeijing-dispatch.html)
[24] Faccio, Mara, 2006, Politically connected rms,

American Economic Review

96(1), 369-386.
[25] Fan Joseph, Oliver Meng Rui and Mengxin Zhao, 2008, Public governance and
corporate nance: Evidence from corruption cases,

Journal of Comparative Eco-

nomics, Volume 36, Issue 3, September, Pages 343364
[26] Fisman, Raymond. 2001. Estimating the Value of Political Connections.

Amer-

ican Economic Review, September, pp:1095-1102.
[27] Fisman, Raymond & Jakob Svensson. 2007. Are corruption and taxation really
harmful to growth?

Firm level evidence.

Journal of Development Economics,

83(1), pp. 63-75.
[28] Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl and Jongil So. 2009. Do Politically Connected
Boards Aect Firm Value?

Review of Financial Studies, 22 (6):

2331-2360.

[29] Goldman, Eitan, Jorg Rocholl and Jongil So. 2013. Political Connections and
the Allocation of Procurement Contracts.
[30]

Review of Finance, forthcoming.

Hindustan Times, 2005, Coal miners pay with their lives for cronyism in China,
August 11.

[31] Homer,Andrew 2009, Coal Mine Safety Regulation in China and the USA,

Jour-

nal of Contemporary Asia, Vol 39, No. 3, pp. 424-439.
[32] Hong, Harrison and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2009. "The price of sin: The eects of
social norms on markets,"

Journal of Financial Economics, Elsevier, vol. 93(1),

pages 15-36, July.
[33] Hong, H., Kubik, J., Scheinkman, J., 2011. Financial constraints on corporate
goodness. Unpublished working paper.
[34] Huang Yanzhong, 2012, China's Corrupt Food Chain,

The New York Times,

Aug 17.
[35] Jia Ruixue and Huihua Nie, 2013, Decentralization, Collusion and Coalmine
Deaths, mimeo.

33

[36] Johnson, T., 2006, Corruption Deters Mine Safety Eorts,

Contra Costa Times,

26 December, p. F4.
[37] Journal of New Safety, 2005, Eradicate coal mining accidents? Eradicate local
corruption rst! Editoral comments, Issue 3.
[38] Kato Takao and Cheryl Long, 2006a. "Executive Turnover and Firm Performance in China,"

American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,

Ameri-

can Economic Association, vol. 96(2), pages 363-367, May.
[39] Kato, Takao and Cheryl Long, 2006b. "CEO turnover, rm performance, and

Journal of Comparative
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 34(4), pages 796-817, December.
enterprise reform in China: Evidence from micro data,"

[40] Khwaja, Asim, and Atif Mian. 2005. Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected
Firms? Rent Provision in an Emerging Financial Market.

Economics, 120 (4):

Quarterly Journal of

1371-1411.

[41] Le, Nathaniel. 1964. Economic Development through Bureaucratic Corruption.

American Behavioral Scientist, 8(3), 8-14.
[42] Li Hongbin and Li-An Zhou, 2005, Political turnover and economic performance:
the incentive role of personnel control in China,

Journal of Public Economics,

Volume 89, Issues 910, Pages 17431762.
[43] Li Ling, 2011, performing bribery in China - Guanxi-Practice, Corruption with
a Human Face, Jurnal of Contemporary China, Vol. 20, No.68, pp. 1-20.
[44] Mauro Paolo, 1995, Corruption and Growth,

nomics

The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

, Vol. 110, No. 3 Aug, pp. 681-712.

[45] Morgan, Gwyn, 2013, China's pollution woes fuelled by corruption,

and Mail,

The Globe

November 13.

[46] Olken, Benjamin. 2007. Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.

Journal of Political Economy, 115 (2), pp. 200-249.

[47] Olken, Benjamin, and Rohini Pande. 2012. Corruption in Developing Countries.

Annual Review of Economics, 4, pp. 479-505.
[48] Peng Jialing, 2004, Safe production quota system is going to be built,

Daily, Jan 21.

34

People's

[49] People's Daily, 2005, Interview with Yizhong Li: Collusion between coal mine
managers/owners and local goernment ocials is the key reason behind coal
mining accidents, Sep 15.
[50] Phillips, Michelle, 2010, In China, workplace deaths a small cost,

The Wash-

ington Times, August 8.
[51] Roodman David, 2008, How to Do xtabond2: An Introduction to Dierence and
System GMM in Stata, Center of Global Development Working Paper.
[52] Sebag-Monteore Clarissa, 2012, China's mines still deadly,

China Business,

May 4.

, The Quar-

[53] Shleifer Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1993, Politicians and Firms

terly Journal of Economics

Vol. 109, No. 4 pp. 995-1025

[54] Sun Chunlong, 2005, "Dark hole: Collusion between high-level government ofcials and coal mine owners deterred investigations by local safety regulators",

Oriental Outlook, Nov 14.
[55] Wang H, Qian C. 2011. Corporate Philanthropy and Corporate Financial Performance: The Roles of Stakeholder Response and Political Access.

Management Journal

Academy of

54(6): 1159-1181

[56] Wang, Shaoguang, 2006, Regulating Death at Coalmines: Changing Mode for
Governance in China,

Journal of Contemporary China, 15 (46):

[57] Wang, Xiaodong, 2013, Risks of accident are 'striking '

1-30.

China Daily,

June 19.

[58] Xu Haoping and Jian Zhou, 2011, The Value of Political Connections: Chinese
Evidence, Working Paper.
[59] Yan, Xiaohong, 2004, High-level government took responsibilities for workplace
death,

China Youth Daily ,

Apri. 29.

[60] Zhao Xiaohui and Xueli Jiang, 2004, Coal Mining: Most Deadly Job in China,

China Daily, November 13.

35

Data Appendix
Our nal dataset is comprised of 1475 rm-year observations (where we have 276 rms for
the period of 2008 to 2013), with a total of 1332 worker fatalities.

For the 193 rm-year

observations for construction rms, we obtain detailed accident level information from a
proprietary accident-level dataset obtained from the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural
Development of China (MHUDC). Construction rms are required to report any accident
involving fatalities to the MHUDC and have been required to do so since 2008. These accidentlevel data were matched by name to our sample of listed rms. 35 Construction companies
contribute a total of 292 deaths (out of a total of 1332 deaths).
For the remaining 1282 (non-construction) rm-year observations , worker fatality information was available via company reports or the State Administration of Worker Safety
(SAWS) website (http://media.chinasafety.gov.cn:8090/iSystem/shigumain.jsp) in 1225 cases.
In 14 instances, the SAWS website failed to provide full accident-level information, while in
25 cases the company failed to provide details on worker fatalities.
Among the 1186 observations where data were available from both sources, the two lined
up very closely, with slightly higher fatality gures based on company reports. Where discrepancies exist, we rely on the (higher) rm-reported gures. The total discrepancy between
the two sources is 38 deaths across 14 rm-year observations. The 14 observations with no
data from government sources contributed 18 deaths to our sample, while the 25 rm-year
observations with no company data contributed 57 deaths.
For the remaining 57 rm-year observations (57 = 1475  193  1225), across 16 rms,
death information was not found in government websites or company reports. In these cases,
we supplement our data using a media search based on the WiseSearch (www.wisers.com)
database. These 57 rm-year observations contribute 11 deaths to our full-sample total of
1332, a reported death rate that is far lower than that of rm-year observations from ocial
or company sources.

36

Figure 1: Frequency distribution of

Notes:

Deaths

The sample used to construct this gure includes the 226 rm-year observations in which

rm-level worker fatalities per year. In this gure, the distribution of

Deaths

Deaths

is positive.

is censored at a maximum of 15.

Deaths

is

Figure 2A: Average

Notes:

The

gure

is

contructed

Deaths/Employment ).

1000*(

DeathRate

using

at Connected versus Unconnected Firms, by Industry (full sample)

the

full

sample

of

1475

rm-year

observations.

DeathRate

is

equal

to

Figure 2B: Average

DeathRate

at Connected versus Unconnected Firms, by Industry (Var(Connected)>0 sample)

Notes: The gure is contructed using the Var(Connected)>0 sample of 325 rm-year observations. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit
the sample to rms where there is variation in
a connected executive.

DeathRate

Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of
Deaths/Employment ).

is equal to 1000*(

Figure 3: Market reaction to fatal accidents, Connected versus Unconnected rms

Notes: Each data point represents the post-accident cumulative abnormal returns CARs[1,K], estimated using a standard FamaFrench four-factor model, over the window of [1,K] where the accident date is set as 1.

Connected

is a rm-year indicator variable,

equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the
rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank.

Table 1A: Summary Statistics for rm-year panel data
Variable

Mean

SD

Median

Min

Max

Obs

Deaths

0.903

5.724

0.000

0.000

162.000

1475

log(1+Deaths)

0.211

0.612

0.000

0.000

5.094

1475

I(Deaths>0)

0.135

0.342

0.000

0.000

1.000

1475

DeathRate

0.029

0.090

0.000

0.000

0.366

1475

Severe

0.039

0.194

0.000

0.000

1.000

1475

Connected

0.087

0.283

0.000

0.000

1.000

1475

NSNP

0.411

0.492

0.000

0.000

1.000

1475

State Ownership

0.180

0.246

0.000

0.000

0.971

1475

28.885

163.431

3.160

0.002

2786.045

1475

Sales (Billions of RMB)
log(Sales)

22.004

1.765

21.874

14.463

28.656

1475

CapInt

14.139

0.838

14.106

10.896

19.910

1475

ROA

0.039

0.066

0.033

-0.221

0.220

1475

13909.043

47978.521

3061.000

21.000

5.53e+05

1475

log(Employment)

8.157

1.498

8.026

3.045

13.223

1475

Investment

0.078

0.065

0.065

-0.179

0.455

1475

SafetyViol

0.027

0.162

0.000

0.000

1.000

1475

Pollute

0.120

0.325

0.000

0.000

1.000

1388

Employment

Deaths is rm-level worker fatalities
I(Deaths>0) is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation; DeathRate is equal to
1000*(Deaths/Employment ); Severe is an indicator variable denoting at least three fatalities from one accident in a rm-year observation; Connected is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or
Notes:

All variables are at the rm-year level, and includes our full sample of 1475 rms.

per year;

vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same
or higher rank;

StateOwnership is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares; CapInt is log value of the ratio of total assets
NSNP is a province-year variable denoting whether a province had passed a no safety, no promotion law in a
SafetyViol is an indicator variable denoting whether a rm was reported in the media for safety violations; Pollute

to total employees;
previous year;

indicates rm-year observations where the rm was ned for environmental violations.

Table 1B: Summary Statistics for rm-year panel data: politically connected vs. politically unconnected
Variable

PoliticallyConnected=0

PoliticallyConnected=1

Deaths

0.591

4.163

3.572***

Dierence

(Std Error)
( 0.520)

log(1+Deaths)

0.155

0.790

0.635***

( 0.054)

I(Deaths>0)

0.110

0.395

0.285***

( 0.031)

DeathRate

0.024

0.084

0.060***

( 0.008)

Severe

0.027

0.163

0.135***

( 0.018)

NSNP

0.417

0.349

-0.068

( 0.045)

State Ownership

0.169

0.301

0.133***

Sales (Billions of RMB)

13.962

184.597

log(Sales)

21.871

23.388

1.517***

CapInt

14.132

14.211

0.079

( 0.077)

0.036

0.067

0.031***

( 0.006)

ROA
Employment

170.635***

53689.710***

( 0.022)
( 14.397)
( 0.158)

9213.468

62903.178

log(Employment)

8.039

9.386

1.347***

(4196.548)

Investment

0.077

0.091

0.014**

( 0.006)

SafetyViol

0.022

0.078

0.055***

( 0.015)

Pollute

0.119

0.123

0.004

( 0.031)

( 0.134)

Deaths is rm-level worker fatalities
I(Deaths>0) is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation; DeathRate is equal to
1000*(Deaths/Employment ); Severe is an indicator variable denoting at least three fatalities from one accident in a rm-year observation; Connected is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or
Notes:

All variables are at the rm-year level, and includes our full sample of 1475 rms.

per year;

vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same
or higher rank;

StateOwnership is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares; CapInt is log value of the ratio of total assets
NSNP is a province-year variable denoting whether a province had passed a no safety, no promotion law in a
SafetyViol is an indicator variable denoting whether a rm was reported in the media for safety violations; Pollute

to total employees;
previous year;

indicates rm-year observations where the rm was ned for environmental violations.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Table 1C: Firm-year panel data: politically connected vs. politically unconnected rms, Var(Connected)>0 sample
Variable

PoliticallyConnected=0

PoliticallyConnected=1

Deaths

1.677

3.471

1.793

Dierence

(Std Error)
( 1.221)

log(1+Deaths)

0.345

0.732

0.387***

( 0.104)

I(Deaths>0)

0.224

0.373

0.148***

( 0.053)

DeathRate

0.039

0.099

0.060***

( 0.014)

Severe

0.049

0.176

0.127***

( 0.033)

NSNP

0.422

0.441

0.020

( 0.059)

State Ownership

0.220

0.287

0.066**

( 0.032)

Sales (Billions of RMB)

32.073

29.722

-2.351

( 9.349)

log(Sales)

22.629

22.772

0.143

( 0.202)

CapInt

14.057

14.114

0.057

( 0.116)

ROA
Employment

0.051

0.063

22367.753

22174.363

0.012*
-193.391

( 0.007)
(5875.608)

log(Employment)

8.772

8.864

0.092

Investment

0.090

0.085

-0.005

( 0.184)
( 0.008)

SafetyViol

0.072

0.059

-0.013

( 0.030)

Pollute

0.171

0.071

-0.099**

( 0.042)

Connected during our
Deaths is rm-level worker fatalities per year; I(Deaths>0)
is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation; DeathRate is equal to 1000*(Deaths/Employment );
Severe is an indicator variable denoting at least three fatalities from one accident in a rm-year observation; Connected is a rm-year
Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level, and includes the sample of rms where there is variation in
sample period (the Var(Connected)>0 sample), a total of 325 observations.

indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji

StateOwnership is
NSNP is a
year; SafetyViol is an

in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares;

CapInt

is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees;

province-year variable denoting whether a province had passed a no safety, no promotion law in a previous
indicator variable denoting whether a rm was reported in the media for safety violations;
where the rm was ned for environmental violations.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Pollute

indicates rm-year observations

Table 2: The impact of political connections on workplace deaths: negative binomial regression
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.855∗∗∗

Columns 1 - 6: Deaths
1.953∗∗∗

1.754∗∗∗

1.697∗∗∗

0.772∗∗∗

1.521∗∗∗

(0.393)

(0.318)

(0.328)

(0.212)

(0.398)

(0.222)

log(Sales)

0.665∗∗∗

0.725∗∗∗

0.134∗

1.210∗∗∗

0.329∗∗

(0.068)

(0.096)

(0.074)

(0.298)

(0.133)

ROA

4.626∗∗∗

-1.259

0.267

1.514

2.731

(1.675)

(2.094)

(1.709)

(5.451)

(2.936)

-0.256∗∗

0.093

-0.351∗∗

-0.066

-0.372∗

(0.111)

(0.146)

(0.150)

(0.332)

(0.216)

1.671∗∗∗

1.238∗∗

0.477

-0.401

0.680

(0.429)

(0.588)

(0.368)

(1.027)

(0.610)

Connected

CapInt
StateOwnership
Investment
Constant

0.304

0.519

-2.610

3.551

-2.216

(1.562)

(1.885)

(1.720)

(3.957)

(2.561)

-0.527∗∗∗

-12.939∗∗∗

-17.487∗∗∗

0.210

-24.789∗∗∗

-4.045

(0.120)

(1.843)

(2.762)

(2.077)

(7.802)

(3.446)

2.881∗∗∗

2.278∗∗∗

1.786∗∗∗

(0.090)

(0.099)

(0.103)

-

-

Year; Industry; Province

Firm; Year

Year; Industry; Province

Firm; Year

Full

Full

Full

Full

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

ln(α)
Constant
Fixed Eects
Sample

1.278∗∗∗
(0.153)

Observations

1475

1475

1475

524

325

198

Log pseudolikelihood

-1095

-1014

-933

-506

-379

-223

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.

Deaths

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

Connected

is a rm-year indicator

variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese)

CapInt is log value of the ratio
StateOwnership is the ratio of state
where there is variation in Connected

where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
of total assets to total employees;

Investment

shares to total outstanding shares.

is the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets;

Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to rms

over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected executive. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses; with the exception of columns 4 and 6 standard errors are clustered at the rm-level.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

(5)
(6)
Columns 4 - 6: DeathRate
∗∗
0.048
0.050
0.063∗∗∗
(0.017)
(0.020)
(0.021)
0.006∗∗∗
-0.009
-0.050∗∗
(0.002)
(0.025)
(0.024)
-0.015
-0.075
0.219
(0.036)
(0.108)
(0.155)
0.001
0.019
0.031
(0.004)
(0.020)
(0.022)
0.013
-0.034
0.001
(0.012)
(0.026)
(0.034)
-0.007
-0.127
0.008
(0.045)
(0.105)
(0.117)
-0.074
-0.044
0.717
(0.072)
(0.247)
(0.543)
Year; Industry; Year; Industry;
Year; Firm
Province
Province
Full
Var(Ct'd)>0
Var(Ct'd)>0
1475
325
325
.138
.322
.45
∗∗∗

(4)
∗∗

(8)
(9)
Columns 7 - 9: I(Deaths> 0)
0.109
0.088
0.121∗∗
(0.049)
(0.056)
(0.060)
0.052∗∗∗
-0.046
-0.069
(0.009)
(0.082)
(0.070)
-0.035
-0.192
0.808∗
(0.117)
(0.350)
(0.457)
-0.038∗∗
0.108
0.105∗∗
(0.016)
(0.068)
(0.050)
0.094∗∗
-0.009
0.239∗∗
(0.047)
(0.115)
(0.113)
0.051
-0.344
0.251
(0.155)
(0.343)
(0.352)
-0.302
-1.301
0.186
(0.230)
(0.850)
(1.758)
Year; Industry; Year; Industry;
Year; Firm
Province
Province
Full
Var(Ct'd)>0 0 Var(Ct'd)>0
1475
325
325
.268
.406
.512

(7)

DeathRate

is equal to 1000*(

* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

or departure of a connected executive. Robust standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.

observation;

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.

Deaths is rm-level worker fatalities per year; I(Deaths>0) is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year
Deaths/Employment ); Connected is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served
as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank; CapInt
is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees; Investment is the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets; StateOwnership is the ratio of state shares to total
outstanding shares. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to rms where there is variation in Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival

Fixed Eects
Sample
Observations
R-Squared

Constant

Investment

StateOwnership

CapInt

ROA

log(Sales)

Connected

(2)
(3)
Columns 1 - 3: log(1 + death)
∗∗
0.282
0.283
0.370∗∗
(0.106)
(0.138)
(0.150)
0.096∗∗∗
0.013
-0.181
(0.017)
(0.166)
(0.137)
-0.038
-0.318
1.555
(0.204)
(0.969)
(1.220)
∗∗
-0.064
0.112
0.158
(0.030)
(0.134)
(0.109)
∗
0.149
-0.007
0.363
(0.083)
(0.213)
(0.248)
0.074
-0.556
0.484
(0.239)
(0.621)
(0.639)
∗
-0.779
-2.949
1.941
(0.415)
(1.828)
(3.480)
Year; Industry; Year; Industry;
Year; Firm
Province
Province
Full
Var(Ct'd)>0
Var(Ct'd)>0
1475
325
325
.28
.36
.493
∗∗∗

(1)

Table 3: The impact of political connections on workplace deaths: OLS regression

SafetyViol )

Table 4: Crosstab of Connected and I(Deaths>0) for average safety violation rate (

Connected=0
Connected=1

Deaths=0

Deaths>0

0.046

0.160

0.000

0.158

0.046

0.002

Dierence

Notes:

Sample includes 325 rms with variation in

I(Deaths>0)

Connected

during 2008-2013;

Deaths

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation;

Connected

is a rm-year indicator

variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese)
where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
variable denoting whether a rm was reported in the media for safety violations.

SafetyViol

is an indicator

Table 5: The impact of political connections on environmental noncompliance
(1)

(2)

(3)

Columns 1 - 3: Pollute
Connected

-0.099∗∗∗

-0.093∗∗

-0.071∗

(0.036)

(0.040)

(0.038)

log(Sales)
ROA
Investment
CapInt
StateOwnership
Constant

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.
violations;

Connected

(0.018)

0.143

-0.152

(0.439)

(0.276)

0.212

-0.130

(0.332)

(0.257)

-0.016

0.021

(0.025)

(0.018)

-0.115

0.199∗

(0.080)

(0.102)

-0.315

-0.456

(0.040)

(0.525)

(0.522)

-

Year; Industry; Province

-

Var(Ct'd)>0

Sample
R-Squared

0.007

(0.017)

0.171∗∗∗

Fixed Eects
Observations

0.031∗

315

315

315

.0175

.0418

.398

Pollute

indicates rm-year observations where the rm was ned for environmental

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or

vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same

CapInt is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees; Investment is the ratio of capital expenditure to
StateOwnership is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to
there is variation in Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected

or higher rank;
total assets;
rms where

executive. Robust standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Table 6: Political connections, deaths and rm performance
(1)

(2)

Columns 1 - 2: ROA
Connected
log(Sales)
Investment
CapInt

(4)

0.017∗∗∗

0.011∗

0.015∗∗∗

0.016∗∗

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.007)

0.004∗∗

0.007

0.001

0.002

(0.002)

(0.005)

(0.002)

(0.004)

0.146∗∗∗

0.069

0.070∗∗

0.029

(0.035)

(0.074)

(0.030)

(0.044)

0.008∗∗

0.008

0.006∗∗

0.007

(0.004)

(0.010)

(0.003)

(0.007)

StateOwnership

-0.011

-0.001

-0.003

-0.020

(0.009)

(0.027)

(0.008)

(0.017)

I(Deaths> 0)
Connected * I(Deaths> 0)
ROA
Constant

0.005

0.005

(0.004)

(0.008)

-0.017∗∗

-0.030∗∗∗

(0.008)

(0.010)

0.358∗∗∗

0.155

(0.057)

(0.095)

-0.106

-0.120

-0.050

0.004

(0.065)

(0.160)

(0.050)

(0.139)

Sample

Full

Var(Ct'd)>0

Full

Observations

1475

325

1199

268

R-Squared

.259

.477

.362

.601

Fixed Eects

Year; Industry; Province

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.

I(Deaths>0)

(3)

Columns 3 - 4: ROA_F1

ROA_F1

refers to ROA in year t+1;

Var(Ct'd)>0

Deaths

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation;

Connected

is a rm-year indicator

variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese)

CapInt is log value of the ratio
StateOwnership is the ratio of state
Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to rms where there is variation in Connected over

where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
of total assets to total employees;
shares to total outstanding shares.

Investment

is the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets;

the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected executive. Robust standard errors, clustered at
the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Table 7: The impact of political connections on cumulative abnormal event returns (CARs): OLS regression

Connected
log(MonthlyDeaths)
log(Sales)
ROA
Constant

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

CARs[1,3]

CARs[1,5]

CARs[1,10]

CARs[1,15]

CARs[1,20]

CARs[1,25]

CARs[1,30]

-0.014∗∗

-0.027∗∗∗

-0.034∗

-0.042∗∗

-0.048∗

-0.059∗

-0.087∗∗

(0.007)

(0.010)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.027)

(0.032)

(0.036)

-0.004

-0.003

-0.003

-0.007

-0.012

-0.008

-0.004

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.009)

(0.011)

(0.013)

-0.002

-0.001

0.005

0.016∗∗

0.009

0.012

0.008

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.014)

-0.059

-0.026

-0.147

-0.151

-0.185

-0.251

-0.196

(0.083)

(0.107)

(0.121)

(0.128)

(0.193)

(0.225)

(0.240)

0.075

0.037

-0.109

-0.358∗∗

-0.202

-0.279

-0.184

(0.113)

(0.152)

(0.171)

(0.179)

(0.271)

(0.328)

(0.350)

210

210

210

210

210

210

210

.0671

.0946

.0649

.0635

.0752

.0362

.062

Fixed Eects
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared

Province, Industry & Year

Notes: A standard OLS model is used to estimate the impact of political connections on CARs. CARs[1,K] is the cumulative abnormal
event return, estimated using a standard Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model, over the window of [1,K] where the accident day
is set as 1;

Connected

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or

vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same

MonthlyDeaths ) is the log value of the total deaths that take place within a month of each initial accident.

or higher rank; log(

standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Robust

Table 8: The eect of workplace deaths on political connections
(1)

(2)

(3)

Columns 1 - 3: Connected_F1
I(Deaths> 0)
Connected
StateOwnership
log(Sales)
CapInt
ROA
Investment

-0.073∗∗∗

-0.248∗∗∗

-0.244∗∗∗

(0.024)

(0.064)

(0.078)

0.401∗∗∗

0.103∗

0.046

(0.049)

(0.057)

(0.064)

0.047

0.310∗∗

0.328

(0.041)

(0.147)

(0.210)

0.009

-0.047

-0.177

(0.007)

(0.030)

(0.151)

-0.008

-0.048

-0.157

(0.012)

(0.039)

(0.118)

0.128

0.566

0.194

(0.095)

(0.635)

(0.928)

0.137

-0.171

-0.285

(0.123)

(0.507)

(0.586)

0.037

1.978∗∗∗

6.434∗∗

(0.168)

(0.731)

(2.939)

Year; Industry; Province

Year; Industry; Province

Firm

Sample

Full

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Observations

1199

268

268

R-Squared

.351

.244

.332

Constant
Fixed Eects

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.

Connected

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the

rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or
central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
fatalities per year;

I(Deaths>0)

Connected_F1

denotes

Connected

in year t+1;

Deaths

is rm-level worker

CapInt is log value
StateOwnership is the

is an indicator variable denoting at least one fatality in a rm-year observation;

of the ratio of total assets to total employees;

Investment

is the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets;

ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to rms where there is variation in

Connected

over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected executive. Robust standard errors,

clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Table 9: Crosstab of Connected and NSNP for Deathrate
All Firms

Unconnected

Connected

NSNP=0

0.035

0.025

0.166

NSNP=1

0.018

0.017

0.027

0.008

0.139

Dierence

Notes: Sample includes the 564 observations from rms headquartered in provinces that implemented an NSNP law during 2009-2012;

Deaths

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

DeathRate

Deaths/Employment ); Connected

is equal to 1000*(

is a rm-year indicator

variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese)
where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;
denoting whether a province had passed a no safety, no promotion law in a previous year.

NSNP

is a province-year variable

(2)

(0.002)

1475

.152

Observations

R-Squared

Deaths

.361

325

0.011

0.008

-0.011

-0.001

-0.116

.26

1475

Full

Province

Year; Industry;

DeathRate

.477

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.162)

-0.107∗
(0.065)

(0.075)

0.068

(0.028)

(0.035)

0.146∗∗∗

(0.009)

(0.010)

0.008∗∗
(0.004)

(0.005)

0.007

(0.011)

0.001

(0.011)

-0.005

(0.008)

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

.486

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

(5)
Columns 4 - 6: ROA

(0.002)

0.004∗∗

(0.012)

0.010

(0.006)

-0.004

(0.007)

0.013∗

(4)
0.002

0.015

0.039
-0.141

.412

315

Var(Ct'd)>0

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.502)

-0.421

(0.249)

-0.133

(0.281)

.524

315

is a rm-year

Var(Ct'd)>0

Firm

Year; Firm

(1.443)

-0.419

(0.290)

-0.049

(0.414)

-0.051

(0.115)

0.190∗
(0.099)

(0.035)

0.009

(0.074)

0.016

(0.091)

-0.143

(0.083)

0.025

(0.056)

(0.017)

0.018

(0.017)

0.006

(0.086)

-0.189∗∗

(0.079)

0.047

(0.048)

(9)

Deaths/Employment ); Connected

.152

1388

Full

Province

(8)
Columns 7 - 9: Pollute

Year; Industry;

(0.279)

-0.761∗∗∗

(0.135)

0.085

(0.143)

-0.074

(0.054)

-0.063

(0.014)

0.002

(0.009)

0.039∗∗∗

(0.066)

-0.150∗∗

(0.031)

0.008

(0.049)

0.020

(7)

is equal to 1000*(

.623

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Firm

Year; Firm

(0.496)

-0.396

(0.081)

0.022

(0.025)

-0.010

(0.019)

-0.022

(0.024)

0.035

(0.013)

-0.001

(0.013)

-0.006

(0.010)

0.009

(6)

StateOwnership

NSNP

Investment

is the ratio of capital

* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.

we limit the sample to rms where there is variation in

is a province-year variable denoting whether a province had passed

is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees;

Pollute indicates rm-year observations where the rm was ned for environmental violations; Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that
Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected executive. Robust

CapInt

is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares;

a no safety, no promotion law in a previous year;

expenditure to total assets;

as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;

indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.

Full

Firm

Year; Firm

(0.552)

0.686

(0.123)

0.005

(0.146)

0.209

(0.031)

0.001

(0.020)

0.027

(0.024)

-0.046∗

(0.034)

-0.110∗∗∗

(0.029)

0.010

(0.028)

0.104∗∗∗

(3)

Province

Year; Industry;

Year; Industry;

Province

0.010
(0.249)

-0.065

(0.071)

-0.113
(0.101)

-0.007

(0.045)

-0.082
(0.111)

-0.012

(0.035)

-0.032
(0.027)

0.012

(0.012)

0.000

0.007
(0.006)

0.005∗∗∗

(0.011)

(0.033)

(0.029)

0.001

-0.113∗∗∗

-0.087∗∗∗

(0.004)

0.012
(0.028)

0.000

(0.027)

(0.008)

0.093∗∗∗

(0.024)

Columns 1 - 3: DeathRate

0.079∗∗∗

Sample

Fixed Eects

Constant

Investment

ROA

StateOwnership

CapInt

log(Sales)

Connected * NSNP

NSNP

Connected

(1)

Table 10: The dierential impacts of No Safety, No Promotion on rm-level outcomes

Table 11: The impact of connections on severe accident rates: A test of under-reporting
(1)

(2)

(3)

Columns 1 - 3: Severe
Connected
log(Sales)

0.100∗∗∗

0.144∗∗∗

0.159∗∗∗

(0.038)

(0.052)

(0.057)

0.020∗∗∗

0.040∗∗∗

-0.032

(0.004)

(0.012)

(0.059)

ROA

0.027

-0.167

0.270

(0.053)

(0.235)

(0.361)

Investment

0.006

0.055

0.253

(0.072)

(0.281)

(0.350)

CapInt

-0.011

-0.026

0.019

(0.008)

(0.022)

(0.052)

State Ownership
Constant
Fixed Eects

-0.005

-0.043

-0.006

(0.025)

(0.064)

(0.081)

-0.232∗∗

-0.364

0.487

(0.111)

(0.463)

(1.519)

Year; Industry; Province

Year; Industry; Province

Year; Firm

Sample

Full

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Observations

1475

325

325

.1

.186

.248

R-Squared

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level.
rm-year observation;

Connected

Severe

is an indicator variable denoting at least three fatalities from one accident in a

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as

mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the

CapInt is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees; Investment is the ratio of capital expenditure
StateOwnership is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample
to rms where there is variation in Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the arrival or departure of a connected

same or higher rank;
to total assets;

executive. Robust standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

Table A1: Instatement of no safety, no promotion laws by province
Province

Eective Date

Passage Date

Deaths

Firm-year obs

Population in 2005

GDP per capita in 2005

(unit: 10,000)

(unit: 1 RMB)

Guangdong

01-Feb-2005

01-Feb-2005

10

122

9194

24435.02

Heilongjiang

01-Jan-2007

28-Nov-2006

13

12

3820

14434.06

Guizhou

01-Jun-2006

01-Jun-2006

68

18

3730

5051.96

Ningxia

01-Nov-2006

27-Sep-2006

2

12

596

10239

Shanxi

29-Jan-2008

29-Jan-2008

246

63

3355

12495

Yunnan

18-Sep-2008

18-Sep-2008

19

51

4450

7835

Guangxi

01-Jan-2009

27-Dec-2008

5

24

4660

8787.729

Jilin

20-Jul-2009

08-Jan-2009

0

18

2716

13348

Hainan

02-Jun-2010

02-Jun-2010

0

6

828

10871

Jiangsu

23-Nov-2010

23-Nov-2010

15

104

7475

24560

Hebei

01-Jan-2011

08-Nov-2010

43

49

6851

14782.26
11346.5

Henan

03-Jan-2011

03-Jan-2011

76

39

9380

Hunan

22-Mar-2011

22-Mar-2011

2

54

6326

10426

Inner Mongolia

04-Mar-2011

04-Mar-2011

18

48

2386

16330.82

Sichuan

11-Apr-2011

11-Apr-2011

49

88

8212

9060

Chongqing

04-Jul-2011

04-Jul-2011

27

20

2798

10982

Jiangxi

03-May-2012

03-May-2012

7

18

4311

9440

Liaoning

01-Feb-2012

30-Nov-2011

23

54

4221

18983.2

Shandong

06-Apr-2012

06-Apr-2012

78

107

9248

20096.46

Shaanxi

04-Jan-2012

04-Jan-2012

0

29

3720

9899

Hubei

No safety quota

No safety quota

57

56

5710

11431

Qinghai

No safety quota

No safety quota

16

40

543

10044.74

Shanghai

No safety quota

No safety quota

43

57

1778

51474

Tianjin

No safety quota

No safety quota

2

6

1043

35783.19

Tibet

No safety quota

No safety quota

0

6

277

9114

Xinjiang

No safety quota

No safety quota

19

43

2010

13108

Zhejiang

No safety quota

No safety quota

20

108

4898

27702.69

Anhui

No safety quota

No safety quota

31

74

6120

8675.145

Beijing

No safety quota

No safety quota

410

90

1538

45443.69

Fujian

No safety quota

No safety quota

26

35

3535

18645.84

Gansu

No safety quota

No safety quota

7

24

2594

7476.529

Notes: Since 2004, China has followed a safety production quota system, whereby the central government assigns a death quota
to each province, and the provincial government allocates the quota among municipalities. In response, provinces began adopting no
safety, no promotion policies that made promotion of safety regulators and other local government ocials contingent on meeting
the safety production target set for their region by the provincial government. Guodoing was the rst province to adopt this policy
in 2005, while others followed suit only in recent years. Deaths is the number of worker deaths among rms in our sample. Firm-year
obs is the number of observations that rms based in each province contribute to our sample. Population is province population in
2005. GDP P.C. is income per capita in 2005. Both population and income gures are obtained from CSMAR Regioual Economy
Database.

Appendix Table A2: Propensity Score Tests
Dependent Variable

Matching Method

Number of Treatment Firms

Number of Control Firms

ATT

Std. Err.

DeathRate

Nearest-Neighbor Matching

129

91

0.292

0.129

DeathRate

Kernel Matching

129

1165

0.326

0.131

DeathRate

Radius Matching

123

1165

0.338

0.129

Notes: Stata codes come from Sascha Becker and Andrea Ichino (2002). ATT stands for Average Treatment Eect on the Treated.
Bootstrap replication number is set at 100 in each case. A logit model is used in the propensity score test, where rms are matched
on these dimensions: log(Sales), ROA, log(Employment), Investment and SIC-1 digit industry. The Epanechinikov kernel is used in
the kernel matching where the bandwidth is set at 0.04, smaller than the default value of 0.06.

(2)

-237.989

-3.236∗
(1.897)
Year; Industry;

-0.613

(0.433)

Year; Industry;

1475

.307

Observations

R-Squared

-0.054

.4

.525

325
.157

1475

Full

325

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.075)

Province
Var(Ct'd)>0

0.011
(0.012)

Var(Ct'd)>0

Year; Firm

(166.483)

0.207

(0.004)

0.002

(0.035)

-0.014

(0.002)

0.007∗∗∗

(0.016)

(5)

.36

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.254)

-0.070

(0.029)

-0.046

(0.019)

0.014

(0.100)

-0.062

(0.024)

0.001

(0.020)

0.050∗∗

Deaths/Employment ); Connected

Investment

is the ratio of capital expenditure to total assets;

StateOwnership

DeathRate

.563

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Year; Firm

(57.131)

-211.836∗∗∗

(0.110)

0.147

(0.056)

0.105∗

(0.469)

0.809∗

(0.086)

0.050

(0.058)

0.120∗∗

is equal to

arrival or departure of a connected executive. Robust standard errors, clustered at the rm-level, are in parentheses.

environmental violations. Var(Ct'd)>0 denotes that we limit the sample to rms where there is

* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

is log value of the ratio of total assets to

NSNP is a province-year
Pollute indicates rm-year observations where the rm was ned for
variation in Connected over the sample period 2008-2013, due either to the

CapInt

is the ratio of state shares to total outstanding shares.

variable denoting whether a province had passed a no safety, no promotion law in a previous year;

total employees;

.461

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.868)

-1.365

(0.117)

-0.055

(0.065)

0.086

(0.307)

-0.164

(0.079)

-0.005

is rm-level worker fatalities per year;

.294

1475

Full

Province

Year; Industry;

(0.232)

-0.184

(0.047)

0.093∗
(0.054)

(9)

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city

Deaths

.482

325

Var(Ct'd)>0

(0.016)

-0.037∗∗

(0.114)

-0.050

(0.009)

0.056∗∗∗

(0.047)

0.070

(8)
Columns 7 - 9: I(Deaths> 0)

0.108∗∗

(7)

(Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government ocial of the same or higher rank;

1000*(

(19.176)

-45.332∗∗

(0.036)

-0.021

(0.021)

0.032

(0.151)

0.232

(0.020)

-0.021

(0.021)

0.062∗∗∗

(6)

Year; Firm

Columns 4 - 6: DeathRate
0.047∗∗∗

(4)

Notes: All variables are at the rm-year level. All specications include industry-specic time trends.

Full

Province

(0.266)

-0.084
(0.229)

0.151∗

(0.085)

0.150
(0.106)

0.072
(0.137)

(0.030)

(1.224)

1.713

(0.151)

0.009

(0.153)

0.361∗∗

(3)

-0.062∗∗

-0.157

(0.167)

(0.018)
(0.917)

0.084

0.102∗∗∗

-0.024

(0.138)

(0.105)

(0.194)

0.285∗∗

0.278∗∗∗

Columns 1 - 3: log(1 + death)

Sample

Fixed Eects

Constant

StateOwnership

CapInt

ROA

log(Sales)

Connected

(1)

Appendix Table A3: The eect of political connections on worker deaths, industry time trends included

Appendix Table A4: The dierential impacts of No Safety, No Promotion: Robustness
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Columns 1 - 5: DeathRate
Connected
NSNP
Connected * NSNP
log(Sales)
CapInt
StateOwnership
ROA
Investment

0.131∗∗∗

0.097∗∗∗

0.098∗∗∗

0.093∗∗∗

0.772∗∗

(0.044)

(0.028)

(0.032)

(0.027)

(0.316)

0.080

0.050

0.000

-0.033

0.017

(0.052)

(0.043)

(.)

(0.215)

(0.027)

-0.157∗∗∗

-0.132∗∗∗

-0.151∗∗∗

-0.114∗∗∗

-0.127∗∗∗

(0.049)

(0.036)

(0.048)

(0.033)

(0.034)

0.012

0.008

0.010

0.006

0.006

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.006)

0.045∗∗

0.004

0.009

-0.000

0.002

(0.017)

(0.011)

(0.014)

(0.012)

(0.011)

-0.082∗∗

-0.061∗∗

-0.055

-0.033

-0.034

(0.037)

(0.026)

(0.041)

(0.027)

(0.026)

-0.023

-0.199∗∗

-0.386∗

-0.082

-0.077

(0.128)

(0.099)

(0.203)

(0.111)

(0.110)

-0.133

-0.121

-0.191

-0.116

-0.113

(0.137)

(0.118)

(0.158)

(0.102)

(0.100)

log(Sales) * NSNP

0.002
(0.010)
-0.065∗∗

Connected * log(GDP per Capita)

(0.030)
-0.764∗∗∗

159.468∗∗∗

-0.141

0.025

-0.006

(0.246)

(10.050)

(0.323)

(0.289)

(0.246)

Year; Industry;

Year; Industry;

Province X Year;

Year; Indsutry;

Year; Industry;

Province

Province

Industry

Province

Province

Var(Ct'd)>0; Var(NSNP)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Var(Ct'd)>0

Observations

143

325

325

325

325

R-Squared

.38

.46

.668

.361

.379

Constant
Fixed Eects
Sample

Notes:

All

variables

are

at

the

rm-year

Deaths/Employment ); Connected

1000*(

level.

Deaths

is

rm-level

worker

fatalities

per

year;

DeathRate

is

equal

to

is a rm-year indicator variable, equal to one if a senior executive at the rm previously

served as mayor or vice-mayor in the city (Tingju Ji in Chinese) where the rm is located or as a provincial or central government
ocial of the same or higher rank;

CapInt

is log value of the ratio of total assets to total employees Robust standard errors, clustered

at the rm-level, are in parentheses.
* signicant at 10%; ** signicant at 5%; *** signicant at 1%.

