                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           SINGLE-ISSUE CAMPAIGNS AND MULTIDIMENSIONAL POLITICS

                                           Georgy Egorov

                                        Working Paper 21265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w21265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2015




I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Attila Ambrus, David Austen-Smith, V. Bhaskar, Colin Camerer,
Faruk Gul, Matthew Jackson, Patrick Le Bihan, César Martinelli, Joseph McMurray, Mattias Polborn,
Maria Socorro Puy, Larry Samuelson, Andrzej Skrzypacz, Konstantin Sonin, and participants of the
PECA 2012 conference, NES 20th Anniversary conference, the Econometric Society meeting in Los
Angeles in 2013, Wallis 2013 Conference in Rochester, Political Institutions Conference in Montreal,
ASSA 2015 conference in Boston, MPSA 2015 conference in Chicago, and seminars at the University
of British Columbia, University College London, Duke University, MIT, New York University, Northwestern
University, University of Pennsylvania, and Queen's University at Belfast for valuable comments and
to Ricardo Pique and Christopher Romeo for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2015 by Georgy Egorov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Single-Issue Campaigns and Multidimensional Politics
Georgy Egorov
NBER Working Paper No. 21265
June 2015
JEL No. D72,D82

                                             ABSTRACT

In most elections, voters care about several issues, but candidates may have to choose only a few to
build their campaign on. The information that voters will get about the politician depends on this
choice,and it is therefore a strategic one. In this paper, I study a model of elections where voters
care aboutthe candidates' competences (or positions) over two issues, e.g., economy and foreign
policy, but eachcandidate may only credibly signal his competence or announce his position on at
most one issue.Voters are assumed to get (weakly) better information if the candidates campaign
on the same issuerather than on different ones. I show that the first mover will, in equilibrium, set
the agenda for bothhimself and the opponent if campaigning on a different issue is uninformative,
but otherwise the othercandidate may actually be more likely to choose the other issue. The social
(voters') welfare is a non-monotonefunction of the informativeness of different-issue campaigns,
but in any case the voters are better offif candidates are free to pick an issue rather than if an issue
is set by exogenous events or by voters.If the first mover is able to reconsider his choice in case the
follower picked a different issue, thenpoliticians who are very competent on both issues will switch.
If voters have superior informationon a politician's credentials on one of the issues, this politician
is more likely to campaign on anotherissue. If voters care about one issue more than the other, the
politicians are more likely to campaignon the more important issue. If politicians are able to advertise
on both issues, at a cost, then the most competent and well-rounded will do so. This possibility makes
voters better informed and better off, but has an ambiguous effect on politicians' utility. The model
and the results may help understand endogenous selection of issues in political campaigns and the
dynamics of these decisions.


Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                                       “Campaigns are not like school debates or courtroom disputes. <...>
                                       Campaigns are quite di¤erent because there is no judge. Each dis-
                                       putant decides what is relevant, what ought to be responded to, and
                                       what themes to emphasize.”

                                                                                             William H. Riker1


1        Introduction

In most elections, voters care about multiple issues and, similarly, parties and individual candidates
write platforms stating their positions on many issues and spanning dozens of pages. Yet, on
campaign trail, in political advertisements, and in debates, it is typical for candidates to focus on
a narrow subset of issues and reiterate the same points over and over. This strategy makes a lot of
sense if voters pay relatively little attention to the election, for example, if a typical voter will only
see a few ads or attend only one rally. The candidates are free to choose their campaign themes,
but the quality and informativeness of the debate may depend on the issues they choose.2 In this
paper, I study informative campaigns with endogenous choice of issues by the candidates.
        I assume that voters’preferences are two-dimensional (and separable), and there are two politi-
cians who choose the issues they will run on. Two assumptions are key. First, I assume that a
politician can only credibly announce his position on (at most) one issue, but not on both. The
motivation is that persuading voters about his/her position or about his/her talents in a particular
area is hard, and there is only a limited amount of time. If voters’attention is limited, losing focus
is costly for the candidate. In reality, even though occasionally candidates talk about several issues,
the broad idea of the campaign is typically clear: for example, Bill Clinton ran on economy in 1992,
while George H.W. Bush on foreign policy; in 1972, George McGovern ran against the Vietnam
war. Sometimes candidates shift their focus during the campaign, as in 2008, where the …nancial
crisis made economy, as opposed to foreign policy and Iraq war in particular, the most salient
issue which subsequently drew attention of both Barack Obama and John McCain, or in 2012,
where the Romney campaign primarily attacked Obama’s economic record, and Obama eventually
moved from focusing on social issues to defending the economic record of his …rst term. Still, the
assumption that at each stage (e.g., in a given rally or debate) the candidate adopts a particular
line of attack or defense, which may or may not coincide with the one chosen by his opponent,
seems reasonable.3
    1
     William H. Riker (1993), “Rhetorical Interaction in the Rati…cation Campaigns”, in Agenda Formation, ed. by
William H. Riker. The University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, p.83.
   2
     In a book on candidates’ behavior in American politics, Simon (2002) emphasizes the informational value of
dialogue in political campaigns, but notes that dialogues are rarely observed.
   3
     Campaign advisers have long known the importance of focusing on very few issues and very few talking points.
Matalin and Carville (1994) describe the advice they gave Clinton in 1992 campaign: “Governor Clinton didn’t want


                                                       1
    The second key assumption I make is that voters get better information about a candidate’s
position or competence on a given issue if both candidates choose this issue. In other words, there
is a certain complementarity: a politician sounds more credible if he talks about, say, economy, if
his/her opponent talks about the same issue as well. Indeed, the politicians may criticize each other,
check whether the opponents’factual statements are correct, and thus indirectly add credibility to
each others’claims. On the other hand, if the other politician talks on another topic, then one’s
own credibility is undermined. The process of making statements and having the other party check
their veracity is not modeled in the paper explicitly, but the assumption that voters learn more if
politicians have a sensible debate on the same issue seems natural.4
    These two assumptions lead to a simple and tractable model of issue selection. I …rst study a
basic case where the …rst mover (dubbed “Incumbent”for clarity and brevity) commits to build his
campaign on one of the two issues. The other politician (“Challenger”) observes this, and decides
whether to reciprocate or to talk about the other issue instead. Voters are Bayesian and they update
on the politician’s decisions and the information that they observe, and vote, probabilistically, for
one of the two candidates. The model gives the following predictions. First, if campaigning on
di¤erent issues gives politicians very little credibility, there is a strong unraveling e¤ect, which
forces Challenger to respond to Incumbent and talk about the same issue. However, if a politician
is quite likely to be able to credibly announce his position or establish his competence even when
talking on a di¤erent issue, then divergence is possible, and in fact it is more likely that Challenger
will choose a di¤erent issue. Second, social welfare (as measured by the expected competence of
the elected politician) does not necessarily increase in the ability of politicians to make credible
announcements when the opponent campaigns on a di¤erent issue. The reason is that when this
ability is low, the politicians will choose the same issue in equilibrium, and this will help voters
rather than hurt them. Third, despite loss of information if candidates campaign on di¤erent issues,
to cede any issues to Perot. He said, “I’ve been talking about these things [the role of government] for two years,
why should I stop talking about them now because Perot is in?” Our response, and it was not easy to confront the
governor with this, was, “There has to be message triage. If you say three things, you don’t say anything. You’ve
got to decide what’s important.”
   4
     One way to microfound this assumption is by introducing a third-party fact-checker that is active only some of
the time; however, if both candidates campaign on the same issue, their opponents …ll in this role automatically. This
microfoundation would be realistic: for example, in 2008, Obama rebutted McCain’s attempt to separate himself
from the incumbent George W. Bush by constantly noting that McCain had voted with Bush 90 percent of the time.
An alternative way is to assume that political positions of politicians are correlated, and when one candidate states
his position, voters update on the other candidate’s position as well. For example, Barack Obama’s open support of
gay marriage might be interpreted as a belief shared by all politicians of his generation and thus have little impact
for voters’ decision to support or oppose him — unless his opponent takes a clear stance, too. In this case, again,
voters will get more precise signals about the di¤ erence in the candidate’s positions when they campaign on the
same issue. Another alternative is to assume that each candidate has a large set of favorable and unfavorable facts
and arguments, and if only one politician talks about an issue, the voters only see the facts that favor his position,
while if both campaign on an issue, the voters get the full picture (see, for example Dziuda, 2011, on selective use of
arguments by a biased expert). I do not model either mechanism explicitly in order to focus on the consequences of
endogenous issue selection.



                                                          2
…xing an issue for both candidates to campaign will generally hurt voters. Fourth, if the …rst-mover
(Incumbent) is allowed to reconsider his initial choice of issue (e.g., because the opponent picked
a di¤erent issue, or because the campaign is long enough), then switching focus is not a signal
of weakness; rather, it signals competence in both issues. Fifth, if voters are more informed on
Incumbent’s competence in one of the issues, say, economy, then he/she is more likely to campaign
on the other issue that voters are more uncertain about. In practice, this implies that Incumbent is
likely to run for reelection on an issue di¤erent than the one where he had a chance to demonstrate
his competence (or incompetence) during the …rst term; doing the opposite would be interpreted
as lack of competence in the other dimension. Finally, if politicians have some discretion whether
to be the …rst or second to start a campaign, they would be likely to postpone a campaign as this
would signal their relative indi¤erence between the two issues. To the best of my knowledge, this
paper is the …rst to model dynamics of issue selection in political campaigns.
   Strategic choice of campaign issues by politicians has been the topic of a number of descriptive
and formal studies. Riker (1996, see also 1993), in an extensive study of the U.S. Constitution
rati…cation, observes that politicians were likely to abandon an issue in which they could not
beat their opponents; this means that debating the same issue should be rarely observed. This
observation predicts “issue ownership” (as in Petrocik, 1996, see also Petrocik et al., 2003; Simon,
2002, contains a model that captures this idea). Aragonès, Castanheira, and Giani (2015) study
a model where parties compete by investing in generating high-quality alternatives to the status
quo. Their model can explain issue ownership whereby parties invest in issues where they have
comparative advantage on, however, if voters are su¢ ciently susceptible to priming, “issue stealing”
is also possible. Other papers that model political campaigns as advertisements that raise salience of
an issue include Amorós and Socorro Puy (2007), which predicts issue convergence if one party has
an absolute advantage on two issues but little comparative advantage, and Colomer and Llavador
(2011), where a challenger proposes an alternative policy on one issue and then the incumbent has
a choice whether to defend the status quo or campaign on a di¤erent issue; this paper predicts issue
convergence if voters like the status quo enough, but otherwise divergence is possible. In Dragu and
Fan (2013), politicians need to divide a …xed budget between several issues; they show that more
popular parties are likely to campaign and thereby increase salience of consensual issues, while
less popular parties would increase salience of divisive issues. In Ash, Morelli, and Van Weelden,
campaigning on a divisive issue (“posturing”) signals commitment to a policy position on that
issue, but can reduce social welfare because of neglect of important consensual issues.
   The paper most closely related to this one is Polborn and Yi (2006). As in this paper, voters
are Bayesian and have …xed preferences. Politicians also choose to disclose information on one of
two dimensions: positive information about oneself or negative information about the opponent.
The authors characterize a unique equilibrium, in which running a negative campaign reveals lack

                                                  3
of positive information about oneself. This paper generalizes Polborn and Yi (2006) for the case
of generic campaign issues where campaigning on di¤erent issues may undermine voters’ ability
to learn the truth.5 As it turns out, this generalization removes complete separability of the
two politicians’problem while preserving tractability; this makes possible obtaining nontrivial and
realistic predictions about choice of issues and campaign dynamics.
    The model in this paper assumes that the relevant characteristic of candidates is their com-
petence in each of the two issues, and all voters have the same preferences (more competence is
better), but similar forces would be in e¤ect if candidates were competing on more divisive issues;
in this case, the counterpart of competence would be proximity of candidate’s ideal point (in a
given dimension) to the median voter’s position. The model would predict that politicians would
have an incentive to campaign on an issue where their position is close to that of the median voter,
and if a politician reveals himself to be distant from the median voter on the issue he chose, voters
would suspect that he is even more radical on the other issue. The results would be valid under
the following assumptions: that the candidates cannot commit to any policy position other than
their ideal one in the course of the campaign, and also that they cannot lie about their position (or,
more precisely, that they cannot lie if the other party is campaigning on the same issue and is able
to expose the lie to voters).6 In the current model, voters’preferences are aligned and competence
is unambiguously good, so pandering must take the form of exaggerating one’s competence. The
results are driven by the assumption that doing so is easier if the opponent talks about a di¤erent
issue; the assumption that exaggeration is either in…nitely costly (or at least that competence is
fully revealed) or totally uncontrolled to the point that the candidate has zero credibility makes
the model tractable, but hardly drives the results.7
    5
      Mattes (2007) also considers the possibility of negative campaings and argues that the welfare e¤ect of banning
them would be ambiguous. Several papers study strategic revelation of hard evidence in debates. In Chen and
Olszewski (2014), discussants have a choice between strong and weak arguments, and show that committing to a
weak argument may sometimes be desirable. In an earlier paper, Austen-Smith (1990) models debates in legislatures
as cheap talk, and argues that they a¤ect outcomes only throught a¤ecting agenda-setting, but not voting.
    6
      There is a large literature on pandering to voters by partisan politicians as well as obscuring one’s positions,
both on campaign trail and in o¢ ce, starting with Shepsle (1972), who argues that in the presence of voters with
local risk aversion, equilibria with imperfect revelation of political positions are possible. Alesina and Cukierman
(1990) suggest that incumbents have an incentive to be ambiguous (see also Heidhues and Lagerlof, 2003). Glazer
and Lohmann assume that maintaining ‡exibility on an issue, as opposed to committing to a policy, leaves the issue
salient and may therefore bene…t the politician. Callander and Wilkie (2007) talk about lying on the campaign
trail, as does Bhattacharya (2011). Kartik and McAfee (2007) consider signaling motive in policy choices; Acemoglu,
Egorov, and Sonin (2013) suggest that signaling may make politicians choose policies further from the median voter
rather than closer to it, thus explaining the phenomenon of populism. Relatedly, Kartik and Van Weelden (2014)
show that during campaigns, a politician may reveal themselves to be noncongruent as a way to commit not to pander
in the future, or may decide not to do so and leave the possibility that he is congruent open; their campaigns feature
informative cheap talk about politicians’types that nevertheless leaves voters indi¤erent whom to elect.
    7
      The paper also suggests an answer to the question on whether a single political dimension is likely to arise
endogenously in a multidimensional world. If it were, this would be a further justi…cation for studying political
competition along a single dimension, in the same way as Duverger’s law (Riker, 1982; see also Lizzeri and Persico,
2005) justi…es studying political competition among two candidates by predicting emergence of exactly two candidates
in a majoritarian system. See also Duggan and Martinelli (2011) who study a model of media slant, where media are



                                                          4
    Apart from the applied results described above, the model has a theoretical appeal. On the
one hand, despite being parsimonious, with only two individuals making binary decisions each, the
model is rich enough to give rise to this broad set of implications which are potentially testable. On
the other hand, for a signaling model with four dimensions of uncertainty (two for each candidate),
the model is surprisingly tractable. It also suggests a novel limitation for the standard unraveling
argument (Grossman and Hart, 1980, Grossman, 1981, Milgrom, 1981), which would be applied
to this model of political campaigns in the following way: If one candidate chose to talk about,
say, the economy, then avoiding this issue would signal the lowest possible competence over this
dimension, and therefore all types, except perhaps for the very worst ones, would choose the same
dimension. As this paper shows, this argument may fail if there is an alternative statement that
a person can make; in this case, the bene…ts of making such statement may outweight the cost
of giving the wrong perception, and this might destroy the unraveling equilibrium. This can help
understand why and when candidates dodge questions in the course of debate, and why they often
get away with that. This paper suggests the following: if a candidate dodged the question and
proceeded with saying something unimportant, he will be punished severely by voters. At the same
time, if he made an important statement instead, the voters’opinion about the candidate’s ability
or position regarding the …rst question will become worse, but only mildly so, and overall seizing
the opportunity of making an important statement may bene…t the candidate. Interestingly, the
better the candidate performs on the other statement he chose to make, the less voters will punish
him on the original question, as they would believe that dodging the question will be justi…ed.8
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic model. Section
3 studies the equilibria of the basic model, with sequential or simultaneous moves, and obtains
implications for social welfare and for each election probabilities. In Section 4, a dynamic version is
introduced, where both politicians get a chance to respond to each other’s choice of issue. Section
5 discusses several extensions of the basic model. Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains the
main proofs; Appendix B contains auxiliary proofs and treats out-of-equilibrium cases.
assumed to collapse a multidimensional policy position to a one-dimensional one.
   8
     The insights of the paper make it potentially applicable to advertising campaigns. For example, if Apple released
a new iPhone and marketed it with the emphasis on the screen resolution, then Samsung faces a strategic choice.
It may advertise the screen resolution of its new Galaxy phone, which would allow potential users to make a direct
comparison, or it may advertise its battery life. The intuition from this paper suggests that either decision may be
optimal depending on the relative strength of the new device on these two dimensions, and also that the optimization
problems of the …rst mover (Apple in this example) and the second mover (Samsung) are di¤erent. Of course, in
the marketing application, another important dimension choice variable is price; however, one can expect the main
intuition to hold. The results may even be directly applicable if the price has to be …xed at some round number, such
as $599 or $699.




                                                          5
2        Model

Consider a two-dimensional policy space, one dimension being economy (E) and the other being
foreign policy (F ). There are two politicians, which I shall refer to as Incumbent, indexed by i,
and Challenger, indexed by c; this is mainly done for brevity, and otherwise the politicians will
be symmetric until this assumption is relaxed in Section 5.1. Each politician j 2 fi; cg has a
two-dimensional type aj = (ej ; fj ), which corresponds to his ability in economic and foreign policy
questions, respectively (in what follows, ajs will denote the projection of a on issue s 2 fE; F g).
Consider an electorate with perfectly aligned preferences: there is a continuum of voters, and the
utility of each voter if politician of type (e; f ) is elected is

                                                 U (e; f ) = e + f ;                                             (1)

I thus assume that voters weigh both issues equally (this assumption is relaxed in Section 5.2). The
type of each politician j is his private information and is not known to the other politician or voters;
the distribution of types, independent and uniform on                  j   = [0; 1]    [0; 1], is common knowledge.
At the time of voting, all voters have the same information on both Incumbent and Challenger:
they know the history of the candidates’moves as well as the moves of Nature. This information
(or, more precisely, the posterior distribution of (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ) conditional on the history) is denoted
by I for brevity. Voting is probabilistic (see, e.g., Persson and Tabellini, 2000): voter k votes for
Incumbent if and only if
                                   E (U (ei ; fi )     U (ec ; fc ) j I) > +      k,                             (2)

where       is a common taste shock and      k   is voter k’s individual shock. As is standard, I assume that
                                      1    1                                                  1    1                 1
    is distributed uniformly on      2A ; 2A     and    k   distributed uniformly on         2B ; 2B   , where A <   2
                A
and B <       2A+1 .
        During the campaign, each politician can only talk about one issue, economy or foreign policy.
If both talk about the same issue, they have a reasonable conversation or debate, during which the
voters perfectly learn their competences on this dimension (ei and ec or fi and fc ). However, if
they end up talking about di¤erent issues, it is much harder for them to do so credibly (e.g., the
other side is not actively engaged in responding or fact-checking). In this case, the chance that the
voters will actually …nd out the politician’s competence on this issue is , where                  = 0 corresponds
to zero credibility, and      = 1 is the other extreme where a politician’s ability to make credible
statements of his competence does not depend on the issue his opponent chose. In other words, a
lower       corresponds to a higher noise in communication between politician and voters if there is
nobody around to limit exaggerations or blu¢ ng.9 For simplicity, assume                     > 0; the extreme case
    = 0 is relatively uninteresting, but would require special treatment in many of the proofs.
    9
    One may assume that a politician may announce any competence, but is heavily penalized if he is found to have
exaggerated. When politicians talk about the same issue, there is only chance that some third party is willing to


                                                            6
      More precisely, the types of Incumbent and Challenger are given, respectively, by ai = (ei ; fi ) 2
  i   and ac = (ec ; fc ) 2                 c;   they are assumed to be independent and distributed uniformly on their
respective domains, which we for now assume (for simplicity) to be identical:                                                        i   =   c   = [0; 1]2 .
Incumbent moves …rst and chooses the issue to campaign on, di 2 fE; F g; Challenger observes this
and chooses his issue dc 2 fE; F g. In other words, the set of Incumbent’s strategies is Si :                                                          i   !
fE; F g and the set of Challenger’s strategies is Sc :                                c        fE; F g !     fE; F g.10         Nature then decides
whether each of the candidates is successful in announcing his competence, and voters get signals
 i;    c   2 [0; 1] [ f?g about the politicians’competence on the issues they cover in their campaigns.
Thus, if di = dc , then                 i   = ai jdi and       c   = ac jdc ; if, however, di 6= dc , then with probability                         voters
get the same signals                i   = ai jdi and       c   = ac jdc , and with probability 1                  ,     i   =    c   = ?; let us write
  = 1 in the …rst case and                         = 0 in the second.11 Each voter observes the history of moves (di ; dc )
and signals ( i ;          c ),   and updates accordingly, thus getting conditional distribution I, which allows
him to compute the di¤erence in competence between Incumbent and Challenger:

       D (di ; dc ;   i;    c)    = E (U (ei ; fi )        U (ec ; fc ) j di ; dc ;       i;   c)   = E (U (ei ; fi )       U (ec ; fc ) j I) .            (3)

After that, common shock                           and idiosyncratic shocks               k    are realized for each voter k, and voter k
votes for Incumbent if and only if (2) holds.
      Both politicians are expected utility maximizers. The utility of each is normalized to 0 if he is not
elected and to 1 if he is elected, and therefore each maximizes the probability of being elected. The
equilibrium concept is the following re…nement of the standard Perfect Bayesian equilibrium (PBE)
in pure strategies: voters’ beliefs are such that if politician j 2 fi; cg (Incumbent or Challenger)
chooses E, then his expected utility is nondecreasing in his competence on economy, ej , and if
he chooses F , then it is nondecreasing in fj .12 This simply means that neither politician would
be willing to understate his competence if given this option. In Appendix B, Lemma B2 proves
that monotone PBE must exhibit ‘monotonicity in strategies’: namely, if Incumbent’s strategy
satis…es di (ei ; fi ) = E for some (ei ; fi ), then di (e0i ; fi ) = E for e0i > ei and di (ei ; fi0 ) = E for
fi0 < fi , and similar requirements are satis…ed for Challenger’s decisions dc (ec ; fc ; di = E) and
check the politician’s announcements. However, when they talk about the same issue, there is always someone to do
this, and in this case the politicians have to be credible, so voters learn the true competences on this issue. On the
other hand, if nobody puts a check on politicians, then all announce that they are the most competent, and Bayesian
voters learn nothing. I do not model this explicitly to simplify the exposition.
  10
     It should be emphasized that the two candidates do not have private information about the types of their oppo-
nent, and, in particular, Challenger makes his decision knowing the issue that Incumbent chose, but not Incumbent’s
competence in that issue. To put it another way, I assume that politicians have as much information about their
opponents as the voters. This is a simpli…cation of reality, but a helpful one: from a technical standpoint, it prevents
politicians from strategically jamming the opponent’s signal if they know it to be very high.
  11
     Alternatively, one could assume that whether i = ? and c = ? is determined independently; this does not
a¤ect the analysis.
  12
     Polborn and Yi (2006) introduce a similar monotonicity re…nement in a game where politicians choose to run a
positive campaign or a negative campaign. The focus on pure strategies is without loss of generality in the model,
but is done to save on notation and to simplify the proofs.


                                                                             7
dc (ec ; fc ; di = F ), which simpli…es the analysis considerably. Finally, I do not distinguish between
equilibria that di¤er on a subset of types of measure zero; for example, if all incumbents with ei = fi
are indi¤erent between economy and foreign policy and can choose either way, this is treated as a
single equilibrium.


3    Analysis

In this section, I start by analyzing the game introduced in Section 2. I then consider an alternative
story where both candidates choose issues simultaneously. I conclude this Section by studying
social welfare and compare the results for di¤erent values of the credibility parameter                              and for
both timings.
    Let us …rst compute the probability of each politician to be elected for any possible posterior
distribution I = I (di ; dc ;   i;       c ).   For a given , citizen k votes for Incumbent with probability
                                                             1
                           Pr (      k   < D (I)        )=     + B (D (di ; dc ;   i;   c)     ),                        (4)
                                                             2
where D (I) is the di¤erence of voters’expectations of the politicians’competences given by (3);
this is is also the share of votes Incumbent gets. Incumbent wins if and only if (4) exceeds 12 , which
happens with probability
                                                                   1
                                                Pr ( < D (I)) =      + AD (I) .                                          (5)
                                                                   2
Since A is a constant, Incumbent and Challenger seek to maximize and minimize the expectation
of D (I), respectively. They thus solve, respectively,

                 maxdi E (D (I) j ei ; fi ) = E (E (U (ei ; fi )             U (ec ; fc ) j I) j ei ; fi ) and           (6)
              mindc E (D (I) j ec ; fc ; di ) = E (E (U (ec ; fc )            U (ec ; fc ) j I) j ec ; fc ; di ) ,       (7)

where the exterior expectations are politicians’at the time of their decision-making, and the interior
ones are voters’.
    Let us examine the politicians’ problems, (6) and (7), more closely. Notice …rst that at the
time either politician makes a decision, he knows that he can a¤ect both E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) and
E (U (ec ; fc ) j I), i.e., the voters’posteriors both about about himself and about his opponent (e.g.,
Challenger can make a very competent Incumbent appear worse if he chooses the opposite issue,
because the latter might then fail to inform the voters about his competence). However, if he takes
the expectation of voters’posterior regarding his opponent conditional only on the information he
knows at the time of decision-making, he will get the current expectation (both his and the voters’)
of the opponent’s competence, which he cannot change. This greatly simpli…es the problem by
e¤ectively separating the problems of Incumbent and Challenger:


                                                               8
Lemma 1 In equilibrium, Incumbent and Challenger maximize, respectively,

                                        max E (E (U (ei ; fi ) j di ;   i)    j ei ; fi ) ,                                   (8)
                                         di

and
                                 max E (E (U (ec ; fc ) j dc ;     c ; di )   j ec ; fc ; di ) .                              (9)
                                   dc

Proof. The complete proof of this and other results are in Appendix A.

                                                                                                        1                      1
       The properties of equilibrium critically depend on whether                             exceeds   2   or not: for   >    2,
                                                                                  1
unraveling does not happen in equilibrium, whereas for                            2   unraveling may happen. The next
Proposition characterizes the equilibrium for a relatively high .

                            1
Proposition 1 If        >   2,   there is a unique equilibrium. In this equilibrium, Incumbent chooses
the issue that he is more competent in: economy if ei > fi and foreign policy if fi > ei (and he is
indi¤ erent otherwise). If di = E, then Challenger hooses E if and only if
                                                               p
                             2   1                    4 5 +        (8 7 )
                       ec >        fc + C, where C =                       ,                                              (10)
                              2                             4 (2    )
and if di = F ; then a symmetric formula applies.

       Not surprisingly, Incumbent always chooses the issue that he is most competent in. The Chal-
lenger’s response depends on the chance that he will be heard if he chooses a di¤erent issue. If
    = 1, then his credibility is the same regardless of the issue, and then his strategy is indepen-
dent from the choice of Incumbent: he will always choose the issue his is most competent in. If
1
2   <    < 1, then he may not be as credible when choosing a di¤erent issue. For a very competent (in
both dimensions) Challenger, this gives a reason to choose the same issue as Incumbent, in order
to signal his competence in either issue and avoid being pooled with the less competent mass of
potential challengers. Conversely, if Challenger lacks competence in both dimensions, he is better
o¤ choosing an issue di¤erent from Incumbent’s choice, because he will have a better chance to be
viewed as an average rather than a very bad type. In equilibrium, if Incumbent chose Economy,
then the set of Challengers who are indi¤erent between the two alternatives is a straight line that is
steeper than the diagonal (see Figure 1). In other words, the choice of Challenger is more sensitive
to ec than to fc , which is not surprising since he has a higher chance to communicate ec than fc
credibly. For example, if        is close to 21 , then Challenger’s decision depends almost exclusively on
ec .
       We therefore have the following equilibrium strategies of the politicians. Incumbent always
chooses the issue he is best at. Challengers who are good at one issue and bad at the other also
choose their preferred issue, regardless of the choice of Incumbent. However, Challengers which


                                                             9
                                                                                         1
      Figure 1: Challenger’s equilibrium response if Incumbent picked Economy;           2   <     1.


have roughly equal abilities in both dimensions and who would otherwise be relatively indi¤erent
respond to Incumbent’s pick of issue in a non-trivial way: those who excel in both dimensions
pick the same issue, whereas very incompetent ones choose a di¤erent dimension. The equilibrium
strategies are summarized in Figure 2. Notice that for           close to 1, the lines separating the four
regions converge to the diagonal, and Challenger’s decision becomes largely independent from that
of Incumbent. Conversely, if      is close to 12 , the four regions have (almost) equal size, and half of
Challengers will condition their choice of issue on that of Incumbent (the upper-right corner will
always pick the same issue and the lower-left one will always pick the other issue).
   The formal proof of Proposition 1 is in Appendix A, but the idea is relatively straightforward.
The Incumbent’s problem is symmetric, and thus it is natural to expect symmetric equilibrium
strategies. Hence, let us focus on Challenger. For simplicity, suppose that both issues E and F
are picked with a positive probability, and suppose that Challenger with type (ec ; fc ) = (x; y) is
indi¤erent, whereas those with a higher ec or lower fc choose E and those with lower ec or higher
fc choose F (Appendix A …lls in the details on why such equilibrium exists and why there are
no other equilibria). Suppose that Incumbent chose E; then, if this Challenger with type (x; y)
chooses E, the voters will perceive him as having total competence x + f^c (x), where f^c (x) =
                                              y
E (fc j di = E; d (ec ; fc ) = E; ec = x) =   2.   If he chooses F , then with probability       voters will
                                   ec (y), where e^c (y) = E (ec j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F; fc = y) = x2 .
perceive his total competence as y+^
With complementary probability 1              , however, they will only know that he chose F , and will
                                                                             ~Fc . Then the indi¤erence
think of him as E (ec + fc j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F ), which we denote by a
condition for Challenger of this type may be written as
                                         y              x
                                    x+     =       y+     + (1      ~Fc ,
                                                                   )a                                   (11)
                                         2              2

                                                      10
                                                                                                        1
                     Figure 2: Equilibrium strategies of Incumbent and Challenger if                    2   <       < 1.

                                                                                                            2
and thus we get an upward-sloping boundary between E and F with a slope                                     2   1   (this is positive
              1
if       >    2 ).   Following the intuition above, conjecture that Challenger of type (1; 1) chooses E and
one of type (0; 0) chooses F ; then (11) intersects the boundary of                          c   at points ( ; 0) and ( ; 1) for
                                                                               2+    + + 2 +2
some          ; . If so, one can compute          ~Fc
                                                  a      directly:   ~Fc
                                                                     a     =        3( + )       . Substituting this into (11),
we have an equationpon (x; y) which should
                                     p     hold for ( ; 0) and ( ; 1). It is then straightforward to
             4 5 +    (8 7 )      3 +   (8 7 )
…nd that =        4(2 )      , =     4(2 )     , which establishes (10).
     Are the two politicians ex ante more likely to campaign on the same issues or on di¤erent issues?
Surprisingly, the answer is that campainging on di¤erent issues is more likely (and this is captured
on Figure 2): Challenger is more likely to choose economy if Incumbent chose foreign policy, and
vice versa. More precisely, we have the following result.

                                     1
Proposition 2 If                 >   2,   then the probability of having politicians talk about di¤ erent issues, is
                      1                                 1 4                            4
higher than           2:   it increases in     on       2; 5   and decreases on        5; 1   , thus reaching its maximum at
         4
     =   5.   Nevertheless, the probability that either politician successfully communicates his competence
on the chosen dimension is strictly increasing in .

     It is true that politicians who choose the opposite issue have lower expected quality, and thus
candidates have an incentive to pool with those who choose the same issue as Incumbent. However,
the result will be more intuitive if we recall that a campaign where one can reveal one’s competence
on one dimension but not the other punishes politicians who are equally competent (or incompetent)
on both issues disproportionately harshly, and these types are key to determine whether Challenger
                                                                                                                               1 1
is more likely to choose the same or a di¤erent issue. In particular, suppose that type                                        2; 2


                                                                     11
is indi¤erent, which would be true if both cases were equally likely. If Challenger of this type
reveals his competence in either issue, the voters’ posterior beliefs about his competence will be
1       1
2   +   4   = 34 . However, it is easy to see that the average competence of politicians choosing foreign
policy if Incumbent chose economy is larger than this (their competence on foreign policy exceeds
1
2,    and that on economy exceeds 14 ), and therefore, as long as                < 1, the type   1 1
                                                                                                 2; 2   would prefer
the opposite issue. Intuitively, politicians who excel in only one dimension are more likely to be
interested in revealing their competence in this dimension, whereas more symmetric politicians are
less interested in communicating credibly and thus are more likely to campaign on a di¤erent issue.
The di¤erence reaches its maximum at                  = 45 , where campaigns on di¤erent issues are almost eight
                                          p
                                           3   1
percentage points (precisely,             3    2    0:077) more likely than campaigns on the same issue.
      Why is there no unraveling, i.e., why voters fail to interpret the politician choosing a di¤erent
issue as a signal that he is the worst possible type? To see why, consider a candidate equilibrium
where if Incumbent chose E, then all Challengers also choose E, with the out-of-equilibrium beliefs
that if he chooses F , then his ec = 0, and also fc = 0, unless he credibly proves otherwise. Consider
Challenger of type (ec = 0; fc = 1). If he chooses E, he would reveal ec = 0 and nothing on foreign
                                                        1
policy, so the voters’posterior will be 0 +             2   = 12 . On the other hand, if he chooses F , then with
probability               he would reveal fc = 1, so voters’ posterior will be 1 + 0 = 1; with probability
1           he will reveal nothing and the voters will assume that he is the worst type. In expectation,
                                                                   1
the voters’ posterior will equal               . Thus, if      >   2,   then this type of Challenger would …nd it
optimal to deviate and show his competence on foreign policy to the voters, because, intuitively,
he has a su¢ ciently high chance of succeeding. Thus, for such values of                   there is no equilibrium
with unraveling; moreover, once Challengers with types close to (0; 1) start choosing foreign policy,
voters will Bayesian update and start thinking of Challengers choosing F quite highly, and then,
as Proposition 2 shows, more than half of types will end up choosing F in equilibrium.
                    1
      If            2,   equation (11) no longer de…nes an upward-sloping boundary, and thus the equilibrium
                                                                                                 1
must be di¤erent. The logic from the previous paragraph suggests that for                        2   there should be
equilibrium with unraveling, where each Challenger chooses the same issue as incumbent. As it
turns out, there are other equilibria as well.

                                    1
Proposition 3 If                    2,   then there are multiple equilibria. Incumbent’s strategy is the same
(di = E i¤ ei > fi ) in every symmetric equilibrium. The strategy of Challenger may fall into one
of the two classes:
      (i) Challenger always conforms to Incumbent’s choice of issue: dc = di ;
      (ii) For some cuto¤ t 2 [ ; 1                ]: If Incumbent chose di = E, then Challenger chooses E if
                                                                                                              1    t
ec > t and chooses F if ec < t (and for ec = t, Challenger chooses E if fc is below the cuto¤                  1 2
                1
for         <   2   and arbitrary cuto¤ otherwise); the strategies for di = F are similar.


                                                              12
       The equilibrium strategy of Challenger may, therefore, be either to reciprocate Incumbent or
to play a strategy which only depends on his competence in the issue chosen by Incumbent. If
Challenger is expected to play a symmeric strategy (mutatis mutandis) for the two possible choices
of Incumbent, the latter expects that he would be successful in communicating his competence with
the same probability regardless of the issue he chooses. In this case, Incumbent will use a symmetric
strategy. In principle, there exist equilibria where Challenger plays di¤erent strategies if Incumbent
chose E and F , and then Incumbent must play asymmetrically as well.13 To avoid these compli-
cations, from now on I focus on symmetric equilibria, i.e., equilibria where the equilibrium play
if Incumbent and Challenger have types (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ) = ( ; ; ; ) and (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ) = ( ; ; ; )
will be the opposite.14
       To illustrate the equilibria of type (i), suppose Incumbent chose E.                                 If for all (ec ; fc ),
                                                                                              1
Challenger chooses E, then E (fc j di = E; d (ec ; fc ) = E; ec = x) =                        2    for all x; at the same
                                                                                             ~Fc =
time, e^c (y) = E (ec j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F; fc = y) may be chosen arbitrarily, as may a
E (ec + fc j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F ). If Challenger of type (x; y) chooses E, voters believe his com-
petence is x + 21 , and if he chooses F , they believe it is              (y + e^c (y)) + (1             ~Fc . Clearly, the type
                                                                                                        )a
most likely to deviate is (x; y) = (0; 1); Challenger of this type does not deviate if and only if
                                            1
                                                     (1 + e^c (1)) + (1         ~Fc :
                                                                               )a
                                            2
                                                                                1
                ~Fc
Since e^c (y) ; a     0, such equilibrium is possible only if                   2.   At the same time, for such values
                                                                              ~Fc = 0.
of , it is indeed an equilibrium; it su¢ ces to set e^c (y) = 0 for all y and a
                                                                               1
       Equilibria of type (ii) are also possible only if                       2.       Indeed, …x t, and suppose that
Incumbent chose E and Challenger chooses E if ec > t and chooses F if ec < t. Then
f^c (x) = E (fc j di = E; d (ec ; fc ) = E; ec = x) equals 12 if x > t and may be chosen arbitrarily
                                                                                               t
if x < t. At the same time, E (ec j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F; fc = y) =                       2   for all y; we also have
                                                 t       1
E (ec + fc j di = E; dc (ec ; fc ) = F ) =       2   +   2.   To verify whether threshold t constitutes an equilib-
rium, it su¢ ces to concentrate on the types most likely to deviate. In equilibrium, type (t + "; 1)
must prefer E and type (t          "; 0) must prefer F ; this yields two conditions:
                                                1                  t                      t   1
                                   t+"+                         1+      + (1         )      +       ;
                                                2                  2                      2 2
                                                                   t                      t   1
                          t    " + f^c (t       ")              0+      + (1         )      +       :
                                                                   2                      2 2
  13
     For example, suppose = 14 , then there is an equilibrium where Incumbent chooses E, while Challenger chooses
E if Incumbent did so, and if he chose F , he picks E if and only if fc < 34 . In terms of Proposition 3, Challenger
plays type (i) equilibrium if di = E and type (ii) equilibrium if di = F . From Incumbent’s perspective, he is able
to signal his competence with probability 1 if he chooses E, and with probability 14 + 34 = 16 7
                                                                                                  < 12 if he chooses F ;
in this case it is an equilibrium for all incumbents to choose E (e¤ectively, he has the same incentives a Challenger
                     7
would have if = 16     ).
  14
     There are many alternative ways to de…ne the same restriction. E.g., it would be su¢ cient to assume that the
chances of Incumbents (Challengers) with type (x; y) and with type (y; x) to be elected are the same. It is remarkable
that for > 12 , such symmetry need not be assumed, but may rather be proved (see Proposition 1).


                                                                13
Since these conditions need to hold for " arbitrarily close to 0, the …rst condition implies t                        ,
whereas the second one (setting zt           "   = 0) implies t    1    . It is now straightforward to show that
Challengers with ec 6= t do not have incentives to deviate. Showing that Challengers with ec = t
have no deviations is also straightforward and is done in the Appendix.
       In Subsection 3.2, I compute voters’ welfare under di¤erent equilibria and parameter values,
                                   1
and it turns out that if           2,   the unraveling equilibrium, i.e., the equilibrium of type (i) dominates
every equilibrium of type (ii) in terms of welfare.15 The reason for this is that the two politicians
always campaign on the same issue, and a low                      does not result in loss of information due to
their campaigns lacking credibility. The equilibrium of type (i) is unique for any , and thus this
                                                                                                            1
equilibrium re…nement extends the uniqueness result from Proposition 1 to the case                          2.   This
is the equilibrium we focus from now on.

3.1       Simultaneous game

Consider an alternative game, where the two politicians must choose the issue simultaneously
(or, equivalently, Challenger starts his campaign before he gets a chance to observe the choice of
Incumbent). Since there is no way to know the exact sequence of moves, this makes it a priori an
equally interesting case to consider. Thus, we consider exactly the same game as the one introduced
in Section 2, except that Challenger, when deciding on dc , does not observe the choice of Incumbent,
di .
       Given the symmetry of the game, it is not surprising that there is a symmetric equilibrium,
where each politician j picks dj (ej ; fj ) = E if ej > fj and dj (ej ; fj ) = F if ej < fj . Indeed,
for either politician, the probability of ending up campaigning on the same issue as the opponent
               1
is exactly     2   and this does not depend on the issue; this means that each politician is able to
                                                   1
send a credible signal with probability            2   + 2 , regardless of the issue he chooses. Consequently, if
one politician follows this symmetric strategy, then the other one also must do so in equilibrium.
Hence, symmetric strategies by the politicians are “best responses” to one another, and thus such
an equilibrium exists for all .

Proposition 4 For any                 there exists a symmetric equilibrium where each politician j 2 fi; cg
chooses dj (ej ; fj ) = E if ej > fj and dj (ej ; fj ) = F if ej < fj . Moreover, if              > 12 , this is the
unique equilibrium.

       This proposition does not preclude existence of equilibria which are not symmetric in the two
                                 1
issues: for example if           2,   then there is an equilibrium where di (ei ; fi ) = dc (ec ; fc ) = E for both
politicians and all types. Indeed, Proposition 3 implies that that if Incumbent plays E, it is an
equilibrium for all Challengers to pick E regardless of their type; if the moves are simultaneous,
  15
       The asymmetric equilibria, such as the one in Footnote 13, are also dominated by the unraveling equilibrium.


                                                             14
then the opposite is also true: if all Challengers are expected to pick E, it is an equilibrium for all
Incumbents to do so as well.16 However, for                                   > 21 , only symmetric equilibria exist.

3.2     Social welfare

In this subsection, we study the consequences of the issue selection game on social welfare and
provide comparative statics results. For the society, the relevant variable is the expected competence
of the elected politician. The following lemma shows that in the probabilistic voting model as
above, there is a simple formula for this expected competence. This formula applies to sequential
and simultaneous games as well as some other situations, and we use it throughout.

Lemma 2 Let I (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ; ) be the voters’ posterior beliefs about the distribution of the skills
of the two politicians, (ei ; fi ) ; (ec ; fc ) 2                i            c,   that voters will get if these politicians follow the
equilibrium play and                 denotes Nature’s choice to reveal competences if di 6= dc .17 The expected
quality of the elected politician equals
               0                                                                                                                1
                    X                                                     Z                                      2
                                 if = 1                                                 [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I ( ))]
         1 + A@                                                                                                        d       2A ,   (12)
                             1     if = 0                                              + [E (U (ec ; fc ) j I ( ))]2
                       2f0;1g                                                 c
                                                                      i


where      is the uniform measure on                        i        c.


Proof. Fix either of the realizations of . Following equilibrium play of politicians, the expected
competence of the elected politician equals (dropping the argument at I for brevity):
                             Z                   1
                                                 2   + AE (U (ei ; fi ) U (ec ; fc ) j I) E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)
                                                     1                                                                     d
                                             +       2  AE (U (ei ; fi ) U (ec ; fc ) j I) E (U (ec ; fc ) j I)
                         i       c
                                         Z
                  = 1+A                          [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)            E (U (ec ; fc ) j I)]2 d .
                                     i       c


The result (12) would follow immediately (by opening the brackets and taking the weighted sum
over the realizations of ) if the expected utilities inside the last integral were independent. They
are not; for example, a high realization of E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) means that most likely the politicians are
talking about the same issue, and, therefore, Challenger is likely to have high average competence.
However, conditional on the choices of issues by both politicians, these variables are independent.
In addition, the choice of issue by one politician does not depend on the competence of the other
  16
     For 2 15 ; 12 , there are only three equilibria, up to measure zero: the symmetric one; all types of Incumbent
                                                                   1
and Challenger choose E, and all choose F . For                    5
                                                                     , more exotic equilibria are possible as well. For example, if
     1                                                                                                      1
     5
       , there is  an   equilibrium   where   each   politician  j campaigns   on E whenever ej             4
                                                                                                              and on F otherwise.
  17
     This is a slight abuse of notation, as we previously used I to denote the posterior distribution conditional on
politicians’choices and information obtained by voters, I (di ; dc ; i ; c ). However, since in a pure strategy equilibrium,
the tuple (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ; ) predicts (di ; dc ; i ; c ) uniquely, then I (ei ; fi ; ec ; fc ; ) is well-de…ned.



                                                                                  15
one, except through the choice of issue, even if the case of sequential moves. This implies that
social welfare may be computed using (12). Appendix A …lls in the details.
    Lemma 2 simpli…es the computations considerably. In particular, it shows that the expected
competence of the elected politician only depends on the sum of variances of posterior beliefs that
politicians’equilibrium play generates. This allows to do the computations for Incumbent and Chal-
lenger separately, only taking into account the equilibrium strategies. Interestingly, formula (12)
shows that voters’welfare increases in the variance of their posterior beliefs about each politician’s
total competence. This is intuitive; it means that a more informative campaign, which generates
more heterogenous beliefs, results in higher welfare than a less informative one, where posteriors
might be not that di¤erent from the priors.
    In evaluating the welfare consequences, the following benchmarks are useful. First, if the winner
were picked at random, the average competence would be the unconditional expectation, i.e., 1. At
the opposite extreme is the full information case: if both candidates revealed their competences to
voters on both dimensions, then the expected quality of the winner would be
                                  Z 1Z 1
                                                                   1
                        1+A 2            (x + y)2 dxdy 2 = 1 + A.                                           (13)
                                   0   0                           3
          1
Thus,     3A   is the extra bene…t of having elections as opposed to picking the candidate randomly;
this is the maximum one can achieve with probabilistic voting where a less competent candidate
has a chance due to a shock to preferences . As the variance of the common shock decreases (A
becomes higher), the expected competence of the elected politician would increase.
    In the case of sequential voting, we have the following result.

Proposition 5 The expected competence of the elected politician is increasing in A. It is non-
                                                       5           1
monotone in ; more precisely, it equals 1 +            24 A   if   2   (if type (i) equilibrium from Proposition
3, which yields the highest social welfare among all equilibria, is played), and for          > 21 , it monoton-
                               3            5
ically increases from 1 +      16 A   <1+   24 A   to 1 + 14 A > 1 +   5
                                                                       24 A.

    The nonmonotonicity result is not surprising if one takes into account that for               < 12 , there is
an equilibrium where the the two politicians are guaranteed to discuss the same issue, whereas for
                        1
  slightly exceeding    2   they will talk about di¤erent issues half of the time (even slightly more than
that, as follows from Proposition 2), and thus there is a chance of about one-fourth that they will
                                                                                                            5
fail to announce their respective competences. In fact, the expected competence exceeds 1 +                 24 A
only if    > 0:7. In all cases, this falls short of the maximal possible gain of 31 A, although if             is
close to 1, then 75% of this gain is realized, and even in the worst-case scenario this chance exceeds
      9
56% ( 16 ).
    Consider now the welfare implications of a game where strategies are chosen simultaneously.
Proposition 4 established that a symmetric equilibrium exists for all , and arguably it is the most

                                                          16
plausible one (and unique if           > 21 ). We get the following comparison in this case.

Proposition 6 In the symmetric equilibrium of the game with simultaneous moves, the expected
quality of the elected politician equals 1 + 1+8 A; this is lower than the expected quality in the game
                                 1                                            1
of sequential moves if           2,   but it is higher in the case            2   <       < 1.

          The intuition for this result is simple: all things equal, voters make a more informed choice,
and therefore get a higher utility, if politicians reveal more information about their competences.
This is more likely to happen (again, all things equal) if                        is high, and given that strategies are the
same, the expected quality is increasing in . The probability of campaigning on the same issue in
the game with simultaneous moves is 12 ; on the other hand, Proposition 2 states that in the game
                                                  1                1
with sequential moves, it is less than            2   for    2     2; 1    . This explains higher voter welfare for such
                                        1
     in simultaneous game. If           2,   then sequential moves allow politicians to converge on the same
issue and have an informative discussion at least on that issue. With simultaneous moves, they
lack the ability to converge, and thus the welfare of voters is lower in this case.
          If there is a concern that social welfare is lower if politicians fail to coordinate on the same
issue, then one alternative would be to choose an issue (say, at random), and then require that
both politicians campaign on that issue. Formula (12) applies to this case as well, and the expected
quality of the winner equals
                                             Z                                        !
                                                 1Z 1                 2
                                                               1                             1
                               1+A 2                        x+            dxdy     2      =1+ A                        (14)
                                             0        0        2                             6

(indeed, if a politician announces competence x on one dimension, the voters expect his total
competence to be x + 21 ). Comparing this result to Proposition 5 reveals that for all , the expected
competence in the case where politicians are free to choose their issue is higher than if they are
not. This seems surprising, because if the issue is …xed, there is no loss due to possible failure to
announce their competences credibly in any dimension. However, there is a di¤erent force at play:
with endogenous choice of issues, the announcement of a politician of his competence over one issue
carries quite a bit of information about his competence on the other issue, which is not the case if
they were forced to talk on a given issue (this is not true for Challenger, who is the second-mover,
if        < 21 , but for Incumbent this is true for any ). It turns out that the latter e¤ect dominates.18

     18
     In Subsection 5.2, we consider the case where issues have di¤erent weights. It turns out that allowing politicians
to choose issues freely is still optimal: even though the voters would prefer that the politicians compete on the
more important issue, they would do that in equilibrium anyway. We show this result formally for = 1; in the
sequential game, numerical simulations con…rm this hypothesis for other values of as well. However, for more general
distributions of types this is not necessarily true: for example, if the competence of Challenger over one dimension
is very uncertain and < 1, the society would strongly prefer Incumbent to choose that issue, but Incumbent would
ordinarily do that with probability 1=2 only.



                                                                 17
Proposition 7 If politicians were forced to campaign on an exogenously chosen dimension, then
for all values of , social welfare would be strictly lower than in the game of sequential moves. It
would be lower than in the game with simultaneous moves as well (if the symmetric equilibrium
                                    1                        1
is played), provided that       >   3;   if, however,    <   3,   then forcing politicians to campaign on an
exogenously given dimension results in a higher social welfare than a simultaneous-move game.

       Figure 3 illustrates the expected qualities of elected politicians under di¤erent scenarios. Propo-
sition 4 suggests that campaigning on di¤erent issues may decrease social welfare, if this prevents
voters from getting precise information about candidates’policies.19 This will not happen if politi-
cians choose issues in a well-established sequence, or at least if the one who moves second has a
chance to observe the choice of the …rst politician and to respond. This leads to the following
nontrivial observation. When candidates choose an agenda for an entire campaign, the decisions
are unlikely to be made at once, and hence constraining the candidates with an exogenously given
agenda is not a good idea. However, when it comes to some particular event, such as a debate,
where candidates are likely to prepare their strategy without observing the opponent’s plan, …xing
                                                                                              1
a particular issue or set of related issues may make sense. Notice that for               2   2; 1   , it is better for
voters if politicians made their campaign decisions independently; indeed, with sequential decisions,
it is more likely that they will campaign on di¤erent issues, while with independent decisions this
probability is …xed at 12 .

3.3       Probability of being elected

Another natural question is whether the timing of the game gives an advantage to Incumbent or
Challenger. At …rst glance, the timing allows Incumbent to pick the issue that he prefers, and thus
can guarantee that he will talk about the issue that he excels at. However, the voters are aware of
this incentive and behavior, and discount Incumbent’s competence on the other issue accordingly.
                                                                                     1
Challenger, on the other hand, does not have such ‡exibility, and if             <   2   he is forced to choose the
same issue as the challenger, which might not be his strong side. However, voters understand this,
and do not infer Challenger’s competence in the other dimension from his announcement, and thus
if Challenger turns out to be incompetent in the issue that Incumbent picked, he is not penalized
further. It turns out that in the probabilistic voting model, these e¤ects cancel each other out; the
expected probability of winning only depends on the expected competence, which is equal in our
case for the two politicians. This implies, for example, that before knowing his type, a politician is
indi¤erent between being a …rst-mover and a second-mover in the game.

Proposition 8 The probability of Incumbent winning and Challenger winning are equal.
  19
     Caselli and Morelli (2004) and Mattozzi and Merlo (2007) consider very di¤erent models that lead to selection
of incompetent politicians. In this paper, incompetent politicians may get elected because voters do not necessarily
make a strong inference about a politician’s incompetence in the issue he is not campaigning on.


                                                        18
                     Figure 3: Social welfare under di¤erent scenarios and values of .


         At the same time, a given type of politician need not be indi¤erent. For example, if         < 1, then
all politicians who are equally competent on both dimensions, with ej = fj < 1, would prefer to
be second-movers rather than …rst-movers. In Subsection 5.4, Incumbent will be given an option
to postpone his announcement and allow Challenger to move …rst. It turns out that while not all
types of Incumbent will use this option, those who do are likely to be competent, and this will
result in observable …rst-mover advantage.20


4         Dynamics of campaign

In this Section, I extend the baseline model by allowing the Incumbent (who moves …rst) to recon-
sider his initial choice if the Challenger made a di¤erent suggestion. The idea here is to capture
the process of …nding a common theme for the campaign or debates and to make sure that both
players have an opportunity to react to each other’s suggestion. Speci…cally, consider the following
timing. As before, Incumbent moves …rst and picks a (tentative) issue for his campaign, d~i . Chal-
lenger observes this choice and responds with his own (…nal) decision dc . If the two issues coincide,
d~i = dc , then the parties proceed to campaigning on this issue, and so Incumbent’s …nal decision
    20
    In Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2008), incumbency advantage arises in a probabilistic voting model due
to his ex-ante higher competence (which in turn is present because he had won elections before). Since this paper
assumes, for simplicity, that the candidates are ex-ante symmetric, this e¤ect is not present.




                                                       19
       Figure 4: Timing of proposal-making by Incumbent and Challenger in the dynamic game.


is di = d~i . If, however, d~i =
                               6 dc , then with some probability p, Incumbent has an opportunity to
                                                         n        o
revise his initial decision, and is free to pick any di 2 d~i ; dc = fE; F g, and with a complementary
probability 1       p he sticks to di = d~i . The probability p may correspond to the probability the
Incumbent’s campaign team is ‡exible enough or has enough time to switch the focus.21 This
timing (as well as a possible conversation) is shown on Figure 4.22 I assume that voters observe
the entire sequence of moves d~i ; dc ; di ; in particular, they know whether Incumbent was the …rst
to propose the issue of his campaign di , or he started with a di¤erent issue and then switched. In
what follows, restrict attention to symmetric equilibria, which implies, in particular, that the …rst
proposal by Incumbent is d~i = E if ei > fi and d~i = F otherwise. To ensure existence of such
                                                                         p
equilibria, assume that p is not too close to 1 (precisely, we need p 4 3 6 0:93);23 to avoid
issues with multiplicity, assume           > 12 .
   Let us focus on Incumbent’s second choice on whether to switch the campaign issue; this
question is relevant only if dc 6= d~i . For concreteness, suppose d~i = E and dc = F . In this case,
  21
      Alternatively, one can think of p as the share of voters who get Incumbent’s message after he switches, and 1 p
is then the share of voters who pay attention at the beginning of the campaign only. Probabilistic voting ensures
that these two interpretations are equivalent.
   22
      If Incumbent were allowed to revise his initial pick even if Challenger chose the same issue, then the …rst-stage
announcement by Incumbent would have to be “babbling”. The reason is that in a candidate equilibrium where …rst
announcement is informative, switching to another issue should be interpreted as competence in both issues. Thus,
it would make sense to announce the weaker issue for at least some types, and this cannot be true in equilibrium.
I am indebted to V. Bhaskar for the suggestion to explore the possibility that Incumbent must stick to his original
choice if Challenger approves the choice of issue.
   23
      The reason why existence may fail if p is too close to 1 is the following. Consider Incumbent who is very competent
in both issues, but slightly better at E (e.g., type (1; 1 ")), and suppose he chooses d~i = E at …rst. From Proposition
2, we know that if > 12 , Challenger will pick dc = F with probability higher than 12 ; it turns out that this remains
true in this version of the game as well (in fact, the possibility of Incumbent switching increases Challenger’s chance of
conveying his competence, and increases the ‘e¤ective .’ But this would imply that very competent Incumbents who,
as we will see, are always willing to switch to signal their competence on both issues, expect to end up talking about F
with a higher probability than about E. But if he switched to F , he would, similarly, end up campaigning on E with
a higher probability, which
                          p he prefers. This leads to nonexistence of a monotone equilibrium in pure strategies. On
the other hand, if p 4 3 6, then the probability of talking about E upon choosing d~i = E equals (1 p) + pz              1
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                 1  1
                                                                                        p
                                                                                          3   1    3   1
                                                                                                         p
which ensures that monotone strategies form an equilibrium (here, z = 2             2    3    2
                                                                                                =  4   6
                                                                                                           3    0:46 is the
smallest probability that Challenger will choose the same issue as Incumbent).



                                                            20
Incumbent may either agree to discuss foreign policy or insist on talking about economy. Suppose
…rst that Incumbent is very competent in economy but not in foreign policy, for example, his type
is (1; 0). For such Incumbent, switching to foreign policy is unlikely to do him any good: indeed,
he would have a (weakly) higher chance to signal his competence credibly, but in the foreign policy
dimension, this is precisely what he prefers to avoid. In contrast, suppose that Incumbent is very
competent on both dimensions, say, type (1; 1                  "). In this case, it makes perfect sense to comply
with Challenger’s proposal and switch to foreign policy. By doing so, not only he would be able
to signal that he is highly competent in foreign policy; in addition, voters will take into account
that foreign policy is his weaker issue, and therefore he must be even more competent in economy
(which he truly is). For such Incumbent, therefore, switching allows to signal competence in both
dimensions, which is otherwise di¢ cult to achieve. If he insisted in talking about economy, he
would, with some probability, reveal his highest competence in this issue, but voters would view
his foreign policy credentials to be average at best (and, in fact, worse than average, because they
expect those who excel in foreign policy to switch). Therefore, one can expect that in equilibrium
Incumbent will insist on campaigning on the issue he originally chose if his competence in the other
issue is low, but will be open to switching if he is competent on the other issue as well.
    What is the choice of Challenger who received a proposal to talk about, say, economy, and
anticipates that if he proposes foreign policy instead, then Incumbent will follow the strategy above?
Such Challenger knows that if he agrees on E, then both will campaign on economy, and his signal
will be credible with probability 1. At the same time, if he chooses F instead, he will talk about F ,
but will only be able to send a credible signal with probability                   0   = p + ((1         p) + p (1       ))   =
  + p (1         ), where          is the probability of Incumbent switching to F if given such chance. Since
                           1
we assumed         >       2,   we are guaranteed to have       0       > 21 , and therefore the characterization of
Challenger’s strategies from Proposition 1 applies (with                  replaced by        0 ).   It remains to verify that
Incumbent’s strategy to start with the issue he is most competent in is indeed an equilibrium; one
can verify that this is true if p is not too close to 1, as we assumed. We therefore have the following
result, which is illustrated in Figure 5.
                                  p                                                    1
Proposition 9 Suppose that p < 2 2 3                       3        0:93. If   >       2,   there is a unique symmetric
equilibrium. In this equilibrium, Incumbent initially chooses the issue that he is more competent at,
and if Challenger picks a di¤ erent issue, then a positive share of incumbents switch. The boundary
between those willing to switch and those that are not is linear; for                       = 1, Incumbent is ‡exible if
                   1                                                                                             1
min (ei ; fi ) >   2   max (ei ; fi ), i.e., if Incumbent is relatively symmetric; at                 close to   2,   Incumbent
                                        p
                                    4       10
switches if min (ei ; fi ) >            3        0:28. Challenger follows the strategy described in Proposition 1
for some     0         .




                                                               21
    Figure 5: Equilibrium strategies by Incumbent and Challenger in the dynamic game if                      > 12 .


5        Extensions

In this section, I consider several extensions of the baseline model of Section 2.

5.1      Asymmetric uncertainty

The baseline model assumed that the ex-ante distributions of Incumbent and Challenger’s abilities
are the same. This was obviously a simpli…cation; …rst, the voters are likely to be better informed
about Incumbent’s competence, and also Incumbent is more likely to be more competent on the
grounds that he was selected into o¢ ce earlier. To study this possibility, suppose that, from
voters’perpective, Incumbent’s two-dimensional type is taken not from a uniform distribution on
[0; 1]     [0; 1], but instead from a uniform distribution on           0   = [e1 ; e2 ]   [f1 ; f2 ]; in particular,
                                                                        i
e1 = e2 would imply that the voters are perfectly informed about Incumbent’s ability on economy,
and f1 = f2 would imply the same on foreign policy. The new distribution of Incumbent’s type is
shown in Figure 6.
      The Challenger’s strategies, for either choice made by Incumbent, are the same as speci…ed in
                           1                                1
Proposition 1 for      >   2   and Proposition 3 for        2.   The strategy of Incumbent, as it turns out,
critically depends on the shape of the set        0.   In particular, if it is a square, albeit smaller than
                                                  i

  i   = [0; 1]   [0; 1], which means that the residual uncertainty of Incumbent’s competence in the
two issues is the same, then Incumbent will have equal probability of campaigning on both issues.
Interestingly, this does not depend on whether he is known to be competent or incompetent in either
dimension; all that matters is residual uncertainty. If, however, uncertainty about Incumbent’s
competence in one of the dimensions is less, then Incumbent is more likely to campaign on the


                                                       22
                        Figure 6: Information structure and equilibrium strategies.


other dimension (and in particular, the most competent and the least competent of Incumbent’s
types will choose the other dimension, provided that                  is not equal to 1. More formally, we have
the following result.

Proposition 10 Suppose that Incumbent’s type is distributed on                        0   = [e1 ; e2 ]   [f1 ; f2 ]. Then:
                                                                                      i
       (i) If e2    e1 = f2     f1 , then Incumbent is equally likely to choose either dimension, and will
choose E if ei        e1 > fi     f1 and will choose F if ei         e1 < fi   f1 .
       (ii) If e2   e1 < f2      f1 , then in any equilibrium, Incumbent is more likely to choose F than
E. More precisely, let           be Incumbent’s probability of being credible in communication.24 Then
        e2 e1
for     f2 f 1 < 1    , there is a unique equilibrium, in which all types of Incumbent will choose F ; if
e2     e1      1
f2     f1 2 2 1 ; 1
                  , there is a unique equilibrium where Incumbent chooses both E and F with positive
                                  h           i
probabilities; and for fe22 ef11 2 1    ; 21 1 , there are two equilibria. A similar characterization
applies if e2       e1 > f2     f1 .
                                                                                                           e2 e1
       (iii) The probability that Incumbent chooses E increases, as a set,25 as the ratio                  f2 f 1   increases.

       In other words, Incumbent is always more likely to campaign on the issue where voters are
more uncertain about his competence. At the extreme, if voters perfectly know his competence on
either of the dimensions, Incumbent must campaign on a di¤erent issue. Interestingly, this perfect
knowledge is not required for this result. If               < 1, so there is a chance that voters will fail to get
                                                                                  e 2 e1
the precise signal, then Incumbent will never choose economy if                   f2 f1       is small enough, and will
                                       f2 f1
never choose foreign policy if         e 2 e1   is small enough. Intuitively, if e2        e1 is small and f2       f1 is not,
then even Incumbent with ei = e2 will not want to waste his campaign on the issue of economy,
  24
    This probability is the same for both issues, and equals = + (1                 ), where     is the probability that
Challenger chooses the same issue as Incumbent.
 25
    Since multiple equilibria are possible, comparative statics with respect to sets is the relevant object.


                                                             23
where the campaign cannot make a big di¤erence, and will talk about foreign policy instead. Thus,
one can expect that an Incumbent who had a chance to demonstrate his true competence (or true
incompetence) in one of the issues during his term or career prior to the campaign will build his
campaign on a di¤erent issue.

5.2   Asymmetric issues

We have assumed so far that voters care about both issues equally. A natural question is what will
happen, both to campaign strategies and social welfare, if voters gave di¤erent weights to the two
issues. Suppose that voters have the following utility function:

                           U (e; f ) = we e + wf f = (1 +    ) e + (1    ) f;                      (15)

then the baseline case (1) would correspond to      = 0.
   Assume, as before, that both politicians are taken from a uniform distribution on [0; 1]2 . In
what follows, we restrict attention to the case where       = 1; this case allows for simple closed-form
solutions and has the additional advantage that the politicians’strategies do not depend on whether
the game is sequential or simultaneous, as there is no strategic interaction. We should now expect
politicians to have a preference for revealing their competence along the dimension that voters care
more about. This is similar to Subsection 5.1, where competent politicians had an incentive to
inform voters on the issue where there is more uncertainty; here, by informing voters about his
competence on an issue they do not care about, a politician barely changes their propensity to vote
for him. We should therefore expect that politicians will be more likely to campaign on the more
important issue, and this is indeed what happens in equilibrium.
   We start by characterizing the equilibrium strategies.

Proposition 11 Suppose that voters’ utilities are given by (15). Then in both simultaneous and
sequential games, a politician with type (e; f ) will choose E if and only if:
                                              we    1+
                                         f<      e=           e.
                                              wf    1

Moreover, the voters’ expected utility is strictly greater in this case than if the politicians had to
compete on one issue chosen by voters (and also is increasing in j j).

   The equilibria are depicted in Figure 7. Proposition 11 implies that politicians are indeed
more likely to compete on the more important issue. This e¤ect is su¢ ciently strong to have
welfare consequences. A priori, one could think that it would be better to require the politicians to
campaign on the more important issue: even though there is no direct information loss since        = 1,
the possibility that a politician reveals his competence on the less important issue is wasteful for


                                                  24
          Figure 7: Equilibrium strategies if E and F have di¤erent weights, and      = 1.


voters. However, the more important one issue is, the less frequently politicians will campaign on
the other issue, and this e¤ect is strong enough so that the voters would be worse o¤ if they …xed
campaigns on the more important issue (and they would be even more worse o¤ if they …xed the
less important one).

5.3   Campaigning on more than one issue

So far, the politicians faced a hard constraint that they must choose one issue to campaign on.
One feature of political campaigns, however, is that politicians can spend money to buy voters’
attention. This possibility may be easily incorporated into this framework.
   Suppose that each of the politicians can freely campaign on one issue, however, by paying a
certain amount of money M , he can campaign on both issues. Thus, Incumbent chooses di 2
fE; F; EF g and Challenger chooses dc 2 fE; F; EF g. As before, voters observe the issues that the
politicians campaign on, but may or may not learn the exact competences of politicians on those
issues. If Incumbent campaigns on E (i.e., di 2 fE; EF g), then voters learn ei with certainty if
Challenger also covers E (i.e., if dc 2 fE; EF g), and with probability       if he does not (i.e., if
dc = F ); the information structures for foreign policy and for Challenger’s campaigns are similar.
In other words, the only new assumption is that information obtained by voters on a politician’s
competence on one issue is not directly a¤ected by his choice to campaign on the other issue.
   To build an intuition, suppose that    = 1. If campaigning on both issues were impossible, each
politician would choose his stronger issue. Now take one of the politicians, say Incumbent, and
suppose that his stronger issue is E; naturally, he would be more inclined to talk about both issues
if he is good at F as well. Suppose his type is (e; f ) and he is indi¤erent between talking about
both issues and E only. If he chooses both issues, voters learn his true competence e + f ; if he



                                                25
Figure 8: Equilibrium strategies in simultaneous-move game if campaigning on both issues is allowed
at a cost, and < 1.

chooses E only, their posterior will in equilibrium be e + f2 . He is thus indi¤erent if and only if
                f                        2M
A e+f       e   2   = M , i.e., if f =    A .   Thus, a lower M makes campaigning on both issues more
likely; this strategy will be chosen by politicians that are relatively competent in both issues, while
the less competent ones will choose their best issue only. More generally, the following is true for
the simultaneous-move game if players play symmetric equilibria.

Proposition 12 Take a simultaneous-move game and …x any                 > 0. Then if M > A 3 4 , politi-
cians always talk about one issue. For M 2 0; A 3 4         , politicians choose both issues with a positive
probability, which is increasing in M . The politicians who choose only one issue choose their best
issue. Finally, if M = 0, then almost all politicians campaign on both issues.

   The equilibrium strategies are depicted in Figure 8. Quite interestingly, if          2 (0; 1), the lines
that separate politicians talking about both issues from those talking about only one issue are
downward sloping. This is surprising at …rst: for someone who is extremely good in one issue, it
might su¢ ce to talk about that issue only. However, the intuition is very simple. Recall that in
equilibrium of the original game where politicians could only talk about one issue, those who are
revealed to be bad at the issu they chose (say, economy) also leave little uncertainty about the
other issue, and all but prove that they are even worse on that dimension. In contrast, those who
demonstrate that they are extremely good at economy leave a high degree of uncertainty about
their competence in the other dimension. Thus, politicians that are better at one issue have more
uncertainty to resolve and thus have more incentives to campaign on both issues.
   What are the welfare consequences of the possibility to campaign on both issues, at a cost? To
answer this question, focus on the case where        = 1 where the equilibrium strategies are particularly
simple (also, in this case, both sequential and simultaneous games yield identical results).

                                                      26
                                                                                                                       A
Proposition 13 Suppose that            = 1. Then in both simultaneous and sequential games, if M >                     2,
                                                                                                                      A
politicians always talk about one issue; type (e; f ) chooses E if and only if e > f . If M 2 0;                      2 ,
                                                               2M
then politician chooses both issues if min (e; f ) >            A ,   and otherwise chooses e if and only if e > f .
   The voters’welfare is decreasing in M . The politicians’joint expected welfare is nonmonotone,
with two global maxima at the ends of the interval 0; A2 , and a global minimum at M =                            A
                                                                                                                  6   (for
               4
that value,    9   of politicians cover both issues in their campaigns). The total weighted welfare of
voters and politicians is decreasing in M if politicians’weight is low relative to that of voters’and
is nonmonotone otherwise.

   The result on social welfare is not surprising. Since a lower M makes more politicians willing
to campaign on both dimensions, campaigns are more informative, and voters are unambiguously
better o¤. For politicians, election itself is a zero-sum game, and they would ex ante prefer not to
make additional expenditures. Thus, their utility is maximized when either campaigning on both
                                                                                     A
issues is costless (M = 0) or does not happen in equilibrium (M                      2 ).   Not surprisingly, the society
as a whole would bene…t from more transparency and more informed voters. An extension where
voters’ attention, which ultimately determines M , is endogenized, is an interesting direction for
future research.

5.4    Delaying campaign

So far, Incumbent was assumed to be the …rst mover and Challenger was assumed to follow.
Suppose, however, that Incumbent has a choice whether to move …rst or wait for Challenger to
start his campaign and then move second. Proposition 8 suggests that on average, …rst mover and
second mover have equal chance of winning ( 21 ). However, Incumbent who knows his type (ei ; fi )
need not be indi¤erent. For simplicity, let us focus on equilibria where the second mover chooses
the same issue as the …rst mover; to ensure existence of such equilibria, restrict attention to the
          1
case      2.
   To build intuition, let us …rst …gure out Incumbent’s preferences to be the …rst or second mover.
Consider Incumbent of type (ei ; fi ) and suppose that ei                   fi . If Incumbent moves …rst, the voters’
                           ei
posterior will be ei +     2    = 32 ei , because Challenger will choose the same issue (Economy). If he
                                            1
moves second, then with probability         2   Challenger will choose E, and then Incumbent’s perceived
competence will be ei + 21 (since all Incumbents will choose E in this case), and with probability                      1
                                                                                                                        2
Challenger will choose F , in which case Incumbent’s perceived competence will be fi + 12 . Incumbent
prefers to move …rst if and only if 32 ei >     1
                                                2   ei +   1
                                                           2   + fi +   1
                                                                        2   , i.e., if fi > 2ei   1, and to move second
otherwise. Similarly, if ei          fi , then Incumbent prefers to move …rst if ei > 2fi                    1. This is
illustrated on Figure 9 (Left). In other words, Incumbents that are competent in one issue and
incompetent in the other prefer to move …rst, whereas those who prefer to move second tend to


                                                           27
Figure 9: Left: Incumbent’s preferred choice whether to move …rst orpsecond. Right: Incumbent’
                                                                                       p       s
                                            1
equilibrium choice for parameters l1 = l2 = 20 . The exact values are 161
                                                                       36
                                                                          3
                                                                             0:27 and    157+7
                                                                                          54
0:36.

be, on average, well rounded and generally incompetent. Intuitively, politicians with types close
to (1; 0) or (0; 1) have strong preferences over issues to campaign on and want to be the ones who
choose the issue. On the other hand candidates with ei = fi < 1 strictly prefer to be second movers:
they know that if they move …rst, their competence on the issue they do not campaign on will be
heavily discounted, and this is less of a problem if they move second. Indeed, in the latter case,
the voters will think that they were forced to campaign on a dimension chosen by Challenger, and
will not penalize them. The least competent politicians (in particular, those with ei ; fi < 12 ) prefer
being second-movers as well: for them, moving …rst and campaigning on either issue is going to
release a (justi…ed) negative signal about their competence in both dimensions; at the same time,
if they move second, they would reveal their competence in one issue only.
   Let us now use this intuition to analyze the game where Incumbent, in the beginning of the game,
makes a strategic choice whether to move …rst or wait and move second, and voters observe this
choice. It is easy to see that in that case, the stragegies from Figure 9 (Left) cannot be equilibrium.
                                               3 1
Indeed, take Incumbent of type (ei ; fi ) =    4; 2   , which was indi¤erent between moving …rst or
second. Now that voters understand that moving …rst or second is a strategic decision, he is no
                                                                                             3        1   1
longer indi¤erent: moving …rst (and choosing E) will lead to voters’posterior of             4   +    2   2   +0 =1
(because voters will take the expectation of his foreign policy skills among Incumbents who preferred
                                                                      3
to move …rst and choose E), whereas moving second will give him       4   + 12   7
                                                                                 8   +   1
                                                                                         2   =   23
                                                                                                 16   if Challenger


                                                  28
                  1
chooses E and     2   + 12   3
                             4   +0 =      7
                                           8    if Challenger chooses F . Thus, waiting gives him, in expectation,
37
32   > 1, which makes him strictly prefer to wait. This is intuitive: moving …rst allows them
to reveal their competence on the issue they are good at, but now voters understand that their
impatience means that they are very incompetent on the other issue. On the other hand, waiting
signals to voters their skills on the two issues are relatively close, and therefore announcing their
competence on one issue will not hurt them on the other dimension, or will hurt very little. Hence,
in equilibrium, Incumbents will have a strong incentive to wait to signal their symmetry.
     To desribe equilibrium, consider a game where with probability l1 > 0 Incumbent must move
…rst, with probability l2 > 0 he must move second, and with complementary probability 1                             l1   l2
he has discretion when to move. The inference problem that voters face is now more complicated:
not only they need to take into account two possibilities (whether Incumbent moved …rst or second
because he had to or because he chose to do so), but also the relative probabilities of these two
scenarios depend, in a nontrivial way, on the competence that Incumbent demonstrated. This
makes Bayesian updating quite a bit more involved and, unlike all previous cases in the paper, the
boundaries separating types of Incumbents who move …rst and who move second will be nonlinear.
While a comprehensive analysis of this game is beyond the scope of this paper, we can prove the
following result.

                                                  1            1
Proposition 14 Suppose l1 + l2                    10   and     6.   Then there is an equilibrium with the following
properties:
     (i) Incumbent with ei            fi moves …rst if and only if
                                                                                                                           !
     1 l1 e2i + (1      l1       l2 ) fi2   1          1 l2 + (1    l1    l2 ) 1     fi2         1 l2 + (1   l1   l2 ) e2i
ei +                                      >       ei +                                    + fi +
     2 l1 ei + (1       l1       l2 ) fi    2          2 l2 + (1     l1    l2 ) (1   fi )        2 l2 + (1   l1   l2 ) ei
                                                                                                                        (16)
and, similarly, for ei < fi ;
     (ii) if Incumbent moves …rst, he chooses E if and only if ei > fi , and then Challenger chooses
the same issue;
     (iii) if Incumbent moves second, then Challenger chooses E if and only if ec > fc , and Incumbent
chooses the same issue.
     Moreover, for any l2 > 0, if l1 ! 0 then the share of Incumbents who opt to move second
conditional on having a choice converges to 1, and for any l1 > 0, if l2 ! 0 then the share of
Incumbents who opt to move second conditional on having a choice remains bounded away from
zero.

     Incumbent’strategies from the equilibrium described in Proposition 14 are depicted on Figure
                                                    1
9 (Right). The restriction l1 + l2                  10   guarantees that the two regions where Incumbent starts
campaign immediately have non-overlapping projections on the two axes, which simpli…es Bayesian

                                                               29
                                                          1
updating considerably, and the condition                  6   guarantees that it is equilibrium for Incumbents
to choose the same issue as Challenger, even though the distribution of their types by that time
is non-uniform, as some types would start campaign immediately if given this opportunity. Under
these conditions, formula (16) applies and is easy to understand. For example, if type (ei ; fi ) is
indi¤erent between moving …rst and second, then moving …rst will tell voters his true competence
                                                                       l1 ei
on E, ei ; conditional on this information, there is           l1 ei +(1 l1 l2 )fi   chance that he had to move …rst
(only types with foreign policy competence less than ei campaign on E if they move have to move
                 (1 l1 l2 )fi
…rst), and   l1 ei +(1 l1 l2 )fi   chance that he had discretion (only types with foreign policy competence
less than fi start with campaigning on E if they have discretion). In the …rst case, his average
                                           ei                                   fi
competence on foreign policy is            2,   in the second case, it is       2.    Now, taking weighted average
produces the left-hand side of (16), and its right-hand side follows from similar considerations.
   The last results, on limits as l1 ! 0 or l2 ! 0, are particularly interesting. If l1 is very close to
0, then very few Incumbents have to move …rst, and moving …rst is very likely to be attributed to a
deliberate choice. In that case, Incumbent’s competence on the issue he is not campaigning on will
be very heavily discounted, and very few incumbents will choose to start an immediate campaign
nonetheless. In the limit, almost all Incumbents prefer to wait. In other words, while making a
…rst announcement is an attractive option for at least some politicians, not using this option is
even more attractive (unless they have an excuse to use it), because it serves as a positive signal
of possessing balanced competence in the two issues. This insight may be extended further, to a
game where both politicians get, e.g., alternating opportunities to move …rst; backward induction
will immediately suggest that both politicians will wait until the very last opportunity, and on the
equilibrium path, waiting will be something expected rather than a positive signal. (Interestingly,
o¤ equilibrium path, once one politician makes the choice, the other one has no incentive to wait
further.) On the other hand, if l2 is close to 0, the share of Incumbents who move …rst or second are
both bounded away from zero: the fact that moving second will be attributed to well-roundedness
rather than to having to move second increases attractiveness of waiting, but it does not completely
eliminate incentives for very asymmetric Incumbents to move …rst.
   The insights obtained in these extreme cases suggest the following implications. First, politicians
are not likely to seize the very …rst opportunity to pick an issue, and the reason is not aggregate
uncertainty (i.e., they might want to learn, which issues voters …nd most important), but rather
signaling considerations. Second, politicians will use opportunities which present a good reason
not to wait. For example, if some event or story makes it impossible or very hard for a politician
not to react, the politician might well make the …rst move (e.g., a stock market crash creates a
good reason to start campaigning on economy). A politician may also want to use an opportunity
which would otherwise go unnoticed (and therefore he would not get enough credit for waiting).
If none of these event types get realized, politicians are likely to wait until the last moment, when

                                                          30
the remaining time becomes a binding constraint.26


6     Conclusion

The paper studies issue selection by politicians if voters are Bayesian. These choices of issues
cannot change voters’preferences, but a¤ect the information they possess about the politician, and
thereby in‡uence the outcome of elections. Two assumptions are crucial: …rst, a politician may
only choose one issue (at least at a time); second, voters learn weakly more if both politicians
campaign on the same issue than on di¤erent issues. Under these assumptions (and a number of
technical ones, such as uniformity of distributions of types), equilibria are fully characterized and
a number of results are obtained. In particular, if campaigns on di¤erent issues are uninformative,
there is unraveling and they do not occur in equilibrium; however, if such campaigns are relatively
informative, they are more likely than campaigns on the same issue. These choices by politicians
carry substantial information value: in particular, the voters would not be better o¤ if they could
require the politicians to campaign on a given …xed issue. If politicians are allowed to switch
issues in the course of a campaign, then the most competent and ‘well-rounded’will do so, thereby
signaling well-roundedness and overall competence, whereas those that excel in one issue only will
not. The model allows for a number of other comparative statics results and extensions.
    The model is very simple, with only two actors making binary choices (plus a continuum of
voters participating in a standard probabilistic voting), yet it delivers a surprisingly rich set of
results. It is also surprisingly tractable, with simple closed-form solutions in many cases, even
though there is ex ante uncertainty over four dimensions. The results obtained in the paper do
not appear to be knife-edge; this suggests that these results are likely robust to departures from
the model’s assumptions, for example, to nonuniform distribution of types, or to voters that are
not perfectly Bayesian, but exhibit some behavioral traits. These properties of the model make
multiple extensions possible, and allow one to model political campaigns in a simple way as part of
a larger political economy model. For example, how does anticipation of a political campaign a¤ect
the incumbent’s behavior, in particular, the choice of issues to address while in o¢ ce? Or, which
politicians value campaign contributions more, if money allow them to buy more voters’attention
and campaign on multiple issues instead of only one? Or, in a dynamic model of campaigns, how do
politicians respond to a change in issue salience due to an exogenous shock? These are all natural
questions that the model may help address. More broadly, the insights from the model may be
useful both for theoretical research, such as that on strategic disclosure or persuasion, and applied
work beyond political economy, such as studying advertising campaigns.
  26
     Starting early may have a tangible bene…t, for example, politicians who start campaign early deliver their message
to more voters. Building this motive in the studying of dynamics of campaigns seems to be another interesting
direction for future research.


                                                          31
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2013) “A Political Theory of Populism,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 771-805.
Alesina, Alberto, and Alex Cukierman (1990) “The Politics of Ambiguity,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 105 (4):829-850.
Amorós, Pablo, and M. Socorro Puy (2013) “Issue convergence or issue divergence in a political
campaign,” Public Choice, 155(3-4): 355-371.
Aragonès, Enriqueta, Micael Castanheira, and Marco Giani (2015) “Electoral Competition through
Issue Selection,” American Journal of Political Science, 59(1): 71-90.
Ash, Elliott, Morelli, Massimo, and Richard Van Weelden (2015) “Elections and Divisiveness:
Theory and Evidence,” mimeo.
Ashworth, Scott, and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita (2008) “Electoral Selection, Strategic Challenger
Entry, and the Incumbency Advantage,” Journal of Politics, 70(4): 1006-1025.
Austen-Smith, David (1990), “Information Transmission in Debate,”American Journal of Political
Science, 34 (1):124-152.
Bhattacharya, Sourav (2011) “Campaign Rhetoric and the Hide-and-Seek Game,” mimeo.
Callander, Steven, and Simon Wilkie (2007) “Lies, Damned Lies, and Political Campaigns,”Games
and Economic Behavior 60: 262-286.
Canes-Wrone, Brandice, Michael Herron, and Kenneth Shotts (2001) “Leadership and Pandering:
A Theory of Executive Policymaking,” American Journal of Political Science 45:532-550.
Caselli, Francesco, and Massimo Morelli (2004) “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics,
88(3-4): 759-782.
Chen, Ying, and Wojciech Olszewski (2014) “E¤ective Persuasion,”International Economic Review,
55(2): 319-347.
Colomer, Josep M., and Humberto Llavador (2011), “An Agenda-Setting Model of Electoral Com-
petition,” Journal of Spanish Economic Association, 2011.
Dragu, Tiberiu, and Xiaochen Fan (2013) “An Agenda-Setting Theory of Electoral Competition,”
mimeo.
Duggan, John, and Cesar Martinelli (2011) “A Spatial Theory of Media Slant and Voter Choice,”
Review of Economic Studies, 78(2): 640-668.
Dziuda, Wioletta (2011) “Strategic Argumentation,”Journal of Economic Theory, 146(4): 1362-97.
Glazer, Amihai, and Susanne Lohmann (1999) “Setting the Agenda: Electoral Competition, Com-
mitment of Policy, Issue Salience,” Public Choice, 99, 377-394.
Grossman, Sanford J. (1981) “The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about
Product Quality,” Journal of Law and Economics, 24(3): 461-483.


                                                32
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart (1980) “Takeover Bids, the Free-rider Problem, and the
Theory of the Corporation,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 11: 42-64.
Heidhues, Paul, and Johan Lagerlöf (2003) “Hiding information in electoral competition,” Games
and Economic Behavior, Elsevier, vol. 42(1): 48-74.
Kartik, Navin, and Preston McAfee (2007) “Signaling Character in Electoral Competition”, Amer-
ican Economic Review 97, 852-870.
Kartik, Navin, and Richard Van Weelden (2014) “Informative Cheap Talk in Elections,” mimeo.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Nicola Persico (2005) “A Drawback of Electoral Competition,”Journal of
the European Economic Association, 3(6): 1318-1348.
Mattes, Kyle (2007) “Attack Politics: Who Goes Negative and Why?” mimeo.
Matalin, Mary, and James Carville (1994) “All’s Fair: Love, War, and Running for President,”New
York: Random House.
Mattozzi, Andrea, and Antonio Merlo (2007) “Mediocracy,” CEPR Discussion Papers 6163.
Milgrom, Paul R. (1981) “Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications,”
The Bell Journal of Economics, 12(2): 380-391.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Petrocik, John R. (1996) “Issue Ownership in Presidential Elections, with a 1980 Case Study,”
American Journal of Political Science, 40:825-850.
Petrocik, John R., William L. Benoit and Glenn J. Hansen (2003) “Issue Ownership and Presidential
Campaigning, 1952-2000,” Political Science Quarterly, 118(4): 599-626.
Polborn, Mattias, and David T. Yi (2006) “Positive and Negative Campaigning,”Quarterly Journal
of Political Science, 1, pp. 351-371.
Riker, William H. (1982) “The Two-Party System and Duverger’s Law: An Essay on the History
of Political Science,” American Political Science Review, 76(4): 753-766.
Riker, William H. (editor) (1993) “Agenda Formation,” University of Michigan Press:Ann Arbor.
Riker, William H. (1996) “The Strategy of Rhetoric: Campaigning for the American Constitution,”
Yale University Press:New Haven.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. (1972) “The Strategy of Ambiguity: Uncertainty and Electoral Competition,”
American Political Science Review, 66(2): 555-568.
Simon, Adam F. (2002) “The Winning Message: Candidate Behavior, Campaign Discourse, and
Democracy,” New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                                 33
Appendix A — Main Proofs

Introduce the following notation. For a politician j 2 fi; cg (Incumbent or Challenger) with type
(ej ; fj ) = (x; y), let f^j (x) = E (fj j dj = E; ej = x), and let e^j (y) = E (ej j dj = F; fj = y). In other
words, f^j (x) is voters’ equilibrium expectation of fj conditional on j choosing E and revealing
the true value of ej = x, and e^j (y) is voters’ expectation of ej conditional on j choosing F
and revealing fj = y (for Challenger, these values also may depend on Incumbent’s choice di
that is known to Challenger at the time of decision-making, but we suppress the argument di for
brevity). Furthermore, denote the voters’expectation of j’s total competence under these scenarios
   ^E (x) = x+ f^j (x) and a
by a     j                 ^F (y) = e^j (y)+y. Let a
                                         j         ~E and a
                                                          ~F be the voters’expectations of j’s total
                                                                           j               j
                                                                                                                              E         F
competence if he chose E and F , respectively, but no further signal was obtained. Let                                        j   and   j    be
the probabilities that politician j will be able to communicate his competence if he chooses E and
F , respectively; these values satisfy                    E; F      . Denote the voters’expectation of his competence
                                                          E E                      E                             F F                F
taking this into account by aE
                             j (x) =                      j a
                                                            ^j   (x) + 1           j   ~E
                                                                                       a        F
                                                                                         j and aj (y) =          j a
                                                                                                                   ^j   (y) + 1     j       ~Fj .
                                                                                                                                            a
         Slightly abusing notation, let Ej be the set of (ej ; fj ) such that dj (ej ; fj ) = E and F
be the set of (ej ; fj ) such that dj (ej ; fj ) = F .                             In other words, (re)de…ne Ej ; Fj                          j;

E = f(x; y) 2         j       : dj (x; y) = Eg, and F =              j   n Ej . Let Gj = Ej \ Fj = @Ej \ @Fj be the
set of points that have points from both Ej and Fj in any "-neighborhood (we drop subscript j
and write G when this does not cause confusion). Finally, de…ne the following function.

                                             E        y              E                               x
                          j   (x; y) =       j   x+     + 1          j     ~E
                                                                           aj
                                                                                       F
                                                                                       j       y+            1    F
                                                                                                                  j     ~Fj
                                                                                                                        a               (A1)
                                                      2                                              2
(again, we will typically drop subscript j). Results from Appendix B establish the relations between
    j   (x; y) and Gj under di¤erent conditions.

         Proof of Lemma 1. As shown in the text, Incumbent maximizes E (D (I) j ei ; fi ) given by (6).
The second term, E (E (U (ec ; fc ) j I) j ei ; fi ), equals the unconditional expectation E (U (ec ; fc )) =
1 both if di = E and if di = F , i.e., it is a constant. Thus, di maximizes E (D (I) j ei ; fi ) if and
only if it maximizes (8). Similarly, Challenger minimizes E (D (I) j ec ; fc ; di ) given by (7), taking
di as given, but the …rst term satis…es E (E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) j ec ; fc ; di ) = E (U (ei ; fi ) j di ), again by
the law of iterated expectations. The latter value depends on di but not on dc , and therefore is a
constant from Challenger’s perspective. Hence, his problem is equivalent to maximizing (9).

                                                                               E               F
         Proof of Proposition 1. For politician j, let                         j   and         j   denote the probabilities of signaling
his competence credibly (i.e., that                   j   6= ?), as perceived by him at the time he makes decision, if
he chooses E and F , respectively.
                                                                                           E                 F                     E F
         Suppose that di = E. For Challenger, we then have                                 c       = 1 and   c   = ; let rc =      c = c      =
1
        2 [1; 2). Now, Lemma B8 in Appendix B implies that both E and F are chosen by a positive

                                                                     A-1
                                                                                                                                     2rc 1           2
measure of Challengers. Then by Lemma B10, G is straight line with slope                                                             2 rc      =     2 1     1;
                                                                                                                                                    E
moreover, Lemma B6 implies that this line is de…ned by                                                  (x; y) = 0. Now, we have                    c = 1   and
 F
 j    = , thus Lemma B9 is applicable and it suggests that for some (x; y) 2 G n @                                                        c,       x = y. This,
together with the fact that the slope of G is at least 1, implies that the two endpoints must lie
on the lower and upper sides of @                          c:   namely, it must be that ( ; 0) 2 G and ( ; 1) 2 G, and
thus     ( ; 0) =             ( ; 1) = 0, where                     is given by (A1). Then direct computations show that
         2+          2
              +                 +2
~Fc =
a         3( + )          +   3( + ) .   The conditions on                       may thus be rewritten as
                                     8
                                     <                                                     2+     + + 2 +2
                                                       =        2   + (1              )         3( + )     ,
                                     :             1                                               2+  + + 2 +2
                                               +   2   =        1+       2       + (1           )     3( + )                .
                                                                                                   p                            p
             1                                                                            4 5 +    (8 7 )                   3 +     (8 7 )
For      >   2,    this system has a unique solution                              =            8 4        ,             =         8 4      .       This de…nes
Challenger’s strategies uniquely, up to the indi¤erent types that lie on line G. Trivial algebraic
manipulation yields (10). Similarly, if di = F , Challenger will follow symmetric strategies.
    To …nd Incumbent’s strategies, notice that the probability p   that Challenger chooses the same
                                                           3(2 )      (8 7 )
issue is found in the proof of Proposition 2; it equals =       4(2   )      . Thus, from Incumbent’s
                                                        p
                                                    (1 ) 8 7  2
perspective, E       F
               i = i =       + (1    ) = +3  4         4(2 )    > 23 for all . This implies that for
Incumbent ri = 1, and now Lemmas B8, B10, B9 imply that equilibrium strategies are unique, and
his G is a line connecting (0; 0) and (1; 1).

                                                                    1
      Proof of Proposition 2. If                           >        2,   the probability that Challenger chooses issue F when
Incumbent chose E (or vice versa) equals
                        p                p                                                              !                  p
           1 4 5 +          (8 7 ) 3 +     (8                                                     7 )           2       +    (8          7 )
                                     +                                                                      =                                  ;
           2          8 4                8 4                                                                            4 (2   )

this follows from Proposition 1. Di¤erentiating this with respect to yields
                                    p           !
                       d 2       +     (8 7 )                 4 5
                                                   =             p         .
                      d          4 (2    )            2 (2    )2    (8 7 )
                                                                                                                                                   p
                                         4                                                                                                           3
This is increasing for             <     5   and decreasing for                   > 45 , and the maximal value equals 14 +                          6    0:539.
The probability that
                  p a politician communicates his competence on the chosen dimension successfully
                     (1   ) 8 7          2
             +3                                                                            1
equals       4            4(2 )              , which is increasing on                      2; 1   . This completes the proof.

                                                                                                                    E                F
      Proof of Proposition 3. Suppose di = E. For Challenger,                                                       c   = 1 and      c   = . Given that
              1                                                 E                 F
0<            2,   Lemma B8 implies (since                      c =2         +    c         1) that equilibria of type (i) are possible for
             1
all          2,    and these are the only equilibria where almost all types choose the same issue, i.e.,
                                                                                                                                  E     F
equilibria where almost all challengers choose F are not possible (since                                                          c + c =2 > 1). Now
                                                                                                                                  E F
suppose that both Ec and Fc have positive measures. Then, since rc =                                                              c = c   2, Lemma B6

                                                                                 A-2
implies that G n @                 c     is a vertical line, and then Lemma B7 implies that there is an equilibrium
where G connects ( ; 0) and ( ; 1) if and only if                                                     2 [ ;1           ]. This proves that all equilibria
of type (ii) are possible, and that there are no other equilibria. The case di = F is considered
similarly.
                                                                                                                                            E       F
     Now suppose Challenger plays symmetric strategies. Then for Incumbent,                                                                 i   =   i    > , and
                      E F
thus ri =             i = i      = 1. Since in a symmetric equilibrium, Incumbent must choose E and F with
positive probabilities, Lemma B10 implies that G is a straight line with slope 1, and then Lemma
B9 implies that (x; y) 2 G if and only if x = y, so, Incumbent’s strategy to choose E if ei > fi and
F if ei < fi are indeed best responses. This completes the proof.

     Proof of Proposition 4. It should be noted that all Lemmas in Appendix B apply to the
game with simultaneous moves immediately or with trivial changes in their proofs.
     Suppose …rst that Incumbent uses the symmetric strategy and chooses E if and only if ei > fi .
                                                      E            F         1            1
For Challenger, in this case,                         c   =        c   =     2   +        2     > 34 . In this case, rc = 1, and Lemma B10 implies
that it is an equilibrium for Challenger to choose symmetric strategies. Similarly, if Challenger plays
symmetric strategies, it is an equilibrium for Incumbent to do so. This proves that a symmetric
equilibrium exists for all .
     Suppose that there is another equilibrium. First, let us prove that both politicians must choose
both issues with positive probabilities. Suppose not, e.g., that Incumbent chooses E for almost all
                                                           E                              F
his types. Then for Challenger,                            c   = 1 and                    c    = . Lemma B8 then implies that Challenger must
choose both issues with positive probabilities. Moreover, Proposition 1 implies that Challenger
has an essentially unique strategy, and this strategy involves choosing E with probability x 2
       p 1                                      E
 3
 4
     1
     6 3; 2
                  2 1
                  5 ; 2 . Then for Incumbent, i = x + (1        x) and Fi = 1 x + x. Since
         1     E           F                      E        1   F             F         1 E                     E       1 F           1
x        2,    i           i ,   and thus         i   +    2   i             i   +     2 i . We have           i   +   2 i    1=     2    (x + 2        x     1) >
1    2                 2                  1   2           8    1                      1
2    5   +2            5         1 >      2   5   +       5    2       1 =            10 > 0. Lemma        B8 then implies that Incumbents must
choose both issues with positive probabilities, which is a contradiction.
     Second, let us prove that a politician’s separation line cannot be horizontal or vertical. Suppose,
to obtain a contradiction, that, e.g., Incumbent chooses E if ei >                                                       and F if ei <          (the other case
is similar). Now suppose that Challenger chooses E with probability x 2 (0; 1). Then, as before,
 E                                            F
 i   = x+             (1         x) and       i   =1           x + x. For Incumbent’s strategy to be equilibrium, we must
              E F                                                                             E F          x+ (1 x)                 3x(1 )+ 2
have          i = i         2, by Lemma B10. We have                                          i = i   2=    1 x+ x           2=        1 x+ x ;         for this to
                                                                        2
be nonnegative, it must be that x                                      3(1           ).   The right-hand side, however, is a strictly increasing
                                  1                                              1                                             2
function of                on     2; 1   , and its value at                      2    is 1. Thus, for          > 12 , x       3(1     )    is impossible. This
contradiction shows that separation lines cannot be horizontal or vertical.
     Finally, suppose that both politicians have upward-sloping separation lines on both issues.
Suppose that Challenger chooses E with probability x and Incumbent chooses F with probability


                                                                                               A-3
                                                                         1                 1
y. Without loss of generality, suppose that x                            2         y       2   (i.e., Challenger plays a weakly more
                                                             1                                  1
symmetric strategy), and also that x 2                       2; 1     (the case x =             2   leads to a symmetric equilibrium,
                                                                         E                                     F
as was shown earlier). For Incumbent then                                i   = x+              (1    x) and    i     = 1        x + x. Let
                  x+ (1 x)
ri = E      F
       i = i = 1 x+ x ; then by Lemma B10, the line G that separates Ei and Fi has slope
2ri 1    3x(1 )+2 1                    1                      E    F
 2 ri = 2      3x(1 )    1 (since x    2 ). Moreover, since i + i = x + (1        x) + 1 x + x =
         3                         E F       2
1 + > 2 , it must be that max i ; i          3 , and then Lemma B9 implies that for Incumbent, the
separation line G has slope 2r i 1
                             2 ri and intersects the main diagonal. Suppose that G intersects with
                                                                                        2 3x(1 )
@ i at points ( ; 0) and ( ; 1), then the fact that Fi has measure y implies = y 21 3x(1   )+2 1 ,
            2    3x(1  )
  = y + 21 3x(1 )+2 1 . The conditions         0 and      1 imply that y must satisfy

                                   1 2          3x (1        )                     1 2              3x (1      )
                                                                     y       1                                   .                         (A2)
                                   2 3x (1      )+2          1                     2 3x (1          )+2        1
                                                                                                                   2+       2
                                                                                                                       +              +2
                                                                           ~Fi =
         Direct calculations (as in the proof of Proposition 1) imply that a                                       3( + )       +   3( + ) ,   and
             ~F
           1 ai y
~E
ai =        1 y .   Now the indi¤erence condition for type ( ; 0),                              ( ; 0) = 0, may be written as

                                         E               E
                                         i     + 1       i   ~E
                                                             ai
                                                                         F
                                                                         i             1       F
                                                                                               i    ~Fi = 0.
                                                                                                    a
                                                                             2
                       E F
Plugging in                   ~E
                       i ; i ;a   ~E
                               i ;ai ;       ; , and making substitutions x = u + 12 , y = v + 12 , and m = 1
yields the following equation on v:

             m (1 2u) 2                  12m2 u2 + 16m (2 m) u + (2 m)2
     v3 +              v                                                 v
            2 m (1 2u)                           4 (2 m (1 6u))2
                                                     um 36m2 u2 + 12m (2 3m) u + (2                                  9m) (2         m)
                                                  +                                                                         2             = 0,
                                                          2 (2 m (1 2u)) (2 m (1                                     6u))
                                          6um
where v must satisfy the condition jvj 2 m+6um  . Let us prove that for m; u 2 0; 12 , this equation
                                h                    i
                                      6um     6um
on v has no solutions on X =       2 m+6um 2 m+6um n [ a; a]. Denote the right-hand side f (v);
                                           ;
we then have
                 6um                                                 60m2 u2 + 12m (4 3m) u + (2 3m) (2                              m)
     f                              = 2mu (2       m      6mu)                                                                            > 0.
            2    m + 6um                                                  (2 m (1 2u)) (2 m (1 6u))3
           6um                                    2
If       2 m+6um            u, i.e., if m       7 6u ,   we have
                                                                 2                               3
                                                                32u2   224u3 16u2 88u + 4 m
                                                                         8
                                 u                        4                                      5 > 0;
f ( u) =                                                2     480u4 32u3 192u2 + 40u + 34 m2 +
                4 (2      m + 2mu) (2          m + 6mu)                2
                                                            17 50u 24u + 208u 3  48u4       5
                                                                                        288u m 3


to see this, notice that for a …xed u, the expression in brackets is a cubic with a positive coe¢ cient
                                                                                             2
of m3 ; the numerator is positive for m = 0 and m =                                        7 6u     (equal to 8 (1         2u) (1 + 2u) and
                             2u2
1536 (1         2u) 1+3u
                     (7 6u)
                            , respectively), and m =
                              3
                                                                        2
                                                                      7 6u       is located on the downward-sloping part of the



                                                                      A-4
                                                                 4   648u3 44u2 +234u 59
cubic, as the derivative with respect to m equals 16 288u               (7 6u)2
                                                                                           < 0; this shows that
         6um                             6um
f      2 m+6um          > 0 whenever   2 m+6um      v      u. We similarly have

                           u 1   4u2                     72m3 u3 + 2m 28 52m + 43m2 u+
f (u) =                                                                                                        < 0;
          4 (2     m + 2mu) (2 m + 6mu)2           12m2 (10    11m) u2 + (2 m) 4 8m + 19m2
                   6um                                    12m2 u2 + 48mu + (2 m) (2 + 3m)
         f                    = mu (2 m            6mu)                                   < 0.
             2     m + 6um                                 (2 m (1 2u)) (2 m (1 6u))3

Since in f ( ), the coe¢ cient of v 3 is positive, this leaves the only possibility, where f (v) = 0
                                               6um                           6um
has three real roots: one on            1;   2 m+6um     , another on      2 m+6um ; +1      , and a third one
                         6um
on     max       u; 2    m+6um   ; u . None of these roots is in set X. However, this implies that the
equilibrium v corresponds to the third root, and satis…es             u < v < u. However, this implies that
                                                                                             1           1
juj     jvj is impossible in equilibrium, which contradicts the hypothesis that x            2       y   2   . This
contradiction implies that there are no other equilibria where both politicians use upward-sloping
separation lines, and this completes the proof.

      Proof of Lemma 2. The expected competence of the elected politician is E (E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)) =
E (U (ei ; fi )) = 1 for Incumbent, and similarlyZ for Challenger.
   Denote         = i       c , Let us show that    E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) E (U (ec ; fc ) j I) d   = 1. We split
the entire space of types into four regions, (di ; dc ) 2 f(E; E) ; (E; F ) ; (F; E) ; (F; F )g according to
the issue chosen in equilibrium (note that these need not be independent, as Challenger’s choice
depends on that of Incumbent if the moves are sequential). Let                  (di ; dc ) be the probability of
Incumbent and Challenger choosing di and dc , respectively, and               (di ) =   (di ; E) +   (di ; F ). We




                                                        A-5
have
                Z
                    E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)         E (U (ec ; fc ) j I) d

            = E [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) E (U (ec ; fc ) j I)]
                 X
            =              (di ; dc ) E [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) E (U (ec ; fc ) j I) j di ; dc ]
                (di ;dc )2S 2
                    X
            =                   (di ; dc ) E [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I) j di ; dc ]          E [E (U (ec ; fc ) j I) j di ; dc ]
                (di ;dc )2S 2
                    X
            =                   (di ; dc ) E [U (ei ; fi ) j di ; dc ]       E [U (ec ; fc ) j di ; dc ]
                (di ;dc )2S 2
                 X X
            =                   (di ; dc ) E [U (ei ; fi ) j di ]        E U (ec ; fc ) j      (di ;dc )
                di 2S dc 2S
                 X                               X
            =           E [U (ei ; fi ) j di ]             (di ; dc ) E [U (ec ; fc ) j di ; dc ]
                di 2S                            dc 2S
                 X
            =           E [U (ei ; fi ) j di ]           (di ) E [U (ec ; fc ) j di ]
                di 2S
                 X
            =            di E [U   (ei ; fi ) j di ]
                di 2S
            = E [U (ei ; fi )] = 1:

Here, the third equality uses the fact that conditional on the choices di and dc , the expected compe-
tences of the two politicians taken from the voters’perspective are independent. The fourth equality
uses the law of iterated expectations. The …fth one uses the fact that the expected competence of
Incumbent who chose di does not depend on the choice of Challenger, because the latter is made
either simultaneously or later. The seventh inequality again uses the law of iterated expectations.
The eighth one uses the fact that the expected competence of Challenger equals 1 (and does not
depend on di ), and the ninth one again uses the law of iterated expectatioins. We thus have
                                 Z
                         1+A         [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)          E (U (ec ; fc ) j I)]2 d

                                 0                                                                              1
                                     Z
                    = 1 + A@               [E (U (ei ; fi ) j I)]2 + [E (U (ec ; fc ) j I)]2 d                2A .


Taking the weighted sum over the two possible realizations of , we get (12). This completes the
proof.

   Proof of Proposition 5. Suppose that                            > 12 . We …rst calculate the integral for Incumbent
(again, assuming
          p        that ei > fi as the opposite case may be considered similarly). With probability
    2 +      (8 7 )                                          R1     2
1        4(2 )      , Challenger also chooses E. This gives 0 32 x 2xdx = 89 . With probability

                                                                  A-6
          p
2        +   (8 7 )                                                                                                                  9
         4(2 )      ,      Challenger chooses F , and the integral equals                                                            8       + (1        )       1. In total, the
contribution of Incumbent is
                              p                     !                        p
     9             2       +    (8            7 )            2            +    (8                  7 )               9
           1                                             +                                                             + (1                    ) 1
     8                     4 (2   )                                       4 (2   )                                   8
                                                                                                           9      1                                          p
                                                                                                  =                                           2          +           (8           7 )   .
                                                                                                           8    32 (2                )
   Now, consider the contribution of Challenger.
                                           p       The part of
                                                             p the integral coming from the set
                                     4 5 +    (8 7 )     3 +    (8 7 )
where he chooses E is (as before, =       8 4        , =     8 4       ):
                                Z                                 2                               Z    1                     2
                                                    1x                    x                                          1
                                             x+                                      dx +                      x+                dx
                                                    2                                                                2
                                                                      2              2                               2               3              2            3
                                13           3 +9 +4                      +4                  +8 +4                      +4              + 12           +4
                           =                                                                                                                                         .
                                12                                                              48
The part of the integral coming from the set where he chooses F may be found as follows: with
probability , it is
                                Z    1                                                   2
                                                   1
                                             y+      ( +(                     ) y)           ( +(                ) y) dy
                                 0                 2
                                1                                     2              2                           2               3                  2        3
                           =       4 + 12 + 3                             +3                 +8            +4        +3                  + 12           +3           ,
                                48
and with probability 1                        , it is
                       2                 2                        2
                        +  +                         +2                       +                   1                      2                               2                2
                                             +                                           =                                   +               +      +        +2               .
                       3( + )                      3( + )                     2               18 ( + )
This means that the total integral for Incumbent and Challenger, after substituting for the values
of        and , is
                                                                                                                                              p
                               68        19         6   2    (2           )2             24        52 + 29           2           6       3          (8       7 )
                       2+                                                                                  3                                                         .
                                                                                192 (2                 )
                                                                                                                                                                                        1
It may be shown directly that this is an increasing function of , and that its value for                                                                                            =   2   is
         3
2+       16   and for       = 1 is 2 + 14 . The result for                           >        1
                                                                                              2   follows.
                                                        1
         Consider now the case                          2.   Let us show that equilibria of type (ii) result in a lower wel-
fare than equilibrium of type (i). Without loss of generality, suppose Incumbent chooses E, and
Challenger chooses E if ec >                            and F if ec <                         (       = 0 corresponds to type (i) equilibrium and
     2 [ ;1            ] corresponds to type (ii) equilibrium). The contribution of Incumbent to welfare is
given by
                                     Z       1Z x                                                                    Z       1Z x
                                                       x          2                                                                                          9           a+a
              (1       +       ) 2                  x+                dydx +                      (1           ) 2                       1dydx           =                   .
                                         0     0       2                                                                 0       0                                       8


                                                                                         A-7
The contribution of Challenger equals
Z   1Z 1                 2                   Z       Z       1                                                    Z           Z       1                      2                                   3
                     1                                                            2                                                           1                                  13 +
                x+           dydx+                                   y+               dydx+(1                 )                                 +                dydx =                               .
      0              2                           0       0                  2                                         0           0           2   2                                      12
The sum of the two equals
                                                                           53         3 +5                2       3
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                        24
                                                                                                                                                           3 5 +6a2                            1
which is a decreasing function of                                     (its derivative with respect to                                             is          24         < 0 for               2 ).
This means that the maximum is reached at                                                 = 0, i.e., in equilibrium of type (i), and this maximum
           53            5
equals     24   = 2+     24 .     Plugging this value of the integral into (12) yields the result for this case. This
completes the proof.

     Proof of Proposition 6. In the symmetric equilibrium, each politician is able to announce
                                                                                  1       1                                                                                          1
his competence credibly with probability                                          2   +   2    , and he fails to do so with probability                                              2   (1     ).
Consequently, the integral in the right-hand side of (12) equals
                                                     Z                                                            Z                           !
                                                             1              2                                             1
                                   1 1                               3                 1                                                                         1+
                         2          +                                  x         2xdx + (1                    )               2xdx                 =2+              .
                                   2 2               0               2                 2                              0                                           8

Therefore, the expected competence of the elected politician equals 1 + 1+8 A, and is thus monoton-
                                                                                                                  1                                                  3
ically increasing in               . Its maximum is achieved at                                          =        2   and it equals 1 +                              16 A,       which exceeds
     5                                                                                                                                                                                   1
1+   24 A,      the expected competence in the sequential game (see Proposition 5). If                                                                                               >   2,   then
the proof of Proposition 5 suggests that the expected competence of the elected politician in the
sequential game is
                                                                                                                                                       p
                                  68        19       6           2    (2          )2          24     52 + 29                      2           6    3            (8     7 )
                     1+A                                                                                  3                                                                      ,
                                                                                          192 (2          )
                                       1+                                 1
which is less than 1 +                  8    A for               2        2; 1    , as the di¤erence equals
                                                                                                                                                       p
                             20        43 + 18               2       (2          )2        24       52 + 29                   2           6   3             (8        7 )
                     A                                                                                3                                                                      ,
                                                                                      192 (2         )

which is negative fore such . This completes the proof.

     Proof of Proposition 7. If an issue is …xed exogenously, the expected competence of the
elected politician is given by (14) and equals 1 + 16 A. This is less than 1 +                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                            16 A,     which is the lower
                                                                                                                                                           1
bound of utilities of both the sequential and simultaneous games for                                                                                   >   2.    On the other hand, if
      1                                                                                                                                                               5
      2,   then the payo¤ in the type (i) equilibrium of the sequential game is 1 +                                                                                   24 A,      which is even
                                                                                                                                                       1+
higher. However, the payo¤ in the case of the simultaneous game is 1 +                                                                                  8    A, and it is lower than
1 + 16 A if and only if                < 13 . This completes the proof.



                                                                                              A-8
    Proof of Proposition 8. The expected probability of challenger winning is obtained by taking
the expectation of (5) over all possible realizations of (ec ; fc ), (ei ; fi ), as well as                                          c   and     i.   The law
                                                                       1
of iterated expectations implies that this equals                      2,   and thus the expected probability of incumbent
                         1
winning also equals      2.   This completes the proof.

   Proof of Proposition 9. In the symmetric equilibrium, Incumbent chooses d~i = E if ei > fi
and d~i = F if ei < fi . Consider the case where d~i = E and dc = F . If Incumbent chooses di = F ,
                                                                  EF
he conveys his competence with probability                        i    = 1; if he chooses E, he does so with probability
 EE
 i    =    . Similarly to the original Challenger’s problem (Lemmas B4 and B10), one can show
that the regions EEi where Incumbent sticks to E and EFi where he switches to F are separated
by an upward-sloping straight line (with types that switch lying above and left of the types that
do not), and types on this line are indi¤erent. Consider an agent with competence (x; y) and
suppose that he is indi¤erent. If so, then if he chooses E, he gets          x + y2 + (1     ~EE
                                                                                            )a i , where
~EE
ai  = E ei + fi j d~i (ei ; fi ) = di (ei ; fi ) = E; dj = F . If he chooses F instead, he gets y + x+y
                                                                                                     2 .
Consequently, he is indi¤erent if and only if
                                                     2        1            2 (1           )
                                           y=                     x+                          ~EE
                                                                                              ai .                                                        (A3)
                                                     3                       3
                                                                       1
This indeed de…nes an upward-sloping line for                          2    <                 1. Moreover, for such                      , x > 0 implies
y > 0. Consequently, if the measures of Incumbents who stay and who switch are both positive
(the other cases are easy to rule out similarly to Lemma B8), the line should connect some point
                                                                                                           2    1
( ; ) with some point (1; ). Moreover, it must be that                                         =       +    3       (1      ) and 0                   <   < 1.
                   ~EE
    Let us now …nd ai  as a function of . The area EEi consists of two triangles, obtained from the
bottom-right triangle by connecting ( ; ) with (1; 0). One triangle has vertices (0; 0) ; (1; 0) ; ( ; );
                                                                                                            1                            2 +1
its area is   2   and the sum of the coordinates of its mass center is                                      3 (1 + +            )=         3 .   The other
                                                                                  (1          )            (1   ) + 23      1
                                                                                                                                (1       )
triangle has vertices (1; ) ; (1; 0) ; ( ; ); its area is                                 2        =                      2                and the sum
                                                                                                   2 + +2                2 +(1       )    + 23   1
                                                                                                                                                     (1   ) +2
                                                 1
of coordinates of its mass center is             3   (1 + 1 +              +    + ) =                 3           =                        3                     .
Therefore,
                                                         2         2                  2                2
                                           1 2               +2                           +        +       +2
                                 ~EE
                                 ai  =                                                                              .
                                           3                               +
Thus, (A3), when evaluated at point (x; y) = ( ; ), simpli…es to

                                      3              2                            3                                 2                2
                     H( ; )= 3            + 23               84 + 64                  + 288                 108           192                             (A4)
                                      2                                                            2
                               + 81         171 + 84                   + 30                   20           10 = 0.

    If    = 1, the equation (A4) has a unique root on [0; 1),                                      = 0, and in this case the indi¤erence
line connects (0; 0) and 1; 12 . In the other extreme,                                = 21 , we must have                   = , and thus                  > 0.



                                                                   A-9
                                                           p
                                                   4           10                                                                                                    1
In this case, the only root is                =            3            0:28; obviously, this case is the limit as                                       tends to    2   as
well.
      Let us show that for all           2 (0; 1), there is a unique root                                                 2 (0; 1). The left-hand side of (A4)
equals 10 (2       1) (1        ) > 0 if               = 0 and it equals                             3 (2             ) (3         )2 < 0 if       = 1. Thus, there
exists a root 2 (0; 1) for any such . Moreover, if = 1, the three roots of the cubic equation are
      p          p
 1      2; 0; 1 + 2 , and so = 0 is a simple root. Therefore, for close to 1, the equation (A4)
                                                                                             1
has a unique simple root on (0; 1). If for some                                      2       2; 1        there are two or three roots on (0; 1), then
                                                                                                                                                                    1
at least one of the following three alternatives must be true: either for some value of                                                                      2      2; 1    ,
  = 0 is a root, or        = 1 is a root, or there is a double root                                                   0   2 (0; 1). The …rst two possibilities
                                                                                                                   1
are ruled out, because              = 0 may be a root only for                                           2         2; 1     , and        = 1 may be a root only
for     2 f2; 3g. For the last case, suppose that some                                               0   2 (0; 1) is a double root, then the second
derivative of (A4) must vanish at some                                  between the single root and the new double root:
                                3              2                                                                            2
                       6 3           + 23                  84 + 64                   + 2 288                       108           192 = 0.                           (A5)

Since     6= 43 , this is equivalent to
                                                                              12                  16
                                                                        =                    2
                                                                                                       ,                                                            (A6)
                                                                             9 +                    16
                            8        2                                                   1
which decreases from        9   to   3   as        increases from                        2   to 1. For                    given by (A6), (A4) simpli…es to

                            2 (3          )2                        4                3                     2
                                                           10             261            + 1053                       1536 + 768 = 0.
                      (16       9             2 )2

                                                                                                                                1
It is straightforward to check that the last factor has no roots on                                                             2; 1   ; this proves that the root
is unique.
      We can show that this root is decreasing in                                            . Indeed, the root                          = 0 for         = 1 satis…ed
@H( ; )                                                                                                                                        @H( ; )
  @       < 0; since we proved that there is no double root, we must have that                                                                   @       < 0 for all .
                                @H( ; )
It remains to show that           @            < 0 at any root. We have
                  @H ( ; )                    2                                  3                                          2
                           = 9                     + 46                 84           + (288                216 )                + (162         171) ,
                    @
                                                                                              h            p          i
                                                                                                                                                            @H( ; )
Let us show that it is positive for all                         2       1
                                                                        2; 1     ,           2 0; 4          3
                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                          . Indeed, for such values,          @            is
increasing in :
                  @2H ( ; )                            3                     2                   3
                                         = 9                        108          + 23                + 81
                     @ 2
                                               9       3                    2                 3
                                                                108             + 23              + 81
                                               2
                                                           3                 2                                                             2
                                               27                   108          + 81 = 27 (1                         ) 3+3                     > 0.

Consequently, it remains to prove that
                                          @H ( ; )                                           2                 3
                                                                                = 72                  29              9<0
                                            @                           =1


                                                                                 A-10
         h       p        i
for     2 0; 4   3
                     10
                           , which is straightforward.
                                                                                                                        3   2       +1
      We can also prove that                 is increasing in . Indeed, given                                       =       4 3          , we can rewrite (A4)
as

                     ~( ; )=
                     H                       3
                                                 +6          2
                                                                   43 + 48              3
                                                                                            + 6       3
                                                                                                               57   2
                                                                                                                        + 165         144     2
                                                                                                                                                                  (A7)
                                                 3                 2                          3                 2
                                      + 12                57           + 63             + 8               18        +7       = 0.

                                                                                                                                    @ 2 H( ; )
This function has no double root: otherwise there would be a point with                                                                 @ 2
                                                                                                                                                  = 0, in which
             16 13 +2 2
case     =    16 9   2 ;        plugging this into (A7) yields

                                      2 (4       3 )2                      4            3                  2
                                                                  10              261       + 1053                  1536 + 768 ,
                                (16      9               2 )2


                                                                           1                                                  ~ ; )
                                                                                                                            @ H(
which, as we know, has no roots on                                2        2; 1   . Now, this means that                       @      < 0 for all , because
                                                                                     ~ ; )
                                                                                   @ H(
this is true for          = 1. It remains to prove that                               @        > 0. We have

 ~( ; )
@H                    2                              3                 2                          2                 2                                   2
        = 3                + 12          43              + 18                  114 + 165              + 36                  114 + 63        + 24                 36 + 7 .
   @
One can show that this is positive at the root .
      We have shown that the subgame where Incumbent gets a chance to reconsider his original choice
has a unique equilibrium, so Incumbents who originally chose E and F act symmetrically. Let
be the probability that Incumbent switches conditional on being given such a chance. Consider
now the choice of Challenger; for concreteness, suppose that Incumbent chose E. If he chooses
                                                                                                  E
dc = E, then his chance of showing his competence is                                              c   = 1, whereas if he chooses dc = F , then
                                                         F                                                                                        1
the corresponding probability is                         c       = p + ((1          p) + p (1                  ))       =   + p (1          )>    2    (notice that
the original game corresponds to the case where Incumbent never reconsiders or never gets such a
                                        F                                                                                    0
chance, i.e., p = 0 and                 c    = ). This means that his ratio rc = 1=                                              2 (1; 2), and thus Lemma
B10 is applicable, leading to the same characterization as in Proposition 1 after replacing                                                                       with
 0.   In particular, this means that Challenger chooses the same issue as Incumbent with probability
                          p
                 3         3
at least         4        6 ,   as follows from Proposition 2.
                                                                     p
      Finally, consider Incumbent’s original problem. Since for p < 4 3 6 we have p+(1                                                                      p)    > 12 ,
which means that regardless of the strategy this type of Incumbent uses in the following round, the
probability that he will eventually campaign on E is higher if he chooses E. This already implies
that symmetric strategies form an equilibrium. This completes the proof.

      Proof of Proposition 10.                               Without loss of generality, assume that e2                                           e1         f2      f1
(the opposite case is symmetric). If so, renormalize the rectangle [e1 ; e2 ]                                                             [f1 ; f2 ] by mapping
             x e1 y f 1
(x; y) 7!    f2 f1 ; f2 f1        ; we then have a uniform distribution on [0; m]                                                [0; 1], where m is the ratio


                                                                                   A-11
e 2 e1
f2 f1 .   Since this is an a¢ ne transformation of Incumbent’s competence, it does not a¤ect his or
Challenger’s maximization problem.
    If Incumbent chooses E (correspondingly,
                                p             F ), Challenger will campaign on E (correspondingly,
                         3(2 )     (8 7 )
F ) with probability =        4(2 )       , and will thus be able to reveal his competence credibly
                    E              F                                      2                                            E F
with probability    i   =          i   =         + (1           )     >   3.    Then the ratio ri =                    i = i      = 1. Consider …rst
equilibria where both E and F are picked by Incumbent with positive probability. In this case, as
in Lemma B6, we can prove that the line separating Ei and Fi must be upward-sloping with slope
1, and the points on this line must satisfy                           (x; y) =          i (x; y)    = 0.
     Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that                             (0; 0) > 0, so that the line                      (x; y) = 0 lies above the
                                                                                                                                    E
line y = x. Then, evidently,               ~Fi
                                           a     >   ~E
                                                     ai ,   but if so, we would have                     (0; 0) = 1                 i   ~E
                                                                                                                                        ai~Fi < 0,
                                                                                                                                          a
a contradiction. Thus,                 (0; 0)         0, and the intersection of the line                                  (x; y) = 0 with @ ~ i are
                                                                                                                   E        F
some points ( ; 0) and (m; m                         ), with 0                < m. Denoting              =         i   =    i ,   we get the following
condition for     ( ; 0) = 0:

                                                 a + (1              ~E
                                                                    )ai =               + (1           ~Fi .
                                                                                                      )a
                                                                                    2
This is equivalent to
                                                            1
                                                                       ~Fi
                                                                       a        ~E
                                                                                a i =           .
                                                                                            2
                       m
        ~E
We have ai =       +       3   + 32 (m                     ~Fi may be found from
                                                ) = m, and a
                                                                         !
                                                  2                    2
                                          (m     )             (m    )       m+1
                                       ~E
                                       ai            ~Fi 1
                                                    +a                     =     :
                                             2m                   2m          2

                                                         )2
                  ~Fi = m 1+2m
This implies that a            (m
                           2m (m                       )2
                                                            ,            ~Fi
                                                                and thus a               ~E
                                                                                         a i =
                                                                                                      m(1 m)
                                                                                                    2m (m    )2
                                                                                                                .          Consequently,       is found
from the equation
                                                       1              m (1 m)
                                                                                 = ;                                                              (A8)
                                                                    2m (m     )2  2
since the left-hand side is decreasing in                           , it has at most one solution. On the other hand, there
is a solution     2 [0; m) if and only if                           + m > 1, i.e., m > 1                       . Moreover, if m = 1 (i.e., if
e2    e1 = f2    f1 and        0   is a square), then                  = 0, and if m < 1, then                         > 0.
                               i
     Consider the possibility of equilibria where all or almost all types choose the same issue. If all
                                        m+1
                      ~Fi =
types choose F , then a                  2 ,      and the condition that type (m; 0) does not deviate is

                                                                                         m                         m+1
                                   m + f~i (m) + (1                     ~E
                                                                       )a i                + (1                )       .
                                                                                         2                          2
This is satis…ed (for f~i (m) = a
                                ~E
                                 i = 0) if m
                                                                          1
                                                                          2    1.                                ~E
                                                                                     If all types choose E, then ai =
                                                                                                                                        m+1
                                                                                                                                         2 ,   and the
condition that type (0; 1) does not deviate is

                                       1                        m+1
                                             + (1           )                       (1 + e~i (1)) + (1              ~Fi .
                                                                                                                   )a
                                       2                         2

                                                                          A-12
                                                                                   2    1
Since   > 23 , this is satis…ed (for z1 = a
                                          ~Fi = 0) only if m                       1        > 1, which is impossible. Thus,
only equilibria where issue F is chosen by almost all Incumbents are possible, and this is the case
         1
for m    2    1.
   Therefore, equilibria have the following structure: there is a unique equilibrium with both E and
                                                        1
F chosen with a positive probability if m >             2      1,   a unique equilibrium where almost all incumbents
                                                                                            1
choose F if m < 1         , and both these equilibria if 1                    <m            2    1.   In addition, m = 1 implies
  = 0, which proves (i), and m < 1 implies                          > 0, which, coupled with the characterization of
equilibria, proves (ii). It remains to show that a lower m implies a lower probability of Incumbent
campaigning on E. Notice …rst that a decrease in m can only make equilibrium where (almost)
all Incumbents choose F appear, and equilibrium where a positive share of Incumbents choose E
disappear. It thus su¢ ces to prove that in the latter type of equilibria, a decrease in m leads to a
decrease in the probability that Incumbent chooses E. To show this, it su¢ ces to show that                                     is a
decreasing function of m. To show this, rewrite (A8) as g ( ; m) = 0, where

                              g ( ; m) =            m (1        m)            2m       (m          )2 :
                                              1                           2
Di¤erentiating with respect to           and m at points where g ( ; m) = 0, we have
                           @                        1
                             g ( ; m) =                3 2 + m2 4m     2m
                          @                         2
                                                      1
                                              =           2m (m    )2 + 2 (m                           )
                                                      2
                                                      1
                                              =              m (1 m)     (m                           )<0
                                                        1
and
                    @                                                              2
                      g ( ; m) =                  (2m     1)             +    +         m
                   @m                                          1
                                                                                                                !
                                                              2m (m    )2                              2
                                    =             (2m     1)              +                       +         m
                                                             2 m (1 m)
                                              1                      2
                                    =                                    + 2m (m                ) + m2 < 0:
                                              2 m (1      m)
                                 @
                    d              g(   ;m)
This implies that   dm    =     @m
                                 @
                                   g(   ;m)
                                              < 0. This proves (iii), which completes the proof.
                                @


   Proof of Proposition 11. It is straightforward to show that in this case, the relevant results
from Appendix B are still applicable. In particular, this means that for                                     = 1, there are only
equilibria where both issues are chosen with a positive probability, and the line separating the two
issues satis…es     (x; y) = 0, where

               E                                  y            E                                                            x
   (x; y) =    j   (1 +   ) x + (1            )     + 1        j     ~E
                                                                     aj (1         )        F
                                                                                            j    (1        ) y + (1 +   )       1      F
                                                                                                                                       j   ~Fj :
                                                                                                                                           a
                                                  2                                                                         2

                                                               A-13
Furthermore,        = 1 implies that voters get the same signals in sequential and simultaneous games,
which in turn implies that the two politicians will use identical strategies. To …nd the equilibrium
strategies, consider, without loss of generality, the case                                            0 (the case                < 0 is symmetric; notice
that the case       = 0 corresponds to the main setup of the model).
                                E            F
   Since      = 1 implies       j    =       j   = 1 for each politician, we have, for indi¤erent types of politicians,
                                                                           y                                          x
                                    (1 +         ) x + (1              )     = (1             ) y + (1 +             ) ;
                                                                           2                                          2
                                        1+
which is equivalent to y =              1        x. Thus, there is a unique equilibrium with strategies as described
in the proposition.
   Let us now compute social welfare. Again, let us focus on the case where                                                                   0. As before, it
is given by (12). We have
                0 1 1+
                         x
                   Z
                   1+ 1Z
                                                                                                      2
                B                                                             11+
W = 1 + 2A B    @          (1 +                       ) x + (1              )                 x           dydx
                                                                              21
                      0     0

                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                  y
             Z1 Z1                                                 2            Z1 1+
                                                                                    Z                                                                          2
                                                               1                                                                             11                              C
         +            (1 +          ) x + (1               )           dydx +                         (1         ) y + (1 +              )             y           dxdy     1C
                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                               2                                                                             21+
           1    0                                                               0         0
           1+
                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                     3
         A3            +9       2+           3   +3            (1 + )2                                    1
    = 1+                                                  =1+A                            2+                                 .
         12                     +1                                12                                      1+

                                                                                                                                                                       A
This function is increasing and convex in                               for     > 0; for                   = 0 (equal weight) it equals 1 +                            4,
                                                                               2A
whereas for      = 1 (only E matters) it equals 1 +                             3 .
   If instead the politicians are forced to campaign on E (the more important issue), the voters’
social welfare will equal
                         0 1                                                                              1
                          Z                                                           2
                                                                                1                                            (1 + )2
                 1 + 2A @    (1 +                         ) x + (1            )           dx          1A = 1 + A                     .
                                                                                2                                                6
                                    0

It is straightforward to check that the social welfare in this case is strictly lower for                                                              < 1, and
is the same only for the extreme case                              = 1 (in this case, only E matters to voters, and both
politicians will campaign on it with probability 1). Naturally, …xing the less important issue will
                                                                                                                     )2
result in an even lower welfare (more precisely, it will equal 1 + A (1                                          6        ). This completes the proof.



   Proof of Proposition 12. Consider a politician, say, Incumbent. Let                                                                        be the share of
Challengers who choose both issues (dc = EF ); then, by symmetry, the shares of Challengers
                                                  1                                                                       E          F       1+            1
choosing E only and F only are                        2   each. In terms of , we have                                =    i      =   i   =    2    +           2   .

                                                                           A-14
      Take Incumbent with ei > fi ; such Incumbent compares choosing di = E with di = EF and, by
monotonicity, for a given ei , a higher fi makes him weakly more likely to campaign on both issues.
It is straightforward to consider di¤erent cases and show that the separating line must be linear
and connect points ( ; ) and (1; ) for                                                    . Suppose a type (x; y) is indi¤erent. The posterior
impression of voters if he chooses to talk about both issues is:
                                                                                 1+x                                      1+y
                                                      x + (1                 )       + y + (1                         )       ;
                                                                                  2                                        2
and if he chooses to talk about E only, it equals
                                                                                      y
                                                                             x+         + (1                   ~E
                                                                                                              )ai ,
                                                                                      2
where
                                     2 +1             (1       )       2 + +2
                            2          3      +          2                3                         (2 + 1) +               (1      ) (2 +            + 2)
                   ~E
                   ai   =                             1
                                                                                           =                                                                 .
                                                        2
                                                                                                                          3 (1      )
The separating line must therefore satisfy the equation
                   1+x                                1+y                             y                            (2 + 1) +         (1         ) (2 +               + 2)             M
    x+(1       )       + y+(1                     )                          x+                (1          )                                                                     =      .
                    2                                  2                              2                                            3 (1         )                                     A
      From this, we conclude that the slope of the separating line is                                                                      (1         ), which implies
(          ) = (1         ) (1           ), so        =            (1             ) (1             ). Furthermore, since the behavior of Incumbent
and Challenger are symmetric, we have                                             = (1              ) (1           ) = (1          ) (1         + (1             ) (1             )) =
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                               (1  ) (3 )
(1         )2 (2     ). On the other hand,                                       =     1+
                                                                                        2      +       1
                                                                                                     2 , which implies      = 2+(1   )2 (1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                      and
               (1       )(3 )                (1+ +                     )                      3 4       2
                                                                                                     +2 +4       2 2
     =1       2+(1       )2 (1 )
                                      =     2+(1  )2 (1                )
                                                                         ,   so       =           2+(1   )2 (1 )
                                                                                                                     . Plugging , , and ,                                             and
substituting (x; y) for ( ; ), we get the equation

                     (3          )                                       2        4       7    3   + 18        2     23 + 16+                                    M
                                                                        2                                                                               =          .              (A9)
                                              2           (1           ) 6                4    2    11             + (1  )3 (1            2 )     2
                                                                                                                                                                 A
      6 2 + (1            )2 (1           )

      For any given              and A, the left-hand side is an increasing function of , because its derivative
equals
                                                               2                                                                                        3
                                                                                                 12 ( +                     )+
                            3                                  6         36 (1                ) (1    )2 + (1                )2 (1         )2           7
                                                          3    4                                                                                        5 > 0.
                                     2
             6 2 + (1                ) (1             )                (1          )2 10 +                + 2 (1           ) (1          )2 + 6

                                                                                                                                                                              3
If     = 0 (in which case                   = 0), then M = 0, and if                                  = 1 (in which case                   = 1), then M =                         4       A.
                                                                                                                                                                     3
This proves that for M = 0, all or almost all types campaign on both issues, and for M >                                                                                 4   A, each
                                                                                                      3
politician campaigns on one issue only. For M 2 0;                                                        4    A , there is exactly one interior solution
     2 (0; 1), which is increasing in M . Finally, notice that                                                     = (1          )2 (2      ) and        =       1+
                                                                                                                                                                  2          +        1
                                                                                                                                                                                          2
together imply
                                                                   3               (1          )
                                                                                                     (1            )2 = 0;
                                                                                   2

                                                                                          A-15
and the left-hand side is increasing in both                  and . Consequently, an increase in M results in a
higher        and thus a lower . This completes the proof.

                                                              3                    A                         A
     Proof of Proposition 13. For                     = 1,        4    A =         2,   so if M >            2,   no politician talks about
both issues. For M 2 0; A2 , plugging                  = 1 into (A9) yields                     2   =   M
                                                                                                        A,   so       =           = 2M
                                                                                                                                     A,          = 1, and
                 2
 = 1          2M
               A   .    The result on politicians’strategies follows.
   Let us now compute voters’welfare. For each politician, the relevant integral in (12) equals
 Z  Z x                  Z 1Z                      Z 1Z x
             x 2                         2                                   1
2         x+     dydx+2          x+        dydx+2          (x + y)2 dydx =         4 3 + 3 4 + 28 ;
  0   0       2              0        2                                     24
so total voters’welfare equals
                    A            3         4          A   A           3                                 A 4M 3                    M
              1+       4     4       +3        =1+      +                 (3           4) = 1 +           +                   3            2 :
                    12                                3   12                                            3   3A2                   A
                                                                               2
This is decreasing in M (the derivative equals                         8M
                                                                        A3
                                                                           (A             2M ) < 0), from 1 +                         A
                                                                                                                                      3   if M = 0 (this
                                                                                                                                  A               A
corresponds to the full information benchmark from Subsection 3.2) to 1 +                                                         4   if M =      2   (this
coincides with the case of simultaneous game if only campaigns on one issue are possible and                                                          = 1,
as in Proposition 6). Thus, voters’welfare is decreasing in M .
     The politicians’joint welfare equals 1 (the utility of holding o¢ ce), less the amount of money
                                                                                                    2
spent during the campaign, which equals (1                        )2 M = 1                  2M
                                                                                             A          M for each politician. Thus, the
total expected welfare of politicians is
                                                                                   2
                                                                           M
                                                  1     2 1            2               M:
                                                                           A

Its derivative with respect to M is               2 (A        6M ) A A2M
                                                                      2  , so it is decreasing on M 2 0; A6                                           and
                             A A                                                                        A
increasing on M 2            6; 2    ; notice that for both M = 0 and M =                               2   it equals 1. Its minimum, on
                                       A                                   4
the other hand, is at M =              6   and is equal to 1               27 A;       in this case,          = 13 , and thus probability
              1 2
 = 1          3     = 49 .
     Let us now sum the voters’and politicians’utilities with weights z and 1                                                 z, respectively. The
derivative with respect to M is then
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                  2
                                           2M                                         2M                 2M
                                 2 1              (1     z)           3 (1         z)    +z                               .
                                            A                                          A                  A

This is nonpositive for all M 2 0; A2 if and only if z                                   9
                                                                                         13 ,   so politicians’ weight is not greater
       4
than   13 .   This completes the proof.

     Proof of Proposition 14. The validity of formula (16) was established in the text. Checking
its limit properties and verifying that choosing the same issue is always equilibrium for second
movers, is straightforward algebra and is omitted.


                                                              A-16
Appendix B — Auxiliary Proofs

This Appendix establishes several auxiliary results. In particular, Lemma B2 establishes monotonic-
ity of equilibrium strategies. This Appendix is not intended for publication.

                             ^E
Lemma B1 In any equilibrium, a            E                                     ^Fj (y) and
                               j (x) and aj (x) are weakly increasing in x, and a
aFj (y) are weakly increasing in y.

Proof. Consider Incumbent, and suppose he chooses E, then the voters’ posterior belief about
                                  E E                E
his competence is aE
                   i (ei ) =      i a
                                    ^i   (ei ) + 1   i     ~E
                                                           a i , and the politician’s expected utility is an
a¢ ne transformation of this, per Lemma 1. Thus, aE
                                                  i (x) is nondecreasing in x. Moreover, if
 E
 i             ^E
     > 0, then a                                          F                                ^Fi (y) is
                 i (x) is nondecreasing in x. Similarly, ai (y) is nondecreasing in y, and a
                                         F
also nondecreasing, provided that        i   > 0.
     In case of Challenger, we need to consider his decisions in the nodes where Incumbent chose
di = E and where he chose di = F separately. Other than that, however, the reasoning is ab-
solutely identical, so aE                  E                                             F
                        c (x; di = E) and ac (x; di = F ) are nondecreasing in x, while ac (y; di = E)
and aFc (y; di = F ) are nondecreasing in y; the results for a
                                                             ^Fc (y; di = E) and a
                                                                                 ^Fc (y; di = F ) follow
similarly. This completes the proof.
     The next result establishes monotonicity of equilibrium strategies. Let          1   and   2   denote the
one-dimensional and two-dimensional Lebesgue measures, respectively.

                                                 ^E
Lemma B2 Suppose that for politician j 2 fi; cg, a           ^Fj (y) are weakly increasing in x
                                                   j (x) and a
and y, respectively. Then the strategies of politician j are monotone: for any xl           x       xh and any
yl    y   yh :
                           (x; y) 2 Ej implies (xh ; y) 2 Ej and (x; yl ) 2 Ej ;
                                                                                                          (B1)
                           (x; y) 2 Fj implies (xl ; y) 2 Fj and (x; yh ) 2 Fj .

Proof. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that this is not the case. Without loss of generality,
                                                                                         ^E
this means that for some x1 < x2 and some y0 , (x1 ; y0 ) 2 Ej and (x2 ; y0 ) 2 Fj . Let aj (x1 ) = m;
     ^E
then a                             ^E
      j (x2 ) = m as well (indeed, a                               ^E
                                    j (x) is nondecreasing, and if a j (x2 ) > m, the politician would
have to choose F at (x2 ; y0 ), because the expected utility from choosing F is the same at (x1 ; y0 )
                             n               o
and (x2 ; y0 ). Now let X = x : a ^E
                                   j (x) = m  , then weak monotonicity of a^E
                                                                            j (x) implies that X is
an interval, with or without endpoints (denote them by xl and xh ), and [x1 ; x2 ] X.
                                  n               o
    Let n = a^Fj (y0 ) and let Y = y : a
                                       ^Fj (y) = n . There are two possibilities. First, suppose that
Y is a singleton fy0 g; then for y < y0 and x 2 X, the politician must choose E (so such (x; y) 2 Ej ),
and for y > y0 and x 2 X, the politician must choose F (so such (x; y) 2 Fj ). If y0 > 0, then for
any x 2 X, the set fy : (x; y) 2 Ej g is either [0; y0 ) or [0; y0 ], and in either case f^j (x) = y0 . This,
                                                                                                      2
                      ^E
however, implies that a            ^
                       j (x) = x + fj (x) is a strictly increasing function of x on X, contradicting
the de…nition of X.

                                                     B-1
     The other case is y0 = 0. In this case, for any x 2 X and any y > 0, (x; y) 2 Fj . Thus,
(x1 ; y) 2 Ej if and only if y = y0 = 0. In equilibrium, therefore, beliefs must satisfy f^j (x1 ) = 0,
which implies that

                          ^E
                          a                ^                        ^          ^E
                            j (x2 ) = x2 + fj (x2 ) > x1 + 0 = x1 + fj (x1 ) = aj (x1 ) .


                         ^E
But we proved above that a          ^E
                          j (x1 ) = aj (x2 ) = m, so we got to a contradiction, which completes
the proof.
       Now consider the second possibility, where Y is not a singleton. Then it is an interval (similarly
to X), with or without endpoints yl and yh . We have the following: if y 2 Y , then x < xl implies
     ^E
that a                                                 ^E
      j (x) < m and (x; y) 2 Fj , while x > xh implies aj (x) > m and (x; y) 2 Ej ; similarly,
                              ^Fj (y) < n and (x; y) 2 Ej , while y > yh implies a
if x 2 X, then y < yl implies a                                                  ^Fj (y) > n and
                                              ^E
(x; y) 2 Fj ; …nally, x 2 X and y 2 Y implies a              ^Fj (y) = n.
                                               j (x) = m and a
       Consider three possible cases. First, suppose that xh                              xl > yh        yl (i.e., X has a larger linear
measure than Y ). Take x0l ; x0h 2 X such that x0h                           x0l > yh        yl (xl and xh might not be in X). If
yl = 0; then the only values of y where            2 Ej or (x0l ; y)                   (x0h ; y)   2 Ej are possible are y 2 [yl ; yh ].
Thus, equilibrium beliefs satisfy f^j (x0l ) yh and f^j (x0h )                            yl = 0, but this implies that

                                        ^E
                                        a   0
                                         j xl                                   ^E
                                                          x0l + yh < x0h + yl = a   0
                                                                                 j xh ,


a contradiction. If, on the other hand, yl > 0, consider the following: if                                           is the linear measure
of (fx0l g    Y ) \ Ej , then the expected value of that set is at most yh                                               ^ 0         yl yl
                                                                                                                2 , and fj (xl )   yl + 2 +
                              yl                                                                                2yl (yh yl )+ (     yl )
yl +     yh   2   < yh        2    for all   2 [0; yh         yl ] (indeed, the di¤erence is                           2(yl + )            , and the
numerator is a convex function of , so it su¢ ces to check the sign at                                              2     0; yh      yl ; y2l , the
                  yl
latter only if    2    < yh        yl , which is equivalent to yh > 32 yl . We get 2yl (yh                                yl ) > 0 for           = 0,
                                                   1                            1             3                    3                         yl
yh (yh  yl ) > 0 for = yh yl , and                 4 yl   (8yh     9yl ) >      4 yl     8    2 yl     9yl =       4 yl   > 0 for      =     2 ).   At
the same time, f^j (x0h ) y2l , and thus
                                                          yl                    yl         yl
                         ^E
                         a   0
                          j xl          x0l + yh             < x0h + yl            = x0h +                ^E
                                                                                                          a   0
                                                                                                           j xh ,
                                                          2                     2          2
again a contradiction. This proves that xh                       xl > yh         yl is impossible.
       Second, suppose that xh           xl < yh          yl . A similar reasoning will lead to a similar contradiction
due to symmetry of sets X and Y .
       Third, suppose that xh           x l = yh          yl . Careful examination of the argument above shows that
we would get a contradiction even in this case (by choosing x0l and x0h su¢ ciently close to xl and
                                                                                                                        yh
xh and exploiting strict inequalities), unless xl = yl = 0. Take a small " <                                             3   and consider the
set [0; "]    [0; "]. Without loss of generality, suppose that with this square, the relative measure
                                                                                                                                            "2
of points where the politician chooses E is at least half (i.e.,                                   2 (([0; "]      [0; "]) \ Ej )           2.      For
this to be true, there must be some x0l 2 (0; ") such that                                     0
                                                                                         1 ((fxl g     [0; "]) \ Ej ) > 2" . If so, f^j (x0l )

                                                                       B-2
must satisfy f^j (x0l ) < yh           " (to show this, suppose that l = 1 ((fx0l g [0; "]) \ Ej )  "
                                                                                                    2 and

 h   =          0
          1 ((fxl g       ["; yh ]) \ Ej )  yh , then f^j (x0l )   l
                                                                 l+ h
                                                                      " + l +h h yh 2 ; now, the di¤erence
                                                                                    h

                                                                                      "2 +2 2" (yh 2")
yh "             l+
                   l
                       h
                         "+l+ h
                               h
                                     yh
                                      2
                                           h
                                             = h(           h    2")+2 l (yh 2")
                                                                 2( h + l )             2( h + l )       =   "(yh 3")
                                                                                                             2( h + l )   > 0, so
f^j (x0 ) < yh
      l             "). At the same time, f^j (xh )             0, therefore,

                               ^E
                               a   0
                                j xl      x0l + yh      " < " + yl       " = yl + 0     ^E
                                                                                        a j (xh ) ,

a contradiction. We have thus considered all possibilities; this completes the proof.
     Lemmas B1 and B2 together imply that any equilibrium satis…es monotonicity in strategies, in
the sense of (B1).

Lemma B3 For each politician j, Gj is a simple curve which may be parametrized by a (closed)
interval T        [0; 2] such that t 2 T is mapped into (x; y) such that x + y = t.

Proof. Suppose …rst that both Ej and Fj have positive area measures. Then there is a point
(x; y) 2 Ej with x < 1 and y > 0, and thus point (1; 0) and all points (x; y) within some "-radius
of (1; 0) belong to Ej ; similarly, all points within "-radius of (0; 1) belong to Fj . Since G is the
intersecion of two closed sets, it is closed. De…ne t1 = min(x;y)2G (x + y) and t2 = max(x;y)2G (x + y)
and let        : G ! [t1 ; t2 ] be de…ned by           (x; y) = x + y. It is injective: indeed, if for two points
(x1 ; y1 ) ; (x2 ; y2 ) 2 G, we had x1 < x2 and y1 > y2 , then there would be points (x3 ; y3 ) 2 Ej and
(x4 ; y4 ) 2 Fj with x3 < x4 and y3 > y4 (because we could take these points arbitrarily close to
(x1 ; y1 ) and (x2 ; y2 ), respectively). But this would contradict Lemma B2: indeed, monotonicity
would imply that point (x4 ; y3 ) 2 Ej because x4 > x3 , but also that (x4 ; y3 ) 2 Fj because y3 > y4 ,
which is impossible. At the same time, it is also surjective. Indeed, take some t 2 (t1 ; t2 ) which
is not part of Im . Since Im               is a closed set (as           is a continuous function with a compact as
                                                                                                                      1
its range), take t3 = max [Im \ [t1; t]] and t4 = min [Im \ [t; t2 ]]. Let (x5 ; y5 ) =                                   (t3 ) and
                  1                                                                   "
(x6 ; y6 ) =           (t4 ) and let " = min (x6       x5 ; y6     y5 ) > 0. Within   2 -neighborhood         of (x5 ; y5 ), pick
                                     "
(x7 ; y7 ) 2 Ej and within           2 -neighborhood     of (x6 ; y6 ), pick (x8 ; y8 ) 2 Fj . Then, by monotonicity,
(x8 ; y7 ) 2 Ej , and (x7 ; y8 ) 2 Fj (if not, then (x8 ; y8 ) 2 Ej by monotonicity, a contradiction). Now,
observe that
                                            "                    "
                           x 8 + y7 > x 6     + y5                 = x6 " + y5 x5 + y5 = t1 ,
                                            2                    2
                                            "                    "
                           x8 + y7    < x6 + + y5 +                = x6 + (y5 + ") < x6 + y6 = t2 ,
                                            2                    2
and thus         (x8 ; y7 ) 2 (t1 ; t2 ); similarly,     (x7 ; y8 ) 2 (t1 ; t2 ). Thus, for any              2 [0; 1], we have
  ( x8 + (1            ) x7 ; y7 + (1     ) y8 ) 2 (t1 ; t2 ). However, there is      for which this point is in Ej \ Fj ,
a contradiction.
     The remaining case is where either Ej or Fj , say Ej , has measure zero. If Ej 6= ?, then
(x; y) 2 Ej implies that either y = 0 or x = 1. Monotonicity of strategies then trivially implies that

                                                                 B-3
G is a connected subset of [0; 1]            f0g [ f1g        [0; 1], and the result immediately follows. If Ej = ?,
then G is empty, and the statement is trivially true. The same argument works if Fj has measure
zero. This completes the proof.
   The following lemma characterizes the cases where the projections of G on the two axes are
one-to-one mappings.

Lemma B4 Let (x; y) 2 G n @              j   and suppose that (ej ; y) 2 G ) ej = x and (x; fj ) 2 G ) fj = y,
i.e., there are no other points in G with the same ej or fj . Then                          (x; y) = 0.

Proof. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that                             (x; y) 6= 0. Suppose that              (x; y) > 0 (the
                                                         (x;y)
opposite case is analogous). Take " =                     3 ;     then, since curve G is continuous, there exists
  2 (0; ") for which there exists a unique point (x0 ; y 0 ) 2 G with x0 = x                                  and y 0 2 (y   "; y)
(let "0 = y       y 0 < "), and also      (x0 ; y) >     (x; y)        ". Now, consider a politician with type (x0 ; y);
we know, by de…nition of G, that (x0 ; y) 2 F , and, by continuity of , that (x0 ; y) > 0. By
                                                     0
construction, we have e^j (y) = x2 , and f^j (x) = y2 . Consequently, if this politician chooses E,
                                              E        y0                    E
the voters’posterior is aE   0
                         j (x ) =             j   x0 +  2 +       1          j   ~E
                                                                                 aj , and if he chooses F , the posterior is
              F        x             F
aFj (y) =     j   y+   2   + 1       j   ~Fj . But
                                         a           (x0 ; y) 2   F , thus aFj (y)         aE   0
                                                                                            j (x ). Note, however, that

                                                                                            y0       y
                            aE
                             j x
                                 0
                                         aFj (y) =            (x; y) +       E
                                                                             j    x0   x+
                                                                                                 2
                                                                              E     "0
                                                     =        (x; y)          j   +
                                                                                    2
                                                                                     "
                                                     >        (x; y)        "    "+
                                                                                    2
                                                     >        (x; y)        3" = 0,

We get a contradiction which completes the proof.
   The next lemma considers the case where (x; y) lies on a horizontal or vertical segment of G.

Lemma B5 Suppose that G contains a vertical segment not entirely on the border: for some
  2 (0; 1), fy : ( ; y) 2 Gg = [ ; ]. Then                 ( ; )             0 and     ( ; )         0, in particular, for some
y 2 [ ; ],        ( ; y) = 0. Similarly, suppose that G contains a horizontal segment not entirely on
the border: for some         2 (0; 1), fx : (x; ) 2 Gg = [ ; ]. Then                       ( ; )           0 and    ( ; )    0, in
particular, for some x 2 [ ; ],              (x; ) = 0.

Proof. Suppose that G has a vertical segment with (x; y) where x =                                       , y 2 [ ; ] and suppose
  2 (0; 1). If there is y~ 2 ( ; ) such that ( ; y) 2 E for y < y~ and ( ; y) 2 F for y > y~,
then it must be that          ( ; y~) = 0. Indeed, a politician ( ; y) with y 2 ( ; ) expects to get (in
                                                          E            y~              E
terms of voters’posterior belief) aE
                                   j ( ) =                j       +    2     + 1       j   ~E
                                                                                           a j from choosing E and to get



                                                               B-4
                   F                                F
aFj (y) =          j   y+     2       + 1           j     ~Fj from choosing F . Now, we have aE
                                                          a                                   j ( )                                     aFj (y) for y close to
y~ but less than y~ and aE
                         j ( )                            aFj (y) for y close to y~ but greater than y~. Taking limits, we get
    ( ; y~) = 0.
        Consider the case                     > 0. Take a small " and consider the politician (x0 ; y 0 ) = (                                      ";        + "). If
                                                                        0                              0                                            0
" is small enough, then there is some                                       such that             ";        2 G; for almost all ",                      is unique
                                                               0                                                                        0
(take such ") and, moreover, 0 <      < . If we take " small enough, then         will be arbitrarily
                             0
close to . Now, f^j (x0 ) = 2 and e^j (y 0 ) = 2 . This politician chooses F in equilibrium. At the
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                E                                      E
same time, he expects to get aE
                              j (                                      ") =     j           "+   2     + 1             j   ~E
                                                                                                                           aj if he chooses E and to
                                  F                                      F
get aFj ( + ") =                  j           +"+    2    + 1            j    a F
                                                                              ~j .   Taking the limit " ! 0, we get                         ( ; )        0.
        Now consider the case                           = 0. In this case, again take a small " and consider the politician
(x0 ; y 0 ) = (             "; "). Then f^j (x0 )                  0 and e^j (y 0 ) =        2   This player chooses F in equilibrium. At
                                                                                      E                f^j (x0 )                    E
the same time, he expects to get                            aE
                                                             j     (         ") =     j          "+        2           + 1          j   ~E
                                                                                                                                        aj if he chooses E
                                          F                             F                                                  E                             E
and to get aFj (") =                      j   "+    2    + 1            j     ~Fj . Consequently, we have
                                                                              a                                            j   (         ") + 1          j     ~E
                                                                                                                                                               aj
    F                                 F
    j   "+    2    + 1                j    ~Fj ; taking the limit " ! 0, we again get
                                           a                                                                   ( ; )           0.
        We can similarly prove that                         ( ; )             0. Thus, in any case,                ( ; )           0 and        ( ; )         0 and
therefore there is ( ; y) 2 G with                            ( ; y) = 0.
        In the case of a horizontal segment y = , x 2 [ ; ], we can similarly prove that                                                                ( ; )       0
and          ( ; ) 0, and thus there is (x; ) with (x; ) = 0.
                                            h     i
        In what follows, let rj = Ej = F
                                       j  2   ; 1
                                                    . The next results shows that for                                                       1
                                                                                                                                            2   < r < 2, G is
precisely the set of points with                           (x; y) = 0.

                                                                                                                                                   1
Lemma B6 Suppose that both Ej and Fj have positive measures.                                                                       If r 2          2 ; 2 , then
f(x; y) 2          j   n@     j   :        (x; y) = 0g = G n @                j,   and it is a upward-sloping line with                         slope 2r   1
                                                                                                                                                        2 r . If
        1
r       2,   then G n @           j       is a horizontal line, and if r                    2, then G n @          j   is a vertical line.

                                                                                     1
Proof. We have G n @                           j   6= ?. Suppose r 2                 2; 2   . Then the set of points with                         (x; y) = 0 is
                                                                              2r 1
an upward-sloping straight line with slope                                    2 r .   Moreover,            (x; y) is strictly increasing in x and
strictly decreasing in y. Consequently, G may not contain horizontal or vertical segments, as this
would contradict Lemma B5. If so, Lemma B4 implies that all points (x; y) 2 G n @                                                                        j    satisfy
    (x; y) = 0.
        If r = 2, then the set of points with                                (x; y) = 0 de…nes a vertical line. In this case, G cannot
have a non-vertical upward-sloping part (by Lemma B4), and every vertical segment must lie on
the set           (x; y) = 0. A horizontal segment could have one end on the line                                                  (x; y) = 0. If this is the
left end, then Lemma B5 implies that                                        (x; y)     0 on the right end. However, this is impossible,
since         is strictly increasing in x in this case. We would get a similar contradiction if the right end
of the horizontal segment satis…ed                               (x; y) = 0. Thus, G is a vertical line.


                                                                                     B-5
       If r > 2, then the set of points with                          (x; y) = 0 de…nes a downward sloping line. This means
that G may have only one point of intersection with this set, and then Lemma B4 implies that G
must be either a horizontal or a vertical line. If it is horizontal, then its left end should satisfy
  (x; y)         0 and its right end should satisfy                      (x; y)       0 by Lemma B5. Again, this contradicts the
fact that         is strictly increasing in x. Thus, G is a vertical line in this case, too.
                           1                   1
       The cases r =       2       and r <     2   are similar.
       This result suggests that G n @                   j   is always a line (perhaps empty): upward-sloping, vertical, or
horizontal. Lemma B10 below extends this result by showing that the same is true for G (inclusive
of @     j ),   unless almost all politicians choose Ej or almost all choose Fj . Before that, however, we
prove some necessary and su¢ cient conditions for existence of di¤erent types of equilibria.
       The next Lemma characterizes the conditions under which the curve G separating regions E
and F may be a horizontal or a vertical line.

Lemma B7 There exists an equilibrium for which the line G n @                                                 j       separating regions E and
F is the vertical line connecting points ( ; 0) and ( ; 1), where 0 <                                                     < 1 if and only if     2
         F                     F
         j        1            j      1
 1+      E        E   ;2       E       E    , which is only possible if r                  2. Similarly, there exists an equilibrium
         j        j            j       j

for which the line G n @              j    separating regions E and F is the horizontal line connecting points (0; )
                                                                                      E                  E
                                                                                      j        1         j        1
and (1; ), where 0 <                  < 1 if and only if                2 1+          F        F   ;2    F            F   , which is only possible
                                                                                      j        j         j            j
          1
if r      2.


Proof. It su¢ ces to prove the …rst part of the result, as the proof of the second part is completely
symmetric.
                                                           +1   1    +2
    Under the conditions of the Lemma, we have a   ~E
                                                    j = 2 + 2 = 2 and a      ~Fj = 2 + 12 = +1
                                                                                             2 . For
(x; y) such that x > , we have f^j (x) = 2 ; for x < , f^j (x) may take di¤erent values. At the same
                                         1

time, for any (x; y), e^j (y) = 2 . For any (x; y) with x < , and y > 0, we must have
                                                                        +2                                                   +1
                           E
                           j       x + f^j (x) + 1                E
                                                                  j
                                                                                      F
                                                                                      j   y+            + 1           F
                                                                                                                      j         ;              (B2)
                                                                        2                          2                         2
in particular, this should hold for x arbitrarily close to and y arbitrarily close to 0. Since
f^j (x) 0, we have
                          E          E     +2      F         F   +1
                          j  + 1     j             j   + 1   j      .                     (B3)
                                           2         2           2
For any (x; y) with x > , we must have

                               E           1                  E        +2         F                               F         +1
                               j    x+             + 1        j                   j       y+           + 1        j            ;               (B4)
                                           2                           2                       2                            2
in particular, this should be true for y arbitrarily close to 1 (and x arbitrarily close to ). Therefore,

                               E           1                  E        +2         F                               F         +1
                               j      +            + 1        j                   j       1+           + 1        j            .               (B5)
                                           2                           2                       2                            2

                                                                            B-6
                                              E             E        F                                                                 E          E        F
   Now, (B3) is equivalent to                 j        2    j        j           1, and (B5) is equivalent to                          j          j   +    j     1.
                                                   F                         F
          E                                        j            1            j            1
Since     j   > 0, this implies          2 1+      E            E   ;2       E            E       . One can easily verify that for any such
                                                   j            j            j            j

  (provided that        2 (0; 1)) there is an equilibrium, where we de…ne f^j (x) = 0 for x < , whereas
for x = , we let (x; y) 2 E if and only if y < , where                                        satis…es

                        E                               E           +2            F                                        F       +1
                        j        +        + 1           j              =          j           +          + 1               j                                   (B6)
                                     2                              2                              2                               2
                                                                                                                                        E         F
(existence of such value follows from inequalities (B3) and (B5); it is unique if                                                       j   >2    j ).    Finally,
                                                                         F
                                                                         j
the interval for       is nonempty if and only if 2                      E   < 1, which is equivalent to r                                 2.
                                                                         j

   The next Lemma characterizes conditions under which there is an equilibrium where (almost)
all types choose E.

                                                                                                                                                 1 E   F
Lemma B8 There exists an equilibrium where almost all types choose E if and only if                                                              2 j + j         1,
                                                                                                                                       E        1 F
and there exists an equilibrium where almost all types choose F if and only if                                                         j   +    2 j   1.

Proof. It su¢ ces to consider the case where all types of politician, except perhaps for a set of
measure zero, choose E. We have a ~E    1   1                                 ^       1
                                   j = 2 + 2 = 1. For any (x; y), we have fj (x) = 2 , whereas
                                         ~Fj . Politician (x; y) can choose E in equilibrium if and
e^j (y) may take di¤erent values, as may a
only if
                             E            1                     E            F                                         F
                             j    x+              + 1           j            j   (y + e^j (y)) + 1                     j       ~Fj .
                                                                                                                               a
                                          2
                                                                                              ~Fj (for
This must be satis…ed for (x; y) arbitrarily close to (0; 1); we can …nd suitable e^j (y) and a
example, zeros) if and only if
                                                    E       1                         E            F
                                                    j               + 1               j            j .
                                                            2
                                                                                              1 E            F
Thus, a necessary condition for such equilibrium is 1                                         2 j            j         0. At the same time, since
the type (0; 1) is most prone to deviation, this condition is also su¢ cient for the existence of an
equilibrium where all types choose E to exist.
                                                                                                                 1
   The next Lemma restricts the possible separtion lines G if r 2                                                2; 2      .

                             1                                           E F                  2
Lemma B9 Suppose             2   < r < 2, and max                        j ; j                3.    Furthermore, suppose that Ej and Fj
have positive measures. Then there exists (x; y) 2 G n @                                      j    such that x = y.

                                                                             1
Proof. Consider the case 1                    r < 2 (the case                2    <r              1 is considered similarly). In this case,
          E F         E
max       j ; j   =   j .   By Lemma B4, all points (x; y) 2 G n @                                       j   satisfy            (x; y) = 0. Solving the
equation        (x; y) = 0 for y, we get
                                                                             E                               F
                                              2r    1     1                  j     ~E
                                                                                   aj              1         j   ~Fj
                                                                                                                 a
                                     y=               x+2                                 F        E
                                                                                                                       .                                       (B7)
                                               2   r                               2      j        j


                                                                         B-7
                                                                                                                  2r 1
For 1     r < 2, this de…nes an upward-sloping line with slope                                                    2 r      2 (0; 1].
   Suppose that all (x; y) 2 G n @                   j   satisfy x > y. Then we can denote the points of intersection of
G with @    j    by ( ; 0) and (1; ) (with                      < 1,              > 0 because of the assumption of positive measure;
also, ( ; ) = (0; 1) is also ruled out, as then G would be a line with all points satisfying x = y). If
                            2r 1
so, we have that        =   2 r    (1              ). Then we have
                                                                                              2 r
                                       2      2 1                                             2r 1                           r       1
                            ~E
                            a j =        + + = +                                                     +            =1+                  .
                                       3  3 3 3                                           3                   3             2r       1
                                                                                                                                     (1     )       1
Since r        ~E
            1, aj       1. On the other hand, in this case, Pr (dj = E) =                                                              2            2   Pr (dj = F ),
and thus   ~Fj
           a       1. We can rewrite                     (x; y) = 0 as

                              E                y                                           x
                              j        x+                ~E
                                                         aj
                                                                         F
                                                                         j       y+                 ~Fj + a
                                                                                                    a     ~E
                                                                                                           j                ~Fj = 0,
                                                                                                                            a                                   (B8)
                                               2                                           2
which must be true for any (x; y) for which the indi¤erence condition is satis…ed and, in particular,
for points on G arbitrarily close to ( ; 0). Let us show that the left-hand side is actually positive.
A su¢ cient condition for that is

                                           E
                                           j              ~E
                                                          a j
                                                                             F
                                                                             j                    ~E
                                                                                               1 +aj                1>0                                         (B9)
                                                                                      2
                            2 r                                      r 1
Substituting       =1       2r 1           ~E
                                       and aj =1+                    2r 1            , the left-hand side equals

                                  E                                  1       F                 2         r             r 1
                                  j                            +             j       1+                            +        .
                                            2r           1           2                         2r         1            2r 1
This is positive if     = 0, while if                > 0, this equals

                                       F                  1     2r               1
                                       j           r+                                +2         r             +r       1 > 0.
                                                          2
                                                                                                                                     1 F
This last expression is positive if r > 1 (then the left-hand side is at least                                                       2 j    (1      r) + r   1, which
                                                                                                1 F1
is then positive) and for r = 1, in which case it equals                                        2 j               , which is also positive, unless              = 1.
However, r = 1 and           = 1 would imply                         = 0, and this combination is ruled out. Thus, we get a
contradiction which shows that it is impossible that all (x; y) 2 G n @                                                          j   satisfy x > y.
   Now, suppose that all (x; y) 2 G n @                                  j       satisfy x < y. Then we can denote the points of
intersection of G with @           j   by ( ; 1) and (0; ) (with                                     > 0,            < 1 because of the assumption of
                                                                   2r 1
positive measure). If so, we have 1                            =    2 r              . We also have
                                                                                                    2r 1
                                                   2      2 1                                       2 r                      r       1
                            ~Fj =
                            a              +         + = + +                                                      =1                   .
                                       3           3  3 3 3                                          3                       2       r
                                                                                                                                      (1        )   1
Since 1                           ~Fj
           r < 2, it must be that a                           1. As before, since Pr (dj = F ) =                                        2           2   Pr (dj = E),
we must have       ~E
                   aj       1 and 1                ~Fj
                                                   a           ~E
                                                               a j           1, so         ~E
                                                                                           aj             2        ~Fj .
                                                                                                                   a        In equilibrium, we must have
(B8) satis…ed for all (x; y) for which the indi¤erence condition holds and, in particular, for points

                                                                                     B-8
arbitrarily close to (0; ). Let us show that the left-hand side is actually negative. A su¢ cient
condition for that is

                                     E
                                     j              ~Fj
                                                  2+a                        F
                                                                             j              ~Fj + 2 1
                                                                                            a                        ~Fj < 0
                                                                                                                     a
                                             2
                                 2r 1                               r 1
Substituting            =1       2 r            ~Fj = 1
                                            and a                   2 r          , the left-hand side equals

                                    1    E        4r      3                         F           r                     r    1
                                         j                              1 +         j                          +2            .
                                    2             2      r                                  2        r                2    r
This is negative whenever
                                     1      F                                2      r
                                            j r        (4r         3)                   + 2 + 2 (r                   1) < 0.                             (B10)
                                     2
                                                                                            2 r                                      2r 1
Now consider two subcases. If r > 1, then, since                                            2r 1     (because             =1         2 r       0), (B8) holds
if
                                                                              F
                                                       3r (r            1)    j   + 2 (r            1) < 0,                                              (B11)
                                                   F          2
which is negative, provided that                   j    >     3r   and r > 1. On the other hand, if r = 1, then                                        =1    ,
                                                                             2 r
and x < y for all points on G implies                               <        2r 1   strictly. Hence (B8) holds if (B11) is satis…ed
                                                                                                                                                    E F
weakly, which is true since r = 1 in this case. Therefore, since we assumed that max                                                                j ; j   =
 E       F         2
 j   =   j r   >   3,   we get to a contradiction. This completes the proof.
     We …nally prove that G is a straight line, provided that both issues are chosen with positive
probability.

Lemma B10 Suppose that Ej and Fj have positive measures. If r                                                             2, then G is a vertical straight
                1                                                                                   1
line, if r      2 , it   is a horizontal straight line, and if r 2                                  2; 2   , it is an upward-sloping straight line
               2r 1
with slope     2 r .

Proof. Since both Ej and Fj have positive measures, G n @                                                      j    must be nonempty. Suppose …rst
that r       2. By Lemma B6, this implies that G n @                                    j   is a vertical line connecting points ( ; 0) and
( ; 1) for some              2 (0; 1). To show that G contains no other points (other than G n @                                                   j   and the
two endpoints), suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that a segment connecting ( ; 0) and ( ; 0) lies
on G, for some               satisfying 0         < a. This implies that (x; 0) 2 Ej for all x > . This means that
for x 2 ( ; ),
                                                                         +2                                                             +1
                         E
                         j    x + f^j (x) + 1                 E
                                                              j
                                                                                        F
                                                                                        j   (0 + e^j (0)) + 1                    F
                                                                                                                                 j         .
                                                                         2                                                              2
But f^j (x) = 0 for such x (because politicians (x; y) with y > 0 choose F ). Moreover, since this
inequality must hold for x arbitrarily close to , and e^j (0)                                              2       (this holds as equality if          > 0 and
is trivially true if           = 0), it must be that

                                        E                    E          +2              F                      F          +1
                                        j    + 1             j                          j       + 1            j             .
                                                                        2                   2                             2

                                                                                 B-9
                                                                                                           E       1 F
Since such equilibrium is only possible if r            2 (by Lemma B7), then, in particular,              j   >   2 j ,   and
we can subtitute       for   and get a strict inequality

                              E               E       +2      F                  F       +1
                              j    + 1        j          >    j       + 1        j          .
                                                      2           2                      2
Notice, however, that this contradicts (B3), which is a necessary condition for equilibrium.
   We have thus proved that a segment connecting ( ; 0) and ( ; 0) cannot lie on G. We can
similarly prove that a segment connecting ( ; 1) and ( ; 1) for                      <          1 cannot lie on G either.
                                                                            1
This proves the result for r        2. The proof for the case r             2   is similar.
                                  1
   Now, suppose that r 2          2; 2   . Then Lemma B6 implies that G n @                j    is an upward-sloping line
             2r 1
with slope    2 r .   The proof that G \ @        j   contains only the endpoints of this line is similar. This
completes the proof.




                                                          B-10
