NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAVINGS AFTER RETIREMENT:
A SURVEY
Mariacristina De Nardi
Eric French
John B. Jones
Working Paper 21268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21268
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

De Nardi gratefully acknowledges support from the ERC grant 614328 "Savings and Risks'' and from
the ESRC through the Centre for Macroeconomics. We are grateful to Rory McGee and Cormac O'Dea
for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, any agency of the federal government,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, or the IFS. This survey has been prepared for the Annual Review
of Economics.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Savings After Retirement: A Survey
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 21268
June 2015
JEL No. D1,D14,D31,E21,H2,I14
ABSTRACT
The saving patterns of retired U.S. households pose a challenge to the basic life-cycle model of saving.
The observed patterns of out-of-pocket medical expenses, which rise quickly with age and income
during retirement, and heterogeneous lifespan risk, can explain a significant portion U.S. savings during
retirement. However, more work is needed to disentangle these precautionary saving motives from
other motives, such as the desire to leave bequests. An important complementary question is why households
do not buy more insurance against these risks. Going beyond total savings and looking at its components,
including housing, and looking at other portfolio choices can help shed light on these questions.
Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London
and Institute For Fiscal Studies - IFS
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org
Eric French
University College London and IFS
30 Gordon Street
London, WC1H 0AX
United Kingdom
Eric.French.econ@gmail.com

John B. Jones
Department of Economics
BA-113B
University at Albany
State University of New York
Albany, NY 12222
jbjones@albany.edu

1

Introduction

More than one-third of total wealth (Wolﬀ [98]) in the United States is held
by households whose heads are over age 65. This wealth is an important determinant of their consumption and welfare. As the U.S. population continues
to age, the way in which its elderly manage their wealth will only grow in
importance. Most developed countries face similar circumstances.
Retired U.S. households, especially those with high income, decumulate
their assets at a rate slower than that implied by the basic life cycle model,
where the time of death is known. This raises the question of which additional
saving motives lie behind their behavior. The answers to this question are key
to understanding how their savings would respond to potential policy reforms.
In this paper, we present evidence on the potential reasons why so many
elderly households hold lots of assets into very old age. Most of these explanations fall into two categories.
The ﬁrst set of explanations emphasizes the risks that the elderly face late in
life, particularly uncertain lifespans and uncertain medical spending. That is,
elderly households may be holding onto their assets to cover expensive medical
needs at extremely old ages. In fact, the observed patterns of out-of-pocket
medical expenses, which rise quickly with age and income during retirement,
coupled with heterogeneous lifespan risks, can explain a signiﬁcant portion of
U.S. savings during retirement. It should also be noted that, even if the elderly
save exclusively for these reasons, many of them will leave bequests because
they die earlier or face lower medical spending than planned.
The second set of explanations emphasizes bequest motives. Individuals

3

may receive utility from leaving bequests to their survivors, most notably their
children.
These two sets of motivations have similar implications for savings in old
age, making it diﬃcult to disentangle their relative importance. We discuss
promising research that attempts to resolve this problem by looking at additional features of the data. We point out the importance of going beyond
total savings and looking at housing. We also discuss the roles of insurance,
portfolio choice, and rate of return risk.
Section 2 describes the patterns of savings, annuitized income, medical
spending, health and mortality, and bequests for retired elderly households in
the United States. Section 3 sketches out a life cycle model of single retirees
that can illustrate many of the potential saving motivations that face elderly
savers. Section 4 analyzes the savings implications of medical expenses and
diﬀerential mortality within this model. In this section we also discuss possible
reasons why households don’t buy ﬁnancial products that address these risks
directly, namely annuities and long-term care insurance. Section 5 discusses
bequest motives. Section 6 considers the role of housing, as opposed to ﬁnancial
assets, in determining retirees’ saving. This section also includes a discussion
of portfolio choice and rate of return risk. Section 7 documents some facts on
couples and brieﬂy discusses some of the issues involved with modeling their
saving. Section 8 reports on the aggregate eﬀects of saving motives and their
implications for various policy reforms. Section 9 concludes.

4

2

Facts for retired households

An important factor determining the elderly’s welfare is their consumption,
which is ﬁnanced by savings, Social Security payments, private pensions, and
other transfers from government and family. Gustman and Steinmeier [44]
show that for households near retirement, wealth is equal to about one third
of lifetime income. Examining the same age group, Scholz et al. [92] document
the three key funding sources of retiree consumption: net worth, employerprovided pensions, and Social Security beneﬁts. They ﬁnd that, with the
notable exception of people in the bottom lifetime income decile, who rely
only on Social Security, net worth is a major source of funds. Love et al. [70]
compute the trajectories of net worth and the discounted present value of
annuity income during retirement. They too ﬁnd that net worth is a signiﬁcant
component of total wealth.
We will keep net worth and annuitized income separate in our analysis. As
Hurd [51] emphasized, when households cannot borrow against future income
such as Social Security beneﬁts, the distribution of total wealth between net
worth and annuitized income will aﬀect consumption and saving.
To describe the saving of the elderly, we use data from the Assets and
Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) data set. The AHEAD is a
survey of individuals who were non-institutionalized and aged 70 or older in
1994. It is part of the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) conducted by the
University of Michigan. We use data on assets and other variables, starting in
1996 and updating every two years thereafter.
The graphs in this section, which are taken from De Nardi et al. [24], use

5

data only for singles. Single retirees comprise about 50% of age 70+ people
and 70% of age 70+ households. In Section 7 we present some graphs for
couples.
We break the data into 5 cohorts. The ﬁrst cohort consists of individuals
who were ages 72-76 in 1996; the second cohort contains ages 77-81; the third
ages 82-86; the fourth ages 87-91. We construct life-cycle proﬁles by computing
summary statistics by cohort and age at each year of observation. Moving from
the left-hand-side to the right-hand-side of our graphs, we thus show data for
four cohorts, with each cohort’s data starting out at the cohort’s average age
in 1996.
Since we want to understand the role of income, we further stratify the data
by post-retirement permanent income (PI). Hence, for each cohort our graphs
usually display several horizontal lines showing, for example, median assets
in each PI group in each calendar year. We measure post-retirement PI as
the individual’s average non-asset, non-social means-tested insurance income
over all periods during which he or she is observed. Non-asset income includes
the value of Social Security beneﬁts, deﬁned beneﬁt pension beneﬁts, veterans
beneﬁts and annuities. Because non-asset income is generally increasing in
lifetime earnings, it provides a good proxy for PI.

2.1

Asset profiles

We calculate net worth (interchangeably called assets or savings in this paper)
using the value of housing and real estate, autos, liquid assets (which include
money market accounts, savings accounts, T-bills, etc.), IRAs, Keoghs, stocks,

6

the value of a farm or business, mutual funds, bonds, “other” assets and investment trusts less mortgages and other debts. Juster et al. (1999) show
that the wealth distribution of the AHEAD matches up well with aggregate
values for all but the richest 1% of households. The amounts below are in 1998
dollars.

Figure 1: Median assets for singles.
Figure 1 displays display median assets, conditional on birth cohort and
permanent income quintile, for singles. It presents asset proﬁles for the unbalanced panel; each point represents the median for all the members of a
particular cell that are alive at a particular date. Median assets are increasing
in permanent income, with the 74-year-olds in the highest PI income of the
singles holding about $200,000 in median assets, while those at the lowest PI
quintiles holding essentially no assets. Over time, those with the highest PI
tend to hold onto signiﬁcant wealth well into their nineties, those with the
lower PIs never save much, while those in the middle PIs display some asset
7

decumulation as they age. Thus, even at older ages, richer people save more,
a ﬁnding ﬁrst documented by Dynan et al. [28] for the whole life cycle.

2.2

Asset profiles and mortality bias

Figure 2: Median assets by birth cohort: everyone in the data (solid lines) vs.
survivors (dashed lines).

It is well documented that health and wealth are positively correlated (see
for instance, Smith [94], Poterba et al. [88], and Adams et al. [1]). As a result,
poor people die more quickly and as a cohort ages its surviving members are
increasingly likely to be rich. Failing to account for this mortality bias will
lead a researcher to overstate asset accumulation. (Shorrocks [93], Mirer [77],
and Hurd [50]). Figure 2 compares asset proﬁles that are aggregated over all
income quintiles. The solid line shows median assets for everyone observed at a
given point in time, even if they died in a subsequent wave, i.e., the unbalanced
panel. The dashed line shows median assets for the subsample of individuals
8

who were still alive in the ﬁnal wave, i.e., the balanced panel. Figure 2 shows
that the asset proﬁles for those who were alive in the ﬁnal wave have much
more of a downward slope. The diﬀerence between the two sets of proﬁles
conﬁrms that people who died during our sample period tended to have lower
assets than the survivors.
The ﬁrst pair of lines in Figure 2 shows that failing to account for mortality
bias would lead us to understate the asset decumulation of those who were 74
years old in 1996 by over 50%. In 1996 median assets of the 74-year-olds
who survived to 2006 were $84,000. In contrast, in 1996 median assets for all
74-year-olds were $60,000. Median assets of those who survived to 2006 were
$44,000. The implied drops in median assets between 1996 and 2006 therefore
depend on which population we look at: only $16,000 for the unbalanced panel,
but $40,000 for the balanced panel of those who survived to 2006. This is
consistent with the ﬁndings of Love et al. [70]. Sorting the data by permanent
income reduces, but does not eliminate, this mortality bias.

2.3

Income profiles

We allow annuity income to be a ﬂexible function of PI, age, and other variables. Figure 3 presents average income proﬁles, conditional on PI quintile and
thus shows how income evolves over time for the same sample of elderly people.
Average annual income ranges from about $5,000 per year in the bottom PI
quintile to about $23,000 in the top quintile; median wealth holdings for the
two groups are zero and just under $200,000, respectively.

9

Figure 3: Average income, by permanent income quintile.

2.4

Medical spending profiles

Although Kotlikoﬀ [62] pointed out nearly 30 years ago that medical expense
risk could be an important driver of savings, it was not until the late 1990s that
top quality panel data on the medical spending of older households became
available in the AHEAD/HRS.1
As with income, out-of-pocket medical spending is a ﬂexible function of PI,
age, and other variables. Figure 4 presents average simulated medical expenses,
conditional on age and permanent income quintile. Permanent income has a
large eﬀect on average medical expenses, especially at older ages. Average
medical expenses are less than $1,000 a year at age 75 and vary little with
income. By age 100, they rise to $2,900 for those in the bottom quintile of the
income distribution and to almost $38,000 for those at the top of the income
distribution. Mean medical expenses at age 100 are $17,700, which is greater
1

Data from Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) became available at about the

same time. De Nardi et al. [21] review the MCBS medical spending data in some detail.

10

than average income of those of the same age.

Figure 4: Average out-of-pocket medical expenses, by permanent income quintile.

An individual’s out-of-pocket medical spending is a function not only of the
medical services she receives, but also of her resources and insurance coverage.
In fact, those with low assets on average pay a smaller share of their total
medical care costs because they receive more assistance from means tested
social insurance programs such as Medicaid. By way of example, consider two
people who need to be in a nursing home that costs $50,000. One person is
not Medicaid eligible. In most cases neither Medicare nor private insurance
will cover her costs and her out-of-pocket medical cost will be the full $50,000.
The second person has no income or assets and is thus eligible for Medicaid.
Her out-of-pocket cost will be zero.
If we look at the out-of-pocket medical expenses for the Medicaid-eligible
person, we would conclude that she faces no medical risk. However, to study
the eﬀects of health insurance, public or private, one cannot describe the un11

derlying medical expense risk without data on Medicaid payments. Figure 5,
taken from De Nardi et al. [21], uses Medicare Current Beneﬁciary Survey
(MCBS) data to summarize total medical expenditure over the age-65+ component of the life cycle. Figure 5 shows that Medicaid spending is signiﬁcant,
especially at older ages when nursing home expenses become larger. Ignoring Medicaid spending would lead us to signiﬁcantly understate total medical
expenditure risk.
40000

30000
Private Insurance

Out−of−pocket &
Uncollected liability

20000

Government: Other

Government: Medicaid

10000
Government: Medicare

0
65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Age

Figure 5: Average total medical expenditure, by age and payor type.

2.5

Mortality and health status

We treat health as a binary variable (good or bad), which we derive from
respondents’ self-assessments of their overall health status. As with income
and medical spending, we allow the probabilities of bad health and death to
12

Income

Healthy Unhealthy

Healthy

Unhealthy

Quintile

Male

Male

Female

Female

Alla

bottom

7.6

5.9

12.8

10.9

11.1

second

8.4

6.6

13.8

12.0

12.4

third

9.3

7.4

14.7

13.2

13.1

fourth

10.5

8.4

15.7

14.2

14.4

top

11.3

9.3

16.7

15.1

14.7

By gender:b

By health status:c

Men

9.7

Unhealthy

11.6

Women

14.3

Healthy

14.4

Notes: Life expectancies calculated through simulations using estimated health
transition and survivor functions;

a

Calculations use the gender and health

distributions observed in each permanent income quintile; b Calculations use
the health and permanent income distributions observed for each gender;
c

Calculations use the gender and permanent income distributions observed

for each health status group.

Table 1: Life expectancy in years, conditional on reaching age 70.

13

be ﬂexible functions of PI, age, previous health status and gender. Table 1
presents predicted life expectancies. Rich people, women, and healthy people
live much longer than their poor, male, and sick counterparts. Two extremes
illustrate this point: an unhealthy male at the bottom quintile of the permanent income distribution expects to live only 6 more years, that is, to age 76.
In contrast, a healthy woman at the top quintile of the permanent income
distribution expects to live 17 more years, thus making it to age 87.2 Our
estimated income gradient is similar to that in Waldron [97], who ﬁnds that
those in the top of the income distribution live 3 years longer than those at
the bottom, conditional on being 65. Attanasio and Emerson [7] document
similar ﬁndings for the for UK, while Hurd et al. [53] and Gan et al. [40] do so
for the US.
We also ﬁnd that for rich people, the probability of living to very old ages,
and thus facing very high medical expenses, is signiﬁcant. For example, we
ﬁnd that a healthy 70-year-old woman in the top quintile of the permanent
income distribution faces a 14% chance of living 25 years, to age 95.

2.6

Bequests

Gale and Scholz [39] show that intergenerational transfers are large in the
aggregate. However, while many people die with positive assets, leaving bequests to their heirs, most of these bequests are very modest. For example, De
2

Our predicted life expectancy at age 70 is about three years less than the aggregate

statistics imply. This discrepancy stems from using data on singles only: when we reestimate the model for both couples and singles, predicted life expectancy is within a year
of the aggregate statistics for both men and women.

14

Nardi et al. [24] show that one year before their death, 30% of people own less
than $10,000, 70% of people own less than $100,000, and 98% of people own
less than $1,000,000. Hurd and Smith [54] report that the average bequest
amounts left by decedents are even lower. French et al. [36] ﬁnd that part, but
not all of this decline can be explained by medical spending in the last year
of life and death expenses from burial fees. This decline might also be caused
by reporting errors, as children of decedents tends to underreport the value of
estates (Gale and Scholz [39], Laitner and Sonnega [66]), or by transfers aimed
at reducing estate taxes (Kopczuk [59]).

3

A life-cycle model

We can analyze many potential savings motives by studying a fairly simple
version of the life cycle saving model. In this model a single person faces lifespan uncertainty, uncertain medical expenses, bequest motives, and a healthdependent utility function. The person maximizes her expected utility by
choosing how much to save in a risk-free asset. Versions of this model have
been estimated in De Nardi et al. [23, 24] and have been found to ﬁt the data
well.
Consider a retired single person, seeking to maximize his expected lifetime
utility by choosing consumption ct , at age t, t = tr+1 , ..., T , where tr is the
retirement age. Each period, utility depends on both consumption and health
status, h, which can be either good (h = 1) or bad (h = 0).
The ﬂow utility from consumption is
u(c, h) = δ(h)
15

c1−ν
,
1−ν

(1)

with ν ≥ 0. The dependence of utility on health status is given by
δ(h) = 1 + δh,

(2)

so that when δ = 0, health status does not aﬀect utility.
As in De Nardi [20], the utility the household derives from leaving assets
to his or her heirs is
ϕ(a) = θ

(a + k) (1−ν)
,
1−ν

(3)

where θ is the intensity of the bequest motive, while k determines the curvature
of the bequest function and hence the extent to which bequests are luxury
goods.
We assume that non-asset income, yt , is a deterministic function of sex, g,
permanent income, I, and age:
yt = y(g, I, t).

(4)

The individual faces several sources of exogenous risk.
1. Health status uncertainty. The transition probabilities for health status
depend on previous health, sex, permanent income, and age,
πj,k,g,I,t = Pr(ht+1 = k|ht = j, g, I, t),

j, k ∈ {1, 0}.

(5)

2. Survival uncertainty. Let sg,h,I,t denote the probability that an individual
of sex g is alive at age t + 1, conditional on being alive at age t, having
time-t health status h, and enjoying permanent income I.
3. Medical expense uncertainty. Medical expenses, mt , are deﬁned as outof-pocket expenses. The mean and the variance of the log of medical
16

expenses depend upon sex, health status, permanent income, and age.
The stochastic, idiosyncratic component of mt is modeled as the sum of a
persistent AR(1) process and a white noise process. French and Jones [37]
and Feenberg and Skinner [31] show that having both persistent and
transitory medical expense shocks is essential to replicating observed
medical expense dynamics.
Assets evolve according to
at+1 = at + yn (rat + yt , τ ) + bt − mt − ct ,
at ≥ 0.

(6)
(7)

where yn (rat + yt , τ ) denotes post-tax income, r denotes the risk-free, pre-tax
rate of return, the vector τ describes the tax structure, and bt denotes government transfers. Equation (7) imposes a borrowing constraint. Government
transfers ensure that this constraint can be met even when medical expenses
are large. The transfers bridge the gap between an individual’s “total resources” (i.e., assets plus income less medical expenses) and the consumption
ﬂoor c:
bt = max{0, c + mt − [at + yn (rat + yt , τ )]},

(8)

If transfers are positive, ct = c and at+1 = 0.3
The consumer’s ﬁnancial resources are summarized by cash-on-hand, xt ,
xt = at + yn (r at + yt , τ ) + bt − mt .
3

(9)

See De Nardi et al. [25] for a discussion of the Medicaid rules and Hubbard et al. [48]

for other means tested social insurance programs.

17

Letting β denote the discount factor, we can write the dynamic problem recursively
{
Vt (xt , g, ht , I, ζt ) = max u(ct , ht ) + βsg,h,I,t Et Vt+1 (xt+1 , g, ht+1 , I, ζt+1 )
ct ,xt+1
}
+ β(1 − sg,h,I,t )ϕ(at+1 ) ,
(10)
subject to
at+1 = xt − ct ,

(11)
(

)

xt+1 = xt − ct + yn r(xt − ct ) + yt+1 , τ + bt+1 − mt+1 ,
xt ≥ c,
ct ≤ xt ,

∀t,

(12)
(13)

∀t.

(14)

De Nardi at al. [22] estimate this model using the Method of Simulated Moments (as done by Gourinchas and Parker [42], Cagetti [15], and French [34])
and ﬁnd that the model matches the observed asset data very well. In the
following sections we show various simulations of the model (for a set of estimated preference parameters that match the data well) when we shut down
diﬀerent combinations of its features in order to show how retirement saving
responds to various saving motives.

4

Precautionary motives

We ﬁrst report results for the case with no bequest motive (θ = 0) and no
health-dependent utility (δ = 0).

18

4.1

Exogenous medical spending

We ask whether the out-of-pocket medical expenditures estimated from the
data are an important driver of old age savings. To answer this question,
we zero out all out-of-pocket medical expenditures and examine the resulting
changes in assets. Figure 6, taken from De Nardi et al. [24], shows median
assets with and without medical expenses. We construct this ﬁgure by simulating the net worth of the AHEAD birth-year cohort whose members were
ages 72-76 (with an average age of 74) in 1995. We take the initial distribution
of net worth, permanent income, health status, medical expenses, and sex from
the 1995 AHEAD data. As the model reproduces the same mortality bias that
is present in the data, for ease of interpretation, we display proﬁles with no
attrition, so that the composition of the simulated sample is ﬁxed over the
entire sample period. This allows us to track the saving of the same people
over time.
The dashed lines in Figure 6 display the net worth proﬁles generated by
the baseline model with medical expenses. There are ﬁve of those dashed
lines, representing asset proﬁles for each PI quintile. As in the data, the
assets of those at the bottom quintile are not visible because they are close
to zero. Households in this PI group rely on their annuitized income and the
government consumption ﬂoor to ﬁnance their retirement. People with higher
PI levels start out with considerably more assets and decumulate their networth very slowly, with those in the top PI quintile starting oﬀ at $170,000 in
median net worth at age 74 and retaining over $100,000 past age 90.
The solid lines in Figure 6 are the asset proﬁles that result when medical

19

expenses are eliminated. Comparing the dashed and solid lines reveals that
medical expenses are a big determinant of retiree saving. Medical expenses
are especially important for those with high permanent income, who face the
highest expenses and are relatively less insured by the government-provided
consumption ﬂoor. These retirees are reducing their current consumption in
order to pay for the high out-of-pocket medical expenses they expect to bear
later in life. If there were no out-of-pocket medical expenses, individuals in the
highest permanent-income quintile would deplete their net worth by age 94.
In the baseline model with medical expenses their asset holdings at age 100
are almost $40,000. The risk of living long and having high medical expenses
late in life signiﬁcantly increases savings. Our results indicate that modeling
uncertain lives and out-of-pocket medical expenses is important in evaluating
policy proposals that aﬀect the elderly.

4.2

Endogenous medical spending and health-dependent
utility

The results shown in Figure 6 are constructed under the assumption that
medical spending is exogenous. This leaves no scope for individuals to cut back
on medical spending when in dire ﬁnancial straights. Several papers address
the issue of endogenous medical expenditure. De Nardi et al. [24], McMcClellan
and Skinner [75], and Ameriks et al. [4] allow increased medical expenditures
to increase current period utility, reﬂecting channels such as improved nursing
care. Yogo [101], Khwaja [57], Davis [19], Halliday et al. [45], Fonseca et
al. [33], Hugonnier et al. [49], Scholz and Seshadri [91] and Ozkan [83] build

20

Figure 6: Median assets by cohort and PI quintile: baseline model (dashed
lines) and model with no medical expenses (solid lines).

upon the Grossman [43] model of investment in health.
The results of De Nardi et al. [24] suggest, ﬁrst, that whether exogenous
or endogenous, medical expenses need to match the data and thus have a similar impact on observed savings. If individuals expect to purchase expensive
medical services at the ends of of their lives, they will save to cover these
expenditures. Second, when evaluating the eﬀects of counterfactual policy
experiments, such as adjusting the consumption ﬂoor c, allowing medical expenses to adjust will mitigate the savings response. Yogo [101] also ﬁnds that
allowing for endogenous medical spending reduces the precautionary savings
motive.
Laitner et al. [65] show that the risk of facing high medical costs is in many
ways equivalent to the risk of an increase in the marginal utility of consump-

21

tion. In both cases, desired spending increases and the risk of higher future
spending generates precautionary saving motives. They use this result to construct a simpler version of our model that can be solved analytically. Models
of endogenous medical spending in many ways take a similar approach, as
medical spending shocks are shifts in the marginal utility of medical spending,
either direct as in De Nardi et al. [24], or changes in the returns to investment
in health and thus endogenize medical expenses for the purpose of building
and preserving health.
A related question is whether the marginal utility of non-medical consumption varies with health, even after controlling for medical spending. In the
model at hand, the health-dependent utility parameter δ is identiﬁed from
the observed evolution of health, the asset proﬁles, and out-of-pocket medical
expenditures. If consumption is the residual in the budget constraint after
controlling for asset growth and medical expenses, health-dependent utility
is identiﬁed from the relationship between implied consumption and health.
Palumbo [84] and Low and Pistaferri [72] take similar approaches. In De Nardi
et al. [24], this parameter is negative—the marginal utility of consumption is
higher in bad health—but estimated very imprecisely. Hong et al. [47] use
consumption and health data and ﬁnd that bad health reduces the marginal
utility of consumption at younger ages and increases it at older ages. If the
marginal utility of health rises at older ages because of declining health, this
could create an additional motivation to hold onto assets at older ages. However, the literature has not yet reached a consensus about whether bad health
raises or reduces the marginal utility of consumption, let alone the eﬀect’s
magnitude (Finkelstein et al. [32]).
22

4.3

Heterogenous mortality
Simulated assets by age and PI

4

x 10
16
14

Assets

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

75

80

85
Age

90

95

Figure 7: Median net worth under diﬀerent mortality Assumptions
Notes: —-: baseline. – · –: everyone in bad health. – –: everyone male and
in bad health. –+—+–: everyone low permanent income, male, and in bad
health.
Figure 7, taken from De Nardi et al. [23], uses our model to show how
median assets vary with mortality. There are ﬁve clusters of lines in Figure 7,
one for each PI quintile. (The asset holdings of the bottom PI quintile are again
not visible.) The top line in each cluster shows median assets associated with
the baseline mortality assumptions. For each PI level, we also plot the savings
generated by the model under three other cases, where we make increasingly
pessimistic assumptions about how long people expect to live. This allows us
to isolate the eﬀect of the cross-sectional heterogeneity in mortality rates on
saving. First, as presented in the top dashed-dot line, everyone is assumed
23

to always be in bad health and have the associated mortality of those in bad
health. The resulting drop in life expectancy is 2-4 years, depending on gender
and PI. This lower life expectancy generates a noticeable drop in net worth,
especially for the highest PI households. The next dashed line corresponds to
the mortality expectations of males who are always sick, who on average live
5 years less than a woman of the same health and PI. The bottom crossed line
corresponds to the mortality expectations of low income males who are always
sick. In summary, diﬀerences in life expectancy related to health, gender, and
permanent income are important to understanding savings patterns across
these groups, and the eﬀect of each factor is of a similar order of magnitude.
4

x 10
16
14

Assets

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

75

80

85
Age

90

95

Figure 8: Median net worth under diﬀerent mortality assumptions when there
are no medical expenses
Notes: —-: baseline. –+—+–: everyone low permanent income, male, and in
bad health.
Figure 8 shows the asset proﬁles that arise when there is lifespan uncer24

tainty but no medical costs. The solid line displays asset proﬁles for the baseline life expectancy case, while the crossed line refers to the case in which
everyone has the life expectancy of a sick, poor and male person. Comparing
Figure 8 to Figure 7 reveals that when there are no medical expenses the effects of changing life expectancy are much smaller in absolute terms, even if
they are larger in relative terms. In absence of medical expenses, giving the
richest people the mortality rates of a sick, low-income male reduces assets at
age 85 by $32,000. Figure 7 shows that with medical expenses the reduction is
$50,000. Medical expenses that increase with age and permanent income prop
up old age savings for the richest. When their life expectancy is decreased, rich
retirees are less likely to survive to very old age and face very large medical
expenses. This has a large eﬀect on their level of savings and the sensitivity
of their savings to expected mortality.
In interpreting this ﬁnding, it is important to keep in mind that we do
not allow medical spending to jump immediately before death. De Nardi et
al. [21], Braun et al. [12], French et al. [36] and Marshall et al. [73] show that
expenses incurred near the time of death are large. The way in which medical
expenses increase with age therefore to some extent reﬂects higher mortality,
a feature not captured in our spending model. However, in our baseline model
medical expenses and mortality both increase when health switches from good
to bad. Moreover, Spillman and Lubitz [95] and Braun et al. [12] show that
end-of-life costs rise with age, probably because of increased long-term care
costs.

25

4.4

The role of lifespan risk
4

x 10
16
14

Assets

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

75

80

85
Age

90

95

Figure 9: Median Net Worth under Diﬀerent Mortality Assumptions
Notes: –+—+–: everyone low permanent income, male, and in bad health. –
o–o–: everyone low permanent income, male, in bad health, and with a certain
lifespan.
In this section we consider the eﬀects of longevity risk—the risk of outliving
one’s expected lifespan—on saving, an issue ﬁrst considered by Davies [18].
Figure 9 shows two sets of simulations. As in Figure 7, the crossed line shows
predicted net worth when everyone faces the mortality rates of a man with low
permanent income who is in bad health. This man has an expected lifespan of
5 years, but faces the risk of living much longer. The circle-dash line eliminates
this risk; all individuals in these simulations expect to live exactly 5 years, to
age 79. In such a case, there is no value in holding assets after 5 years, hence
individuals deplete their net worth by the end of their ﬁfth year, consistent
26

with a basic life cycle model. In contrast, most individuals facing uncertain
lifespans still have signiﬁcant asset holdings after 5 years, even when facing the
most pessimistic survival prospects. This comparison shows that at realistic
levels of annuitization, the risk of living beyond one’s expected lifespan has
huge eﬀects on saving.

4.5

Insurance

The life cycle model just described implies very strong demand for insurance
products, particularly annuities and Long-Term-Care (LTC) insurance. If
priced fairly, these products insure against lifespan or medical expense risk
much more eﬃciently than standard assets. For example, using a very simple version of the life cycle model with only life span uncertainty, Yaari [99]
shows that people should immediately annuitize all their wealth. However, it
is well-documented that U.S. households hold small amounts of annuities and
LTC insurance; see Fang [30] for a recent survey. In this section, we point out
that although the low purchase rate of insurance products presents a challenge
to the simplest versions of the life cycle model, more realistic versions of the
model have the potential to better explain both low insurance holdings and
savings behavior.
Many studies of the underannuitization puzzle focus on adverse selection:
long-lived people are more likely to purchase annuities, driving annuity prices
up and pricing out those who do not expect to live so long. Mitchell et al. [78]
show that when they use the mortality tables of those who actually purchase
annuities at age 65, annuities pay back 93 cents in expected present discounted

27

value for every dollar purchased. When they instead use the mortality tables
for the overall population, the return falls to 81 cents. Comparing the returns
of the annuitant and overall populations signals the cost of selection. But
even at observed levels of adverse selection, most reasonably calibrated life
cycle models with only life span risk still imply that people should completely
annuitize. For example, Lockwood [69] shows that people are willing to pay
up to 25% of their wealth to gain access to completely fair annuity markets
and 16% to access annuity markets with a 10% load.
A number of papers have studied potential reasons for the lack of annuitization. Medical spending risk could increase demand for liquid assets and
thus reduce the demand for annuities. Davidoﬀ et al. [17] and Peijnenburg et
al. [87] show that high medical risk early in retirement tends to decrease annuity demand, while large medical risks late in retirement tends to increase it.
Because medical spending tends to be modest before age 70 and grows rapidly
with age (De Nardi et al. [24], Robinson [90]), medical spending is unlikely
to signiﬁcantly decrease the demand for annuities. Medical spending may in
fact even increase the demand for annuities, as the mortality credit provided
by annuities makes them the most eﬀective way to save for large medical expenditures at very old ages (Pang and Warshawsky, 2010). Pashchenko [85]
and Lockwood [69], who study the demand for annuities in a rich framework
that includes medical expense risk, stress the importance of bequest motives
in reducing annuity demand.
In contrast to annuities, which pay beneﬁts as long as the individual remains alive, LTC insurance pays oﬀ only when the individual needs expensive
long-term care services. In principle, the demand for LTC insurance should be
28

large, since this insurance often pays oﬀ when other ﬁnancial resources have
been exhausted and medical needs are high.
However, access to comprehensive LTC insurance is likely incomplete. Hendren [46] shows that, conditional on observables, the market for an insurance
product will collapse if private information problems are suﬃciently large. His
main ﬁnding is that a large fraction of those applying for are rejected by the
underwriters because of private information problems. Hendren estimates that
23% of 65-year-olds have health conditions that preclude them from purchasing LTCI. Fang [30] points out that the typical LTC insurance contract caps
both the maximum number of days covered over the life of the policy and the
maximum daily payment for a nursing home stay, a daily payment that is often
ﬁxed in nominal terms.
Moreover, Brown and Finkelstein [13] point out that, by serving as the
payor of last resort, Medicaid signiﬁcantly reduces the return to purchasing
LTC insurance for 75% of the U.S. single households. This is because Medicaid
generally assists households only with LTC expenses not covered by other forms
of insurance. Lockwood [68] ﬁnds that bequest motives also reduce the demand
for LTC insurance. Davidoﬀ [16] shows that home equity may substitute for
long term care insurance. Indeed, it has been shown that health shocks and
loss of a spouse are associated with housing wealth decumulation (Venti and
Wise [96] and Poterba et al. [89]). This point reinforces a larger theme: assets
serve many purposes and can be used for many contingencies.

29

5

Bequest motives

As we discussed in section 2.6, many people die with positive assets and thus
leave bequests to their children or other heirs. However, it is not clear whether
these bequests are intentional or unintentional. For example, De Nardi et
al. [24] estimate their model with and without a bequest motive. Figure 10
compares the distributions of bequests implied by both versions of the model
against the data. The two speciﬁcations ﬁt the data almost equally well. It
turns out that in absence of a bequest motive, modest changes in utility function parameters yield larger precautionary savings motives, allowing the model
to ﬁt the wealth data almost equally well. Nonetheless, the estimated bequest
motive is strong, especially for the rich. This shows the diﬃculty of separately identifying precautionary savings motives from bequest motives using
wealth data alone. Both motivations encourage saving and both motivations
are strongest for the rich—bequests are modeled as luxury goods by construction and precautionary savings motives are strongest for rich people who rely
less heavily on means-tested government insurance. As Dynan et al. [27] note,
many people are likely driven by both motivations.
More recent papers have attempted to attempt to distinguish between precautionary savings and bequest motives by matching additional features of the
data. For example, Lockwood [68] matches additional data on purchases of
LTC insurance. His key idea is that in the absence of bequest motives all
savings is due to precautionary purposes, which implies that demand for LTC
insurance is very large. In the absence of insurance market frictions, the only
way to simultaneously match savings and low purchases of LTC insurance is to

30

a
1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

Probability

.6
.5
.4
0

.1

.2

.3

Probability

.7

.8

.9

1

b

10

30

100

300

Assets (000s of 1998 dollars)

1000

10

over

30

100

300

1000

Assets (000s of 1998 dollars)

Figure 10: Cumulative distribution function of assets held 1 period before
death: data (solid line) and model (lighter line). Panels a and b show results
for models with and without bequest motives, respectively.

have modest precautionary savings motives and a signiﬁcant bequest motive.
Using a complementary argument, Inkmann and Michaelides [55] conclude
that the life insurance holdings of UK households are consistent with bequest
motives.
Ameriks et al. [5] and Ameriks et al. [4] match the responses to ‘Strategic Survey Questions’ that involve hypothetical trade-oﬀs between consuming
long term care and leaving bequests. The hypothetical wealth splits chosen
by survey respondents help identify the relative strength of bequest motives.
Their results, based on samples of wealthy retirees, suggest that precautionary
motives are at least as important as bequest motives. De Nardi et al. [26]
match Medicaid recipiency rates and transfer amounts. Matching the Medicaid data bounds the medical expense risk and the strength of the associated
precautionary saving motives generated by their model. To match observed

31

assets holdings in this environment, the model attributes part of savings to
bequest motives. More generally, papers that bring more aspects of the data
to bear tend to ﬁnd more evidence in favor of a bequest motive, at least for
richer families.
There is also uncertainty about how bequest motives are best modeled.
Altonji et al. [3] empirically reject important implications of the purely altruistic, dynastic model. Hurd [51] and Kopczuck and Lupton [60] ﬁnd that the
presence or absence of children is not important to determining either the existence or the strength of bequest motives. In contrast, Ameriks et al. [5] ﬁnd
that households with children answer ‘Strategic Survey Questions’ in a way
consistent with stronger bequest motives. Laitner and Juster [64] ﬁnd large
heterogeneity both in bequest motives and strength.
An alternative to altruism is the strategic bequest motive introduced by
Bernheim et al. [10], where potential bequests are used as rewards. Brown [14]
ﬁnds that among AHEAD respondents and aged 69 and older, 14% (including
spouses) receive regular care from their children, while only 1% pay a child
for informal care. However, Brown [14] ﬁnds that while caregivers receive
more end-of-life transfers, the transfers are modest. Furthermore, McGarry
and Schoeni [76] show that in the AHEAD data, ﬁnancial transfers from living
parents to their children do not favor caregivers.

32

6

Housing, portfolio choice, and rate of return
risk

6.1

Housing

Our model contains a single risk free asset which can be bought or sold without
cost and which aﬀects the consumer only as a ﬁnancial resource. However, the
most important asset for most US households is their primary home, which
provides consumption services as well as ﬁnancial returns.
In most countries, people run down their non-housing wealth more quickly
than their housing wealth (Nakajima and Telyukova [81], Blundell et al. [11]).
For example, Blundell et al. [11] show that between 2002 and 2012 the median
non-housing wealth of elderly US households declined by close to 50% (Figure 11, panel a, circle-dash line), whereas median housing wealth declined by
about 30% (Figure 11, panel b, circle-dash line). During the same period in
England, the elderly ran down their non-housing wealth by 25% (Figure 11,
panel a, solid line), but increased their housing wealth by 40% (panel b).
Changes in housing wealth are driven by life-cycle changes in homeownership and home size, and time-speciﬁc changes in house prices. In the US, the
homeownership rate falls from 80% to 60% between ages 70 and 90, a fact that
cannot be explained by cohort eﬀects or diﬀerential mortality. In England,
Blundell et al. [11] show that the homeowership rate falls from 75% to 60%
between ages 70 and 90. Regarding downsizing, Banks et al. [9] show that
many retired Americans sell their home and use the proceeds to purchase a
smaller home, although this is much less common in England. Finally, during

33

a

b

over
Figure 11: Median net non-primary housing wealth (panel a) and net primary
housing wealth (panel b) in the US and England by age and cohort, 2002-2012.
Notes: Sample consists of households where at least 1 member responds in
both the ﬁrst and last waves.
the period 2002-12, the sample period behind Figure 11, both countries experienced run ups and run downs in housing prices. By 2012, US housing prices
had returned to their 2002 values, while prices in England had risen 20%.
There are several potential reasons why the elderly may liquidate their
ﬁnancial wealth before their housing wealth (e.g., Engen et al. [29]). First,
liquidating a house entails substantial transaction costs. For example, most
buyers and sellers use real estate agents and these agents typically charge 5-6%
of the selling price of the house. This is in addition to taxes and other fees
associated with selling a house and the time and eﬀort spent moving. Using a
quantitative structural model, Yang [100] shows that observed housing transaction costs can explain why older US households decrease their consumption
of housing more slowly than their consumption of other goods and services.

34

Second, housing is typically tax-advantaged relative to other assets, in several ways. For example, in the US housing can often be bequeathed to one’s
heirs tax-free, whereas liquidating the housing wealth will often force the seller
to pay capital gains taxes. Furthermore, housing assets are often exempt from
the asset tests associated with the Medicaid and Supplemental Security Income
programs (De Nardi et al. [25]). Households that sell their home and use the
proceeds to purchase ﬁnancial assets become ineligible for these government
transfers until the ﬁnancial assets are depleted. Finally, income from ﬁnancial
assets is usually taxable. The ‘rent’ a homeowner pays herself is untaxed.
Third, people may enjoy prefer living in owner-occupied housing to living
in rental properties, perhaps because they can more easily modify their own
property to ﬁt their needs. Estimating a structural model of saving and housing
decisions, Nakajima and Telyukova [80] ﬁnd that homeowners dissave slowly
because they prefer to stay in their homes as long as possible.
Documenting that homeowners decumulate their wealth more slowly, Nakajima and Telyukova [80] argue that homeownership is an important driver of
retiree saving. In principle older homeowners should be able to access their
housing wealth without moving, through the use of reverse mortgages. Nakajima and Telyukova [82] report that in 2011 only 2.1% of eligible homeowners
had reverse mortgage loans. They ﬁnd that bequest motives, nursing-homemove risk, house price risk, and loan costs all contribute to the low take-up of
reverse mortgages, but do not completely explain it. It is not clear whether the
observed slow decumulation of housing wealth can be explained unless reverse
mortgages are assumed to be unavailable.
The results in De Nardi et al. [24] suggest that appropriately modeling med35

ical expenses is important to appropriately modeling slow wealth decumulation
in old age, even when running down one’s assets is costless and frictionless.
Looking across countries, Nakajima and Telyukova [81] argue that medical expenses have important eﬀects, but primarily on non-housing assets. Because
home equity can substitute for LTC insurance (Davidoﬀ [16]) and can be bequeathed, the home ownership motivation cannot be measured independently
of the other savings motives.

6.2

Portfolio choice, and rate of return risks

Surprisingly little work has been done in terms of the link between health,
medical expenses, and portfolio choices. Yogo [101] allows for portfolio choice
in addition to health investment. Koijen et al. [58] propose a framework for
summarizing the risk exposure of complex portfolios in presence of mortality
and medical expense risks. These models are rich but do not account for the
fact that people cannot borrow against future annuitized income, for example.
Gomes and Michaelides [41] develop a rich model of portfolio choice where people face borrowing constraints and earnings risks but not health and medical
expense risks later in life.
French et al. [35] document large diﬀerences in portfolio holdings across the
elderly population and present information on the rates of return of diﬀerent
asset types. These asset price shocks are an important source of risk to the
elderly population. However, Love and Smith [71] show that there is little
evidence of a link between these portfolio shares and health status, once other
factors (such as the level of wealth) are taken into account.

36

Arguably the most important return shocks facing most households are
changes in house prices. Li and Yao [67] use a quantitative general equilibrium model to study the lifecycle eﬀects of house price changes. They point out
that increases in home prices likely reﬂect increases in expected future rents
and thus higher expected future expenses. This eﬀect mutes the non-housing
consumption and saving responses to house price changes. Older homeowners
face a shorter horizon, however; they will likely have to pay higher rents for
only a limited period of time. Thus the non-housing consumption response of
old homeowners is more sensitive to house price changes than that of middleaged homeowners. Attanasio et al. [6] use a structural model with housing
transaction costs and home-owning utility to study the eﬀects of house price
shocks on consumption growth in the aggregate. They ﬁnd that their model
matches the data quite well. Whether these models generate empirically plausible asset trajectories in old age remains an open question.

7

Couples

Building on Hurd [51], Hurd [52] was among the ﬁrst to develop a model of
the savings of couples. Moving from singles to couples introduces several new
considerations. Even if one assumes that couples behave as a unit, rather than
strategically,4 couples are subject to a diﬀerent set of risks and, potentially,
4

Mazzocco [74] shows that under full commitment, the behavior of a couple can be char-

acterized by a unique utility function if the husband and wife share identical discount factors,
identical beliefs and Harmonic Absolute Risk Aversion utility functions with identical curvature parameters.

37

bequest motives. Couples face two sets of health and medical expense risks,
but they can pool both their risks and their assets. They may also be able to
partially self-insure by using the time of the healthier partner to provide care
for the other one. On the other hand, two-person households are exposed to
the risk of having one person die. Couples may thus want to leave bequests
not only to children, but also to surviving partners. While single households
likely have lower needs, Braun et al. [12] show that the death of the husband
often leads to a large reduction in the wife’s income: widows are much more
likely to be impoverished than wives. Moreover, altruism toward a surviving
spouse may diﬀer greatly from altruism toward other potential heirs.

Figure 12: Median assets for intact couples, PI percentiles computed using
couples only.
Figure 12 displays median assets for households who are couples during our
entire sample period. The ﬁrst thing to notice is that these couples are richer
than singles. The younger couples in the highest PI quintile for couples hold
38

over $300,000, compared to $200,000 (in 2005 dollars) for singles, and even the
couples in the lowest PI quintile hold over $60,000 in the earlier years of their
retirement, compared to zero for the singles. As for the singles, the couples
in the highest PI quintile hold on to large amount of assets well into their
nineties, while those in the lowest income PIs display more asset decumulation.
Interestingly, these graphs display ﬂat to increasing asset proﬁles, going from
low to high permanent income.
Poterba et al. [89] and French et al. [36] document large falls in assets
at the death of a spouse. To quantify this observation, we perform ﬁxed

300000
200000
100000
0

2005 dollars

400000

Assets, by Permanent Income Percentile, Initially Couples

70

80

90

100

age
20th percentile couple
20th percentile to female
20th percentile to male

80th percentile couple
80th percentile to female
80th percentile to male

Figure 13: Net Worth, conditional on permanent income and family structure.
Notes: Figure assumes all households begin as couples, then potentially change
to a single male or single female at age 80, then exit at age 90.
eﬀects regression analysis, where wealth is regressed on a polynomial in age,
age interacted with permanent income and household composition (i.e., single
male, single female, couple). Figure 13 reports the predicted assets of a couple
39

starting out, respectively, in the top PI income quintile and in the bottom one,
and display the assets under three scenarios. Under the ﬁrst one, the couple
remains intact until age 90. Under the second one, the male dies at age 80,
while under the third one, the female dies at age 80. For both PI levels, assets
stay roughly constant if both partners are alive. In contrast, assets for the
top-PI couples display a signiﬁcant drop if either spouse dies. Interestingly, at
the lower PI quintile assets experience a large drop when the male dies, but
much less of a drop when the female dies ﬁrst.

8

Medical expenses, government insurance, and
policy reform

In the previous sections we have identiﬁed medical expenses as an important
factor generating large savings in old age and government insurance as an important factor mitigating this risk and thus reducing savings. Kopecky and
Koreshkova [61] develop a general equilibrium model with uncertain lifetimes
and old age medical expense risk. They show that savings for out-of-pocket
medical expenses in old age account for a signiﬁcant fraction, 13.5%, of aggregate wealth.
In a period of large and ever increasing pressure on budget deﬁcits, the
question of how and to what extent the government should insure medical expenses risk becomes even more pressing. De Nardi et al. [25] estimate a rich
structural model of endogenous medical expenses and savings and ﬁnd that
most individuals value the insurance provided by Medicaid at more than their

40

actuarial cost. Braun et al. [12] ﬁnd that, in presence of medical expenses and
lifespan risk, the gains from means-tested social insurance such as Medicaid
and food stamps are large. In fact, increasing size of the insurance by a third
beneﬁts both the poor and the aﬄuent, assuming the increase is ﬁnanced by a
payroll tax. Pashchenko and Porapakkarm [86] study the eﬀects of Obamacare
(and increasing Medicaid provision) in a general equilibrium model with exogenous medical expenses and ﬁnd that the welfare gains stemming from the
reform mostly come from redistribution, rather than reductions in adverse selection. Jeske and Kitao [56] also study the ﬁnancing of health insurance and
medical spending in a general equilibrium framework.
Thus, the literature to date suggests that means-tested programs such as
Medicaid are welfare enhancing. However, in presence of population aging
programs that beneﬁt the elderly, such as Medicaid and Medicare, will become
more broad-based and expensive. For example, Attanasio et al. [8] study the
ﬁnancing of Medicare in presence of population aging and medical expense risk.
They ﬁnd that the labor income tax will have to increase from 23% in 2005 to
36% in 2080, with over two thirds of the tax increase due to Medicare. This
result helps understand the size and growing importance of Medicare costs in
presence of population aging and the ﬁscal adjustments that will be needed to
ﬁnance it.
How medical spending should be distributed across people is also an important question. Ales et al. [2] assume that health care increases the survival
probability and consider an environment where individuals have diﬀerent life
cycle proﬁles of productivity. In the socially eﬃcient allocation for their environment, health care spending increases with labor productivity during the
41

working years, but is equal for everyone after retirement5 . They ﬁnd that in
the U.S., those in the top of the income distribution should spend 1.5 times
what those at the bottom spend on health care, conditional on health status,
for most of the life cycle. This ratio should decline from about 2 (at age 25) to
1 at retirement. According to their analysis, the largest ineﬃciencies lie in the
lower part of the income distribution and in post retirement ages, a ﬁnding
that is consistent with the idea that health insurance programs targeted to the
elderly poor after retirement are welfare enhancing (Braun et al. [12]).
Some, although not all, of the aforementioned papers allow for a bequest
motive. In the aggregate, the importance of bequests has been recognized at
least since the debate between Kotlikoﬀ and Summers [63] and Modigliani [79]
about what fraction of wealth that is transmitted across generations rather
than earned during one’s lifetime. Gale and Scholz [39] suggest that the
amount is at least 50%. De Nardi [20] ﬁnds that bequests play an important role in explaining the observed distribution of wealth.
As we have pointed out above, the relative importance of bequest and precautionary savings motives has not been resolved. Moreover, how the bequest
motive is modeled remains an important and open question. However, it is
likely that the consequences of diﬀerent policies depend critically on how these
two motives are modeled and quantiﬁed. For example, Fuster et al. [38] ﬁnd
that the welfare gains of privatizing Social Security are increasing in the degree
of altruism.
5

Interestingly, Ozkan [83] finds that early in life the rich spend significantly more on

health care, whereas starting from middle age, the medical spending of the poor dramatically
exceeds that of the rich.

42

9

Conclusion

As we have shown, the elderly run down their savings much more slowly than
implied by a basic life cycle model with a known date of death. The literature
suggests that uncertainty and heterogeneity in the length of life and medical
spending, along with bequest motives, are important to understanding the
slow decumulation of retirement wealth. In contrast, public insurance may
reduce the need to save to insure against longevity and medical spending risk,
although it is a realistic feature of the economies that we study.
Some of the risks aﬀecting savings can be estimated directly from the data.
For instance, we can measure total medical expenditures, private insurance
premia and beneﬁts, and government transfers to gauge the degree of total
and out-of-pocket medical spending risk. Also, we can estimate longevity risk
and its heterogeneity both from observed outcomes and from self-reported
expectations. Thus, we have good measures of the kind of medical expense
and longevity risks that people face. However, the relative importance of
the bequest and precautionary saving motives depend crucially on preference
parameters that cannot be identiﬁed directly. More speciﬁcally, we need to
infer risk aversion, patience, the strength of the bequest motive, and the extent
to which bequests are a luxury good.
Identifying these parameters, for both singles and couples, and the relative
importance of the bequest and precautionary saving motives that they imply
is important, because the consequences of policy reforms hinges on the relative
strength of these saving motives. Looking at additional features of the data,
especially those not matched in the calibration or estimation of the model, is

43

a key assessment tool. Recent studies have brought additional information to
bear in promising ways.

44

References
[1] Peter Adams, Michael D Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and
Tiago Ribeiro. Healthy, wealthy, and wise? Tests for direct causal paths
between health and socioeconomic status. Journal of Econometrics,
112(1):3–56, 2003.
[2] Laurence Ales, Roozbeh Hosseini, and Larry E. Jones. Is there ‘too
much’ inequality in health spending across income groups? Technical
Report 17937, National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2012.
[3] Joseph G Altonji, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J Kotlikoﬀ. Is the
extended family altruistically linked? Direct tests using micro data. The
American Economic Review, 1992.
[4] John Ameriks, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and
Christopher Tonetti. Long-term care utility and late in life saving. Vanguard Research Initiative Working Paper, 2015.
[5] John Ameriks, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. The joy of giving or assisted living? Using strategic surveys
to separate bequest and precautionary motives. Journal of Finance,
66(2):519–561, 2011.
[6] Orazio Attanasio, Andrew Leicester, and Matthew Wakeﬁeld. Do house
prices drive consumption growth? The coincident cycles of house prices
and consumption in the UK. Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(3):399–435, 2011.
45

[7] Orazio P. Attanasio and Carl Emmerson. Mortality, health status, and
wealth. Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4):821–850,
2003.
[8] Orazio P. Attanasio, Sagiri Kitao, and Gianluca Violante. Financing
Medicare: A general equilibrium analysis. In John Shoven, editor, Demography and the Economy. University of Chicago Press, 2010.
[9] James Banks, Richard Blundell, Zöe Oldﬁeld, and James P. Smith. Housing mobility and downsizing at older ages in Britain and the USA. Economica, 79(313):1–26, 2012.
[10] B. Douglas Bernheim, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Summers. The
strategic bequest motive. Journal of Political Economy, 93(5):1045–1076,
1985.
[11] Richard Blundell, Rowena Crawford, Eric French, and Gemma Tetlow.
Retirement wealth on both sides of the pond. Mimeo, University College
London, 2015.
[12] R. Anton Braun, Karen A. Kopecky, and Tatyana Koreshkova. Old, sick,
alone and poor: A welfare analysis of old-age social insurance programs.
Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 2015.
[13] Jeﬀ Brown and Amy Finkelstein. The interaction of public and private
insurance: Medicaid and the long term care insurance market. American
Economic Review, 98(5):837–880, 2008.

46

[14] Meta Brown. Informal care and the division of end-of-life transfers.
Journal of Human Resources, 41(1):191–219, 2006.
[15] Marco Cagetti. Wealth accumulation over the life cycle and precautionary savings. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 21(3):339–353,
2003.
[16] Thomas Davidoﬀ. Home equity commitment and long-term care insurance demand. Journal of Public Economics, 94(1):44–49, 2010.
[17] Thomas Davidoﬀ, Jeﬀrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond. Annuities
and individual welfare. The American economic review, 95(5):1573–1590,
2005.
[18] James B. Davies. Uncertain lifetime, consumption, and dissaving in
retirement. Journal of Political Economy, 86(4):561–577, 1981.
[19] Morris Davis. The insurance, health, and savings decisions of elderly
women living alone. Working Paper, 2006.
[20] Mariacristina De Nardi. Wealth inequality and intergenerational links.
Review of Economic Studies, 71(3):743–768, 2004.
[21] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, John Jones, and Jeremy McCauley.
Medical spending on the U.S. elderly. Mimeo, University College London,
2015.
[22] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Diﬀerential
mortality, uncertain medical expenses, and the saving of elderly singles.
Working Paper 12554, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.
47

[23] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Life expectancy
and old age savings. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):110–115, 2009.
[24] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John B. Jones. Why do the
elderly save? The role of medical expenses. Journal of Political Economy,
118(1):39–75, 2010.
[25] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, John B. Jones, and Angshuman
Gooptu. Medicaid and the elderly. NBER Working Paper 17689, 2011.
[26] Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. Medicaid
insurance in old age. Working Paper 19151, National Bureau of Economic
Research, June 2013.
[27] Karen E. Dynan, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. The importance of bequests and life-cycle saving in capital accumulation: A new
answer. American Economic Review, 92(2):274–278, 2002.
[28] Karen E. Dynan, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. Do the rich
save more? Journal of Political Economy, 112(2):397–444, 2004.
[29] Eric M. Engen, William G. Gale, and Cori E. Uccello. The adequacy of
household saving. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 0(2):65–165,
1999.
[30] Hanming Fang. Insurance markets for the elderly. In John Piggott
and Alan Woodland, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Population
Ageing, page forthcoming. Elsevier, 2014.
48

[31] Daniel Feenberg and Jonathan Skinner. The risk and duration of catastrophic health care expenditures. Review of Economics and Statistics,
76:633–647, 1994.
[32] Amy Finkelstein, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. Approaches to estimating the health state dependence of the utility function. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):116–
121, 2009.
[33] Raquel Fonseca, Pierre-Carl Michaud, Titus Galama, and Arie Kapteyn.
On the rise of health spending and longevity. Rand Working Paper WR722, 2009.
[34] Eric French. The eﬀects of health, wealth and wages on labor supply and
retirement behavior. Review of Economic Studies, 72(2):395–427, 2005.
[35] Eric French, Phil Doctor, and Olesya Baker. Asset rundown after retirement: The importance of rate of return shocks. Economic Perspectives,
31(2):48–65, 2007.
[36] Eric French, Mariacristina De Nardi, John B. Jones, Olyesa Baker, and
Phil Doctor. Right before the end: Asset decumulation at the end of
life. Economic Perspectives, 30(3):2–13, 2006.
[37] Eric French and John Bailey Jones. On the distribution and dynamics
of health care costs. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19(4):705–721,
2004.

49

[38] Luisa Fuster, Ayşe İmrohoroğlu, and Selahattin İmrohoroğlu. Elimination of social security in a dynastic framework. The Review of Economic
Studies, 74(1):113–145, 2007.
[39] William G. Gale and John Karl Scholz. Intergenerational transfers and
the accumulation of wealth. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4):145–
160, 1994.
[40] Li Gan, Michael Hurd, and Daniel McFadden. Individual subjective
survival curves. Working Paper 9480, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2003.
[41] Francisco Gomes and Alexander Michaelides. Optimal life-cycle asset allocation: Understanding the empirical evidence. The Journal of Finance,
60(2):869–904, 2005.
[42] Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Jonathan A. Parker. Consumption over
the life cycle. Econometrica, 70(1):47–89, 2002.
[43] Michael Grossman. On the concept of health capital and the demand
for health. Journal of Political Economy, 80(2):223–255, 1972.
[44] Alan L Gustman and Thomas L Steinmeier. Eﬀects of pensions on
savings: Analysis with data from the health and retirement study. In
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, volume 50, pages
271–324. Elsevier, 1999.
[45] Timothy J. Halliday, Hui He, and Hao Zhang. Health investment over
the life-cycle. IZA Discussion Paper No. 4482, 2009.
50

[46] Nathaniel Hendren. Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica, 81(5):1713–1762, 2013.
[47] Jay Hong, Josep Pijoan-Mas, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. Health heterogeneity and the preferences for consumption growth. Mimeo, University
of Minnesota, 2015.
[48] R. Glenn Hubbard, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. The importance of precautionary motives in explaining individual and aggregate
saving. Carnegie Rochester Series on Public Policy, pages 59–125, 1994.
[49] Julien Hugonnier, Florian Pelgrin, and Pascal St-Amour. Health and
(other) asset holdings. The Review of Economic Studies, 57(4):779–813,
2012.
[50] Michael D. Hurd. Savings of the elderly and desired bequests. The
American Economic Review, pages 298–312, 1987.
[51] Michael D. Hurd. Mortality risk and bequests. Econometrica, 57(4):779–
813, 1989.
[52] Michael D. Hurd. Mortality risk and consumption by couples. Working
Paper 7048, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.
[53] Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, and Angela Merrill. Predictors of
mortality among the elderly. Working Paper 7440, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1999.
[54] Michael D. Hurd and James P. Smith. Anticipated and actual bequests.
Working Paper 7380, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.
51

[55] Joachim Inkmann and Alexander Michaelides. Can the life insurance
market provide evidence for a bequest motive? The Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 79(3):671–695, 2012.
[56] Karsten Jeske and Sagiri Kitao. U.S. tax policy and health insurance
demand: Can a regressive policy improve welfare? Journal of Monetary
Economics, 56(2):210–221, 2009.
[57] Ahmed Khwaja. Estimating willingness to pay for Medicare using a
dynamic life-cycle model of demand for health insurance. Journal of
Econometrics, 156(1):130–147, 2010.
[58] Ralph S. J. Koijen, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Motohiro Yogooijen.
Health and mortality delta: Assessing the welfare cost of household insurance choice. Mimeo, 2012.
[59] Wojciech Kopczuk. Bequest and tax planning: Evidence from estate tax
returns. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1801–1854, 2007.
[60] Wojciech Kopczuk and Joseph Lupton. To leave or not to leave: The
distribution of bequest motives. Review of Economic Studies, 74:207–
235, 2007.
[61] Karen Kopecky and Tatyana Koreshkova. The impact of medical and
nursing home expenses and social insurance policies on savings and inequality. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(3):29–72,
July 2014.

52

[62] Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ. Health expenditures and precautionary savings.
In Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ, editor, What Determines Saving? Cambridge,
MIT Press, 1988, 1988.
[63] Laurence J. Kotlikoﬀ and Lawrence H. Summers. The role of intergenerational transfers in aggregate capital accumulation. Journal of Political
Economy, 89(4):706–732, 1981.
[64] John Laitner and Thomas F. Juster. New evidence on altruism: A study
of TIAA-CREF retirees. The American Economic Review, 86(4):893–
908, 1996.
[65] John Laitner, Daniel Silverman, and Dmitriy Stolyarov. Annuitized
wealth and post-retirement saving. Working Paper 20547, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2014.
[66] John Laitner and Amanda Sonnega. Intergenerational transfers in data
from the Health and Retirement Study. Working paper 238, University
of Michigan, 2010.
[67] Wenli Li and Rui Yao. The life-cycle eﬀects of house price changes.
Journal of Money, Credit and banking, 39(6):1375–1409, 2007.
[68] Lee Lockwood. Incidental bequests: Bequest motives and the choice to
self-insure late-life risks. Mimeo, 2014.
[69] Lee M. Lockwood. Bequest motives and the annuity puzzle. Review of
Economic Dynamics, 15(2):226 – 243, 2012.

53

[70] David A. Love, Michael Palumbo, and Paul Smith. The trajectory of
wealth in retirement. Journal of Public Economics, 93:191–208, 2009.
[71] David A. Love and Paul A. Smith. Does health aﬀect portfolio choice?
Health economics, 19(12):1441–1460, 2010.
[72] Hamish Low and Luigi Pistaferri. Disability risk, disability insurance and
life cycle behavior. Working Paper 15962, National Bureau of Economic
Research, May 2010.
[73] Samuel Marshall, Kathleen McGarry, and Jonathan S. Skinner. The risk
of out-of-pocket health care expenditure at the end of life. In Explorations
in the Economics of Aging, pages 101–128. University of Chicago Press,
2011.
[74] Maurizio Mazzocco. Household intertemporal behavior: A collective
characterization and empirical tests.

Review of Economic Studies,

74(3):857–895, 2007.
[75] Mark McClellan and Jonathan Skinner. The incidence of Medicare. Journal of Public Economics, 90(1):257–276, 2006.
[76] Kathleen McGarry and Robert F. Schoeni. Transfer behavior within the
family: Results from the asset and health dynamics study. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences,
52B(Special Issue):82–92, 1997.
[77] Thad Mirer. The wealth-age relation among the aged. American Economic Review, 69:435–443, 1979.
54

[78] Olivia S Mitchell and James M Poterba. New evidence on the money’s
worth of individual annuities. American economic review, 89(5):1299–
1318, 1999.
[79] Franco Modigliani. Measuring the constribution of intergenerational
transfers to total wealth: Conceptual issues and empirical ﬁndings. In
Denis Kessler and Andre Masson, editors, Modeling the Accumulation
and Distribution of Wealth. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988.
[80] Makoto Nakajima and Irina Telyukova. Home equity in retirement.
Mimeo, 2012.
[81] Makoto Nakajima and Irina Telyukova. Housing in retirement across
countries. Boston College Center for Retirement Research Working Paper, 2013.
[82] Makoto Nakajima and Irina Telyukova. Reverse mortgage loans: A quantitative analysis. mimeo, 2014.
[83] Serdar Ozkan. Preventive vs. curative medicine: A macroeconomic analysis of health care over the life cycle. Mimeo, 2014.
[84] Michael G. Palumbo. Uncertain medical expenses and precautionary
saving near the end of the life cycle. Review of Economic Studies, 66:395–
421, 1999.
[85] Svetlana Pashchenko. Accounting for non-annuitization. Journal of Public Economics, 98:53–67, 2013.

55

[86] Svetlana Pashchenko and Ponpoje Porapakkarm. Quantitative analysis
of health insurance reform: Separating regulation from redistribution.
Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(3):383 – 404, 2013.
[87] Kim Peijnenburg, Theo Nijman, and Bas J. M. Werker. Health cost risk:
A potential solution to the annuity puzzle,. Mimeo, Tillburg University,
2010.
[88] James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. The asset cost
of poor health. Working Paper 16389, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2010.
[89] James M. Poterba, Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. The composition and drawdown of wealth in retirement. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 25:95–117, 2011.
[90] James Robinson. A long-term care status transition model. Unpublished
paper, 2002.
[91] John Karl Scholz and Ananth Seshadri. Health and wealth in a lifecycle
model. Mimeo, 2013.
[92] John Karl Scholz, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. Are
americans saving optimally for retirement? Journal of Political Economy, 114:607–643, 2006.
[93] Antony F. Shorrocks. The age-wealth relationship: A cross-section and
cohort analysis. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 55(3):155–163,
1975.
56

[94] James P. Smith. Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relation
between health and economic status. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2):144, 1999.
[95] Brenda C. Spillman and James Lubitz. The eﬀect of longevity on spending for acute and long-term care. New England Journal of Medicine,
342(19):1409–1415, 2000.
[96] Steven F Venti and David A Wise. Aging and housing equity: Another
look. In Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, pages 127–180. University of Chicago Press, 2004.
[97] Hilary Waldron. Trends in mortality diﬀerentials and life expectancy
for male social security-covered workers, by socioeconomic status. Social
Security Bulletin, 67(3):1–28, 2007.
[98] Edward Wolﬀ. Changes in household wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in
the U.S. Levy Economics Institute Working Paper No. 407, 2004.
[99] Menahem E. Yaari. Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and theory of the
consumer. Review of Economic Studies, 32(2):137–150, 1965.
[100] Fang Yang. Consumption over the life cycle: How diﬀerent is housing?
Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(3):423–443, 2009.
[101] Motohiro Yogo. Portfolio choice in retirement: Health risk and the demand for annuities, housing, and risky assets. Mimeo, University of
Pennsylvania, 2009.

57

