NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GORDON GEKKO EFFECT:
THE ROLE OF CULTURE IN THE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY
Andrew W. Lo
Working Paper 21267
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21267
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015

Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Financial Advisory Roundtable (FAR) meeting,
October 17, 2014. I thank Tobias Adrian, Bev Hirtle, and Antoine Martin for inviting me to discuss
this topic, and Tobias Adrian, Brandon Becker, Roland Bénabou, Jayna Cummings, Jakob de Haan,
Leigh Hafrey, Claire Hill, Ed Kane, Joe Langsam, Hamid Mehran, Adair Morse, Antoinette Schoar
and participants at the October 2014 FAR meeting and the May 2015 Consortium for Systemic Risk
Analytics meeting for helpful comments and suggestions. The views and opinions expressed in this
article are those of the author only, and do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of any
institution or agency, any of their affiliates or employees, or any of the individuals acknowledged above,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w21267.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Andrew W. Lo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Gordon Gekko Effect: The Role of Culture in the Financial Industry
Andrew W. Lo
NBER Working Paper No. 21267
June 2015, Revised July 2015
JEL No. G01,G28,G3,M14,Z1
ABSTRACT
Culture is a potent force in shaping individual and group behavior, yet it has received scant attention
in the context of financial risk management and the recent financial crisis. I present a brief overview
of the role of culture according to psychologists, sociologists, and economists, and then present a specific
framework for analyzing culture in the context of financial practices and institutions in which three
questions are answered: (1) What is culture?; (2) Does it matter?; and (3) Can it be changed? I illustrate
the utility of this framework by applying it to five concrete situations—Long Term Capital Management;
AIG Financial Products; Lehman Brothers and Repo 105; Société Générale’s rogue trader; and the
SEC and the Madoff Ponzi scheme—and conclude with a proposal to change culture via “behavioral
risk management.”
Andrew W. Lo
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-618
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
alo@mit.edu

Table of Contents
1

Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 1

2

What Is Culture? ................................................................................................................... 2

3

Values from the Top Down: Authority and Leadership ................................................ 3

4

Values from the Bottom Up: Composition ....................................................................... 6

5

Values from the Environment: Risk and Regulation ...................................................... 8

6

Values from Economists: Responding to Incentives ..................................................... 11

7

Values from Evolution: The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis ........................................ 14

8

Examples from the Financial Industry ............................................................................ 22

9

Regulatory Culture ............................................................................................................. 26

10 The Role of Feedback Loops ............................................................................................. 30
11 Practical Implications for Regulators and Risk Managers ........................................... 32
References ................................................................................................................................... 39

1 Introduction
In the 1987 Oliver Stone film Wall Street, Michael Douglas delivered an Oscar-winning
performance as financial “Master of the Universe” Gordon Gekko. An unabashedly greedy
corporate raider, Gekko delivered a famous, frequently quoted monologue in which he
eloquently described the culture that has since become a caricature of the financial industry:
The point is, ladies and gentleman, that greed, for lack of a better word, is good.
Greed is right, greed works. Greed clarifies, cuts through, and captures the
essence of the evolutionary spirit. Greed, in all of its forms; greed for life, for
money, for love, knowledge has marked the upward surge of mankind. And
greed, you mark my words, will not only save Teldar Paper, but that other
malfunctioning corporation called the USA.
Despite the notoriety of this encomium to enlightened self-interest, few people know that these
words are based on an actual commencement speech, at what is now the Haas School of
Business of the University of California at Berkeley, delivered by convicted insider trader Ivan
Boesky in 1986, only eighteen months before his conviction.1
Millions of people saw Wall Street, and Gekko’s monologue became part of popular culture.
Hundreds, perhaps thousands of young people were inspired to go into finance as a result of
Douglas’s performance. This dismayed Stanley Weiser, the co-writer of the screenplay, who met
many of them for himself, Weiser wrote in 2008, at the height of the Financial Crisis, “A typical
example would be a business executive or a younger studio development person spouting
something that goes like this: ‘The movie changed my life. Once I saw it I knew that I wanted to
get into such and such business. I wanted to be like Gordon Gekko.’ After so many encounters
with Gekko admirers or wannabes, I wish I could go back and rewrite the greed line to this:
‘Greed is Good. But I've never seen a Brinks truck pull up to a cemetery.’”2
What makes this phenomenon truly astonishing is that Gekko is not the hero of Wall Street—he
is, in fact, the villain. Moreover, Gekko fails in his villainous plot, thanks to his young protégéturned-hero, Bud Fox. The man whose words Weiser put into the mouth of Gekko, Ivan Boesky,
later served several years in a federal penitentiary for his wrongdoings. Nevertheless, many
young people decided to base their career choices on the screen depiction of a fictional villain
whose most famous lines were taken from the words of a convict. Culture matters.

1

Greene (1986), Sterngold (1987).

2

Weiser (2008).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 1 of 44

This is a prime example of what I propose to call “the Gekko effect.” It is known that some
cultural values are positively correlated to better economic outcomes, perhaps through the
channel of mutual trust.3 Stronger corporate cultures, as self-reported in surveys, appear to
have better performance than weaker cultures, through the channel of behavioral consistency,
although this effect is diminished in a volatile environment.4 However, not all strong values are
positive ones. The Gekko effect highlights the fact that some corporate cultures may transmit
negative values to their members in ways that make financial malfeasance significantly more
probable. To understand these channels and formulate remedies, we have to start by asking
what culture is, how it emerges, and how it is shaped and transmitted over time and across
individuals and institutions.

2 What Is Culture?
What do we mean when we talk about corporate culture? There are quite literally hundreds of
definitions of culture. In 1952, the anthropologists A.L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn listed 164
definitions that had been used in the field up to that time, and to this day we still do not have a
singular definition of culture. This paper does not propose to solve that problem, but merely to
find a working definition to describe a phenomenon. Kroeber and Kluckhohn settled on the
following: “Culture consists of patterns, explicit and implicit, of and for behavior acquired and
transmitted by symbols, constituting the distinctive achievements of human groups, including
their embodiments in artifacts.”5 Embedded in this seemingly straightforward and intuitive
definition is an important assumption that we shall revisit and challenge below—that culture is
transmitted rather than innate—but will adopt temporarily for the sake of exposition and
argument.
A corporate culture exists as a subset of a larger culture, with variations found specifically in
that organization. Again, there are multiple definitions. The organizational theorists O’Reilly
and Chatman define it as “a system of shared values that define what is important, and norms
that define appropriate attitudes and behaviors for organizational members,”6 while Schein
defines it in his classic text as “a pattern of shared basic assumptions that was learned by a

3

For example, see Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006).

4

Gordon and DiTomaso (1992), Sørensen (2002).

5

Kroeber and Kluckhohn (1952, p. 35).

6

O’Reilly and Chatman (1996, p. 166).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 2 of 44

group… that has worked well enough to be considered valid and, therefore, to be taught to new
members as the correct way to perceive, think, and feel in relation to those problems.”7
The key point here is that the distinctive assumptions and values of a corporate or
organizational culture define the group. They will be shared within the culture, and they will be
taught as the correct norms of behavior to newcomers to the culture. People who lack these
values and norms will not be members of the shared culture, even though they may occupy the
appropriate position on the organizational chart. In fact, these outsiders may even be viewed as
hostile to the values of the culture, a point to which we will return.
It is clear from these definitions that corporate culture propagates itself less like an economic
phenomenon—with individuals attempting to maximize some quantity through their
behavior—and more like a biological phenomenon, like the spread of an epidemic through a
population. Gordon Gekko, then, can be considered the “Patient Zero” of an epidemic of shared
values (most of which are considered repugnant by larger society, including Gekko’s creator).
This biologically inspired model of corporate culture can be generalized further. Three factors
will affect the transmission of a corporate culture through a group: its leadership, analogous to
the primary source of an infection; its composition, analogous to a population at risk; and its
environment, which shapes its response. The next sections will explore how the transmission of
values conducive to corporate failure might occur, how such values emerge, and what can be
done to change them.

3 Values from the Top Down: Authority and Leadership
Who maintains the values of a corporate culture? Economics tells us that individuals respond to
incentives—monetary rewards and penalties. From this mercenary perspective, corporate
culture is almost irrelevant to the financial realities of risk and expected return.
However, the other social sciences offer a different perspective. A corporate culture directs its
employees through authority—sometimes called “leadership” in the corporate world—as much
as financial incentives, if not more so. The great German sociologist Max Weber broke down
authority into three ideal types: the charismatic, who maintains legitimacy through force of
personality; the traditional, who maintains legitimacy through established custom; and the
legal-rational, whose legitimacy comes from shared agreement in the law.8 We can see that

7

Schein (2004, p. 17).

8

Kronman (1983, pp. 43–50).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 3 of 44

Gordon Gekko is almost a pure example of Weber’s charismatic authority; however, at this
point, the style of authority is less important than the fact of authority.
According to Herbert A. Simon’s classic analysis of administrative behavior, a person in
authority establishes the proper conduct for subordinates through positive and negative social
sanctions.9 Social approval or disapproval, praise or embarrassment, may be the most important
factor to induce the acceptance of authority. Also important is the sense of shared purpose, in
the military sometimes called esprit de corps. People with a sense of purpose are more likely to
subordinate themselves to authority, in the belief that their subordination will aid the goals of
their purpose.
How much economic incentive is needed for an authority figure to influence the members of a
culture into bad outcomes? Experimental social psychology gives us a rather disturbing answer.
In the infamous Milgram experiment, originally conducted at Yale by the psychologist Stanley
Milgram in 1961, volunteers administered what they believed were high-voltage electric shocks
to a human experimental subject, simply because a temporary authority figure made verbal
suggestions to continue.10 Of these scripted suggestions, “You have no other choice, you must
go on,” was the most forceful. If a volunteer still refused at that point, the experiment was
stopped. Twenty-six out of forty people administered what they believed was a dangerous,
perhaps fatal, 450-volt shock to a fellow human being, even though all expressed doubts
verbally, and many exhibited obvious physiological manifestations of stress, three of them even
experiencing what appeared to be seizures. One businessman volunteer “was reduced to a
twitching, stuttering wreck, who was rapidly approaching a point of nervous collapse… yet he
continued to respond to every word of the experimenter, and obeyed to the end.” Milgram’s
volunteers were paid four dollars plus carfare, worth about $50 today.
Even more notorious is the Stanford prison experiment, conducted by the Stanford psychologist
Philip Zimbardo in 1971. Zimbardo randomly assigned volunteers to the roles of guards and
prisoners inside the basement of the Stanford psychology department building for a two-week
experiment.11 Almost immediately after the experiment began, the “guards” started to behave
in a dehumanizing way towards the “prisoners,” subjecting them to verbal harassment, forced
exercise, manipulation of sleeping conditions, manipulation of bathroom privileges (some of it
physically filthy), and the use of nudity to humiliate the “prisoners.” Zimbardo, who played the

9

Simon (1997, pp. 184–185).

10

Milgram (1963).

11

Haney, Banks, and Zimbardo (1973a, b).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 4 of 44

role of prison superintendent, terminated the experiment after only six days, at the urging of his
future wife, Christina Maslach, whom he had brought in as an outsider to conduct interviews
with the subjects.12 Zimbardo paid his subjects fifteen dollars a day, roughly $90 per diem in
today’s dollars.
It should be obvious that monetary incentives are completely insufficient to explain the
behavior of these volunteers. In Milgram’s experiment, the majority of subjects submitted
themselves to the verbal demands of an authority, despite the severe mental stress inflicted by
these tasks. In Zimbardo’s experiment, volunteers threw themselves into the role of guards with
gusto, with Zimbardo himself playing the role of the superintendent willing to overlook
systemic abuses. In each case, the volunteers fulfilled the roles which they believed were
expected of them by the authority.
Leadership is important in harnessing the behavior of a corporation’s employees to become
more productive and competitive. Unfortunately, as Milgram and Zimbardo have
demonstrated, the same factors that allow leadership to manifest itself through performance
and teamwork, also allow it to promote goals without a moral, ethical, legal, profitable, or even
rational basis. Remember that 65% of Milgram’s experimental subjects were compelled to keep
administering electric shocks merely by verbal expressions of disapproval by the authority
figure.
In corporate cultures that lack the capacity to incorporate an outside opinion, the primary check
on behavior is the authority. From within a corporate culture, an authority may see his or her
role as similar to the conductor of an orchestra, managing a group of highly trained
professionals in pursuit of a lofty goal. From a viewpoint outside the culture, however, they
may be cultivating the moral equivalent of a gang of brutes, as did Zimbardo himself in his role
as mock prison superintendent. It took a trusted outsider to see the Stanford prison experiment
with clear eyes, and to convince Zimbardo that his experiment was in fact an unethical
degradation of his test subjects.
Finally, even if the authority has an excellent track record, Robert Shiller has pointed out there
is a subtle form of moral hazard associated with this excellence: if “people have learned that
when experts tell them something is all right, it probably is, even if it does not seem so… Thus

12

Additional details from the Stanford Prison Experiment website, http://www.prisonexp.org.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 5 of 44

the results of Milgram’s experiment can also be interpreted as springing from people’s past
learning about the reliability of authorities.”13

4 Values from the Bottom Up: Composition
Not all of corporate culture is created from the top down. A culture is also composed of the
behavior of the people within it, from the bottom up. Corporate culture is subject to
compositional effects, based on the values and the behaviors of the people it hires, even as
corporate authority attempts to inculcate its preferred values and behaviors into its employees.
The pool of possible corporate employees today is wide and diverse. Firms and industries draw
from this pool with a particular employee profile in mind, often filtering out other qualified
candidates. However, this filter may shape the corporate culture in unexpected ways. In the late
1990s, the anthropologist Karen Ho conducted an ethnographic survey of Wall Street
investment banks. Beginning in the 1980s, the era of Oliver Stone’s Wall Street, these firms
deliberately targeted recent graduates of elite schools, in particular Harvard and Princeton,
appealing to their intellectual vanity: “the best and the brightest.” These recruits brought their
social norms and values with them to Wall Street.14 As newer hires were promoted, and older
members departed, a new norm of behavior developed within investment bank culture through
population change. Knowledge of the older Wall Street culture faded and became secondhand,
while Michael Lewis’s memoir about graduating from Princeton to work at Salomon Brothers,
Liar’s Poker, became a manifesto for this new elite.15 Even the drawbacks of a Wall Street job
could confirm the values of an elite worldview. Ho found that her informants rationalized Wall
Street job insecurity as normative, since the insecurity revealed “who is flexible and who can
accept change.”16 The historically high levels of Wall Street compensation were, in her
informants’ view, the natural reward for members of the elite assuming the personal risk of
losing their job.
Corporations deliberately choose employees with attributes its leadership believes are useful to
the corporation. To borrow a biological metaphor, the hiring process is a form of artificial
selection from a population with a great deal of variation in personality type, worldview, and
other individual traits. All else being equal, employees with traits that better fit the corporate

13

Shiller (2005, p. 159).

14

Ho (2009, pp. 39–66).

15

Ho (2009, p. 337).

16

Ho (2009, p. 274).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 6 of 44

culture will do better in the corporation since they are already adapted to that particular
environment. This leads to a feedback loop reinforcing the corporate culture’s values.
Employees who do not fit this profile find themselves under social pressure to adapt or leave
the organization. This process of selection and adaptation leads to stronger corporate cultures,
which are correlated to stronger performance. However, there are times when a corporation
benefits from a diversity of viewpoints to prevent groupthink.17 The innovator, the
whistleblower, the contrarian, and the devil’s advocate all have necessary roles in the modern
corporation, especially in a shifting economic environment. A human resources manager, then,
faces much the same dilemma as a portfolio manager.
Many corporations deliberately hire “self-starters” or “go-getters,” people with aggressive or
risk-taking personalities who are thought to have a competitive nature, which (so goes the
belief) will lead to higher profits for the firm. This personality type is drawn to what the
sociologist Stephen Lyng has described as “edgework.”18 Lyng takes this term from the writings
of the gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson to describe the pleasurable form of voluntary risktaking sometimes found in adventure sports such as skydiving, or in hazardous occupations
such as test piloting. In these fields, the individual is put at severe risk, but the risk is made
pleasurable through a sense of satisfaction in one’s superior ability to navigate such dangerous
waters. This naturally extends to the financial industry, and in fact the sociologist Charles W.
Smith recently used the concept of edgework to compare the financial market trader to the sea
kayaker.19
Edgeworkers normally think of themselves as ferociously independent. Nevertheless, Lyng has
found that success in the face of risk reinforces a sense of group solidarity and belonging to an
elite culture between edgeworkers, even across professions. But this sense of solidarity extends
only to fellow edgeworkers, which puts them at odds with the larger culture. In a corporation,
this can lead to a split between a trading desk, or even upper management, and the rest of the
corporate culture. For example, the organizational theorist Zur Shapira conducted surveys of
fifty American and Israeli executives, and found that, even though many urged their
subordinates to maintain risk-averse behavior, they themselves took greater risks, taking active
enjoyment in succeeding in the face of those risks. One company president still viewed himself
as an edgeworker, telling Shapira, “Satisfaction from success is directly related to the degree of

17

Janis (1982).

18

Lyng (1990).

19

Smith (2005).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 7 of 44

risk taken.”20 For a new hire who patterns job behavior on an authority figure within the firm,
this may be a case of “Do as I say, not as I do.”
Group composition may lead to differences that cannot be explained by culture alone. An
individual’s temperament and personality are largely internal in origin, and are difficult to
change. Some traits, such as the propensity for risk-taking, may have deeper causes. For
example, it has long been documented that younger men are more prone to dangerous activities
than older men or women of the same age, in behaviors ranging from reckless driving to
homicide.21 There may be a neuroscientific reason for this difference in the development of the
adolescent brain.22 These differences are by definition not cultural: they can neither be learned
nor transmitted symbolically. Yet these differences affect the highest levels of human behavior.
Nevertheless, culture is still powerful even in the face of intrinsic behavioral variation. To take
the most dramatic example, consider risk-taking behavior, which has known physiological and
neurological correlates. Insurance companies use automobile fatalities as a proxy to measure
risk-taking behavior between groups. However, there has been an absolute decline in
automobile fatalities in the U.S. over the last forty years, despite a vast increase in the number of
drivers and miles traveled. This decline was caused by changes in culture: in material culture,
such as advances in the design of automobiles and highways; in regulatory culture, such as
appropriate speed limit enforcement; and in social culture, such as the stigmatization of driving
under the influence of alcohol. The same innate propensity for risk is as present today as it was
in 1975, but the culture at large changed to limit its negative effects on the highway.

5 Values from the Environment: Risk and Regulation
The third factor influencing corporate culture is the environment. Competition, economic
climate, regulatory requirement—the list of possible environmental factors to affect corporate
culture may seem bewilderingly complex. However, the anthropologist Mary Douglas made the
elegant observation that a culture’s values are reflected in how it manages risk, which in turn
reflects how the culture perceives its environment.23 No culture has the resources to eliminate
all risk; therefore, a culture ranks its dangers according to what it finds most important, both
positively and negatively. This prioritization acts like a snapshot of the culture’s operating

20

Shapira (1995, p. 58).

21

Wilson and Daly (1985).

22

For example, see Steinberg (2008).

23

Douglas and Wildavsky (1982).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 8 of 44

environment, just as an insurance portfolio may act like a snapshot of the policyholder’s day-today environment. It is important to note that a culture’s ranking of danger may have little to do
with the mathematical probability of an event. As a modern example, Douglas looked at the
expansion of legal liability in the U.S. and its role in the insurance crisis of the 1970s. The
underlying probability of medical malpractice or illness from toxic waste changed very little
over that period. In Douglas’s analysis, what changed was how society chose to respond to
those dangers, due to a change in cultural values.
Cultures warn against some dangers, but downplay others, in order to reinforce their internal
cultural values. For example, sociologist Sudhir Venkatesh finds that in “Maquis Park,” a poor
African-American neighborhood in Chicago, risk-taking behavior is leaving the established
network of formal and informal business relationships that define the community, rather than
experiencing the Knightian uncertainty of establishing new connections with few resources in
the hostile environment of greater Chicago.24 Despite its high crime rate, the culture of Maquis
Park is risk-averse. Criminal behavior there is often an application of economic rationalism and
cost-benefit analysis in the face of limited options, rather than an expression of a higher
tendency to take risks.
Douglas’s idea that the values of a culture are reflected in how they prioritize risk has
immediate application in understanding differences in corporate behavior. For example,
compare risk-taking in the insurance industry versus the banking industry. The insurance
industry is culturally more conservative precisely because a significant portion of its revenues is
determined by state regulation—insurers make money by protecting their downside, i.e.,
through careful risk management. In the banking industry, however, revenues are variable,
and in many cases, directly related to size and leverage; therefore, risk-taking is much more
flexible and encouraged.
According to Douglas, modern cultures fall into three ideal types: the hierarchical, which
includes the bureaucratic tendencies of government, but also of the large corporation; the
individualistic, the world of the market, the entrepreneur, and classic utility theory; and the
sectarian, the world of the outsider, the interest group, and the religious sect. These cultures
have predictable ways in which they interact with one another. The U.S. is obviously
multicultural, but its central institutions are largely hierarchical or individualistic, while its
population is largely sectarian. Each type of culture has a distinctive response to danger—a reemphasis of the importance of the hierarchy, the individual, or the sect—which it uses to

24

Venkatesh (2006, pp. 148–150).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 9 of 44

reinforce the values of the culture, often at the expense of competing views. Thus, for
individualistic cultures, as the late German sociologist Ulrich Beck said, “community is
dissolved in the acid bath of competition.”25
This cultural defense mechanism has important implications, not only for managers, but also for
regulators. To borrow Douglas’s distinction, the central cultures of the financial world find it
very easy to ignore voices from the border, whether they are radicalized protestors in the
streets, regulators from a government agency, or a dissenting opinion from within the financial
community. Regulators are not immune to this defense mechanism, whether they are federal
agencies, professional standard organizations, or law enforcement. In fact, the sanctions taken
against a whistleblower in a regulatory organization may be much harsher than those taken in a
corporation because the whistleblower diminishes the regulator’s legitimacy, the source of its
legal-rational authority over others.
A corporate culture may defend itself so strongly that, despite almost everyone’s dissatisfaction
with the status quo, it may find itself unable to change its norms of behavior. This is not an
exaggeration. In the 1990s, the organizational theorist John Weeks conducted an ethnographic
survey of a large British bank, “British Armstrong,” in which he found precisely that pattern of
behavior.26 Prevailing corporate cultural values in “BritArm” were used to diminish or discount
criticism. For example, BritArm prided itself on its discretion, which meant that complaints had
to be made obliquely, and were therefore easily ignored. However, employees who made blunt
or outspoken criticisms were viewed as outsiders who lacked BritArm’s cultural values, and
were also ignored as part of the culture’s immune response. An acceptable level of complaint, in
fact, became a new norm among BritArm’s employees, part of their corporate cultural identity.
As Weeks explains, “Complaining about a culture in the culturally acceptable ways should not
be seen as an act of opposition to that culture. Rather, it is a cultural form that… has the effect of
enacting the very culture that it ostensibly criticizes.”27
Culture is also subject to the social trends and undercurrents in the environment, creating a
unique and palpable set of ideals, customs, and values that broadly influence societal behavior.
From a sociological perspective, we might call these instances the “collective consciousness” of
society, a term first proposed by the late nineteenth-century French sociologist Émile

25

Beck (1992, p. 94).

26

Weeks (2004).

27

Weeks (2004, p. 12).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 10 of 44

Durkheim.28 Examples might include the giddy dynamism of the Roaring Twenties, the
flirtation with Marxism and socialism in midcentury, and the countercultural movement of the
1960s. From an economic perspective, examples might include recessions, depressions,
hyperinflation, and asset bubbles—periods where macroeconomic factors overwhelm industryor institution-specific factors in determining behavior throughout the economy.
During such periods, it is easy to see how entrepreneurs, investors, corporate executives, and
regulators are all shaped by the cultural milieu that surrounds them. In good times, greed is
indeed good, and regulation seems unnecessary or counterproductive; in bad times, especially
in the aftermath of a financial crisis, greed is the root of all evil, and regulation must be
strengthened to combat such evil.

6 Values from Economists: Responding to Incentives
Economists have traditionally looked at theories of cultural values with skepticism, whether
such theories have come from psychology, anthropology, ethnography, sociology, or
management science. Part of this skepticism is due to the culture of economics, one that prizes
the narrative of rational economic self-interest above all else. Given two competing explanations
for a particular market anomaly, a behavioral theory and a rational expectations model, the vast
majority of economists will choose the latter—even if rationality requires unrealistically
complex inferences about everyone’s preferences, information, and expectations.

The

mathematical elegance of a rational expectations equilibrium usually trumps the messy and
imprecise narrative of corporate culture. For example, Schein breaks down an organizational
culture into its observable artifacts, espoused values, and unspoken assumptions.29 In the pure
economist’s view, this is much too touchy-feely. An economist will measure observables, but
look askance at self-reported values, and ignore unspoken assumptions in favor of revealed
preferences. Gordon Gekko’s motivation—and his appeal to moviegoers—is simple: wealth and
power. He is Homo economicus—the financial equivalent of John Galt in Ayn Rand’s Atlas
Shrugged—optimizing his expected utility subject to constraints.

From the economist’s

perspective, Gekko’s only fault is optimizing with fewer constraints than those imposed by the
legal system.
However, the economist’s view of rational self-interest is not simply axiomatic—economic selfinterest is a learned and symbolically transmitted behavior. We do not expect children or the

28

Durkheim (1893).

29

Schein (2004, p. 26).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 11 of 44

mentally impaired to pursue their rational self-interest, nor do we expect the financially
misinformed to be able to maximize their self-interest correctly. Therefore, this view of
economic behavior fulfills the textbook definition of a cultural trait, albeit one that economists
believe is universal and all-encompassing, as the term Homo economicus suggests.
Through the cultural lens of an economist, individuals are good if they have reason to be good.
The same motivation of self-interest that drives a manager to excel at measurable tasks in the
Wall Street bonus culture may also induce a manager to shirk the less observable components of
job performance, such as following ethical guidelines.30 Yet the same manager might behave
impeccably under different circumstances, i.e., when faced with different incentives.
This notion of rational self-interest, and its rich quantitative implications for behavior, has made
economics the most analytically powerful of the social sciences. The assumption that
individuals respond to incentives according to their self-interest leads to concrete predictions
about behavior, rendering other cultural explanations unnecessary. In this framework,
phenomena such as tournament salaries and Wall Street bonuses are a natural and efficient way
to increase a firm’s productivity, especially in a high-risk/high-reward industry in which it is
nearly impossible to infer performance differences between individuals in advance. If a
corporate culture appears “greedy” to the outside world, it is because the world does not
understand the economic environment in which it operates. The economist’s view of culture—
reducing differences in behavior to different structures of incentives—can even be made to fit
group phenomena that do not appear guided by rational self-interest such as self-deception,
over-optimism, willful blindness, and other forms of groupthink.31 Greed is not only good, it is
efficient and predictive. Therefore, individual misbehavior and corporate malfeasance are
simply incentive problems that can be corrected by an intelligently designed system of financial
rewards and punishments.
This is, of course, a caricature of the economist’s perspective, but it is no exaggeration that the
first line of inquiry in any economic analysis of misbehavior is to investigate incentives. A case
in point is the rise in mortgage defaults by U.S. homeowners during the Financial Crisis of
2007–2009. Debt default has been a common occurrence since the beginning of debt markets,
but after the peak of the U.S. housing market in 2006, a growing number of homeowners
engaged in “strategic defaults,” defaults driven by rational economic considerations rather than
the inability to pay. The rationale is simple. As housing prices decline, a homeowner’s equity

30

Bénabou and Tirole (2015).

31

Bénabou (2013).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 12 of 44

declines in lockstep. When a homeowner’s equity becomes negative, there is a much larger
economic incentive to default irrespective of income or wealth. This tendency to default under
conditions of negative home equity has been confirmed empirically.32

In a sample of

homeowners holding mortgages in 2006 and 2007, Cohen-Cole and Morse (2010) found that
74% of those households who became delinquent on their mortgage payments were
nevertheless current on their credit card payments, behavior consistent with strategic default.33
Moreover, homeowners with negative equity were found to be more likely to re-default, even
when offered a mortgage modification that initially lowered their monthly payments.34 As
Geanakoplos and Koniak (2009) observed in the aftermath of the bursting of the housing
bubble:
Every month, another 8% of the subprime homeowners whose mortgages…are
160% of the estimated value of their houses become seriously delinquent. On the
other hand, subprime homeowners whose loans are worth 60% of the current
value of their house become delinquent at a rate of only 1% per month. Despite
all the job losses and economic uncertainty, almost all owners with real equity in
their homes, are finding a way to pay off their loans. It is those “underwater” on
their mortgages—with homes worth less than their loans—who are defaulting,
but who, given equity in their homes, will find a way to pay. They are not evil or
irresponsible; they are defaulting because…it is the economically prudent thing
to do.35
Economists can confidently point to these facts when debating the relative importance of
culture versus incentives in determining consumer behavior.
However, the narrative becomes more complex the more we dig deeper into the determinants
of strategic default. In survey data of 1,000 U.S. households from December 2008 to September
2010, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2010, Table VI) have shown that respondents who know
someone who strategically defaulted are 51% more likely to declare their willingness to default
strategically36. This contagion effect is confirmed in a sample of over 30 million mortgages
originated between 2000 and 2008, observed from 2005 to 2009 by Goodstein, Hanouna,
Ramirez, and Stahel (2013), who found that mortgage defaults are influenced by the

32

See, for example, Deng, Quigley and Van Order (2000) and Elul, Souleles, Chomsisengphet, Glennon,
and Hunt (2010).
33

Cohen-Cole and Morse (2010).

34

Quercia and Ding (2009).

35

Geanakoplos and Koniak (2009).

36

Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2010).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 13 of 44

delinquency rate in surrounding zip codes, even after controlling for income-related factors.37
Their estimates suggest that a 1% increase in the surrounding delinquency rate increases the
probability of a strategic default up to 16.5%.
These results show that there is no simple dichotomy between incentives and culture. Neither
explanation is complete because both are inextricably intertwined and jointly affect human
behavior in complex ways. Reacting to a change in incentives follows naturally from the
unspoken assumptions of the economist. Economic incentives certainly influence human
decisions, but they do not explain all behavior in all contexts. They cannot, because humans are
incentivized by a number of forces that are non-pecuniary and difficult to measure
quantitatively. As Hill and Painter (2015) have discussed, these forces may include status, pride,
mystique, and excitement. In addition, as they point out, “what confers status is contingent, and
may change over time.”38 These cultural forces often vary over time and across circumstances,
causing individual and group behavior to adapt in response to such changes.
However, economists rarely focus on the adaptation of economic behavior to time-varying nonstationary environments—our discipline is far more comfortable with comparative statics and
general equilibria than with dynamics and phase transitions. Yet changes in the economic,
political, and social environment have important implications for the behavior of individual
employees and corporations alike. To resolve this problem, we need a broader theory, one
capable of reconciling the analytical precision of Homo economicus with the cultural tendencies of
Homo sapiens.

7 Values from Evolution: The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis
If corporate culture is shaped from the top down, from the bottom up, and through incentives
in a given environment, the natural follow-on question to ask next is how? A corporation’s
leadership may exert its authority to establish norms of behavior within the firm, but a
corporation’s employees also bring their preexisting values to the workplace, and all of the
actors in this drama have some resistance to cultural sway for non-cultural, internal reasons.
None of them are perfectly malleable individuals waiting to be molded by external forces. This
resistance has never stopped corporate authority from trying, however. Notoriously, Henry
Ford employed hundreds of investigators in his company’s Sociological Department to monitor
the private lives of his employees, to ensure they followed his preferred standard of behavior

37

Goodstein et al (2013).

38

Hill and Painter (2015, p. 111).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 14 of 44

inside the factory and out.39

The success or failure of such efforts depends critically on

understanding the broader framework in which culture emerges and evolves over time and
across circumstances.
Determining the origin of culture, ethics, and morality may seem to be a hopeless task more
suited to philosophers than economists. However, there has been surprising progress from
anthropology, evolutionary biology, psychology, and the cognitive neurosciences, work that
has important implications for economic theories of culture.

For example, evolutionary

biologists have shown that cultural norms such as altruism, fairness, reciprocity, charity, and
cooperation can lead to advantages in survival and reproductive success among individuals in
certain settings.40 E. O. Wilson has argued even more forcefully, when he coined the term
“sociobiology” in the 1970s, that social conventions and interactions are, in fact, the product of
evolution. More recent observational and experimental evidence from other animal species such
as our close cousins, the chimpanzees, has confirmed the commonality of certain cultural
norms, suggesting that they are adaptive traits passed down across many generations and
species. A concrete illustration is the notion of fairness, a seemingly innate moral compass that
exists in children as young as 15 months as well as in chimpanzees.41
This evolutionary perspective of culture has a more direct instantiation in financial economics
in the form of the Adaptive Markets Hypothesis,42 an alternative to the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis in which financial market dynamics are the result of a population of individuals
competing for scarce resources and adapting to past and current environments. The Adaptive
Markets Hypothesis recognizes that competition, adaptation, and selection occur at multiple
levels—from the subtle methylation of sequences in an individual’s DNA, to the transmission of
cultural traits from one generation to the next—and they can occur simultaneously, each level
operating at speeds dictated by specific environmental forces. To understand what individuals
value, and how they will behave in various contexts, we have to understand how they
interacted with the environments of their past.
The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis explains why analogies to biological reasoning are often
effective in the social sciences. Darwinian evolution is not the same process as cultural

39

Snow (2013).

40

See, for example, Hamilton (1964), Trivers (1971), and Nowak and Highfield (2011).

41

See Burns and Sommerville (2014) for recent experimental evidence of fairness with 15-month-old
infants, and de Waal (2006) for similar experimental evidence for capuchin monkeys and chimpanzees.
42

Lo (2004, 2013).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 15 of 44

evolution, but they occur under similar constraints of selection and differential survival. As a
result, one can fruitfully use biological analogies, as well as biology itself, to explain aspects of
culture, even of corporate culture, a phenomenon that did not exist until the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries.

These explanations fall into two categories: explanations of

individual behavior by itself, and explanations of the interactions between individuals that lead
to group dynamics.
At the level of the individual, recent research in the cognitive neurosciences has refined insights
into the nature of moral and ethical judgments. These judgments arise from one of two possible
neural mechanisms: one instinctive, immediate, and based on emotion; and the other more
deliberative, measured, and based on logic and reasoning.43

The former is fast, virtually

impossible to override, and relatively inflexible, while the latter is slow, much more nuanced,
and highly adaptive. This “dual-process theory” of moral and ethical decision-making—which
is supported by a growing body of detailed neuroimaging experimental evidence—speaks
directly to the question at hand of the origin of culture. At this level of examination, culture is
the amalgamation of hardwired responses embedded in our neural circuitry, many innate and
not easily reprogrammed, and more detailed complex analytic behaviors that are pathdependent on life history, which can be reprogrammed (slowly) and are more in tune with our
social environment.
Apart from its pure scientific value, the dual-process theory has several important practical
implications. Current efforts to shape culture may be placing too much emphasis on the
analytical process, while ignoring the less malleable and, therefore, more persistent innate
process. A deeper understanding of this innate process is essential to answering questions about
whether and how culture can be changed. One starting point is the work of social psychologist
Jonathan Haidt, who proposed five moral dimensions that are innately determined and whose
relative weightings yield distinct cultural mores and value systems: harm vs. care, fairness vs.
cheating, loyalty vs. betrayal, authority vs. subversion, and purity vs. degradation.44 Since the
relative importance of these moral dimensions is innately determined, they naturally vary in the
population along with hair color, height, and other traits.
Haidt and his colleagues discovered that, far from being distributed in a uniformly random way
across the population, these traits had strong correlations to political beliefs (see Figure 1).45 For

43

Greene (2014).

44

Haidt (2007). In more recent writings, Haidt has added a sixth dimension: liberty vs. oppression.

45

Graham, Haidt, and Nosek (2009) and Iyer et al. (2012).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 16 of 44

example, people in the U.S. who identified themselves as liberal believed that questions of
harm/care and fairness/cheating were almost always relevant to making moral decisions. The
other three moral foundations Haidt identified—loyalty/betrayal, authority/subversion, and
purity/degradation—were much less important to liberals. However, those who identified
themselves as conservative believed that all five moral foundations were equally important,
although none were given as high a level of importance as liberals gave to fairness/cheating or
harm/care. These innate traits had predisposed people to sort themselves into different political
factions.

Figure 1. The importance of Haidt’s five moral dimensions among individuals of various political views. Source:
Haidt (2007, Figure 1).

It takes little imagination to see this sorting process at work across professions. Someone who
believes that fairness is the highest moral value will want to choose a vocation where they can
exert this value, perhaps as a public defender, a teacher of underprivileged children, or a sports
referee. Those who believe, instead, that fairness is an unimportant value might find themselves
drawn to the prosecutorial side of the law, or high-pressure sales, or indeed, Gordon Gekko’s

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 17 of 44

caricature of predatory finance. This is not to say that everyone in those professions shares
those values, of course, but rather that individuals with those values may find such professions
more congenial—a form of natural selection bias—and will, therefore, eventually be statistically
over-represented in that subpopulation.
At the same time that evolution shapes individual behavior, it also acts on how individuals
relate to one another. We call the collective behavior that ultimately emerges from these
interactions “culture.” Many forms of collective and group behavior have been conceptually
difficult for classical evolutionary theory to explain since it is primarily a theory centered on the
reproductive success of the individual, or even more reductively, of the gene. Recent research in
evolutionary biology, however, has revived the controversial notion of “group selection,”46 in
which groups are the targets of natural selection, not just individuals or genes. Although many
evolutionary biologists have rejected this idea,47 arguing that selection can only occur at the
level of the gene, an application of the Adaptive Markets Hypothesis can reconcile this
controversy, and also provide an explanation for the origins of culture.
The key insight is that individual behavior that appears to be coordinated is simply the result of
certain common factors in the environment—“systematic risk” in the terminology of financial
economics—that impose a common threat to a particular subset of individuals. Within specific
groups under systematic risk, natural selection on individuals can sometimes produce grouplike behavior. In such cases, a standard application of natural selection to individuals can
produce behaviors that may seem like the result of group selection, but are, in fact, merely a
reflection of systematic risk in the environment.48
For example, consider the extraordinary behavior of Specialist Ross A. McGinnis, a 19-year-old
machine-gunner in the U.S. Army during the Iraq war who sacrificed himself when a
fragmentation grenade was tossed into a Humvee vehicle during a routine patrol in Baghdad
on December 4, 2006. He reacted immediately by yelling “grenade” to alert the others, and then
pushed his back onto the grenade, pinning it to the Humvee’s radio mount, and absorbing the
impact of the explosion with his body, saving the lives of his four crewmates.49
Although this was a remarkable act of bravery and sacrifice, it is not an isolated incident. Acts
of bravery and sacrifice have always been part of the military tradition, as documented by the

46

Nowak, Tarnita, and Wilson (2010).

47

Abbot et al. (2011).

48

Zhang, Brennan, and Lo (2014).

49

http://www.army.mil/medalofhonor/mcginnis/profile/ (accessed March 20, 2015).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 18 of 44

medals and other honors awarded to our heroes. Part of the explanation may be selection
bias—the military may simply attract a larger proportion of altruistic individuals, people who
sincerely believe that “the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few.”
A more direct explanation, however, may be that altruistic behavior is produced by natural
selection operating in the face of military conflict. Put another way, selfish behavior on the
battlefield is a recipe for defeat. Military conflict is an extreme form of systematic risk, and over
time and across many similar circumstances, our military has learned this lesson. On the other
hand, altruistic behavior confers survival benefits for the population on the battlefield, even if it
does not benefit the individual. Accordingly, military training instills these values in
individuals—through bonding exercises like boot camp, stories of heroism passed down from
seasoned veterans to new recruits, and medals and honors for courageous acts—so as to
increase the likelihood of success for the entire troop. Military culture is the evolutionary
product of the environment of war.
Now consider an entirely different environment; imagine a live grenade being tossed into a
New York City subway car. Would we expect any of the passengers to behave in a manner
similar to Spc. McGinnis in Baghdad? Context matters. And culture is shaped by context, as
Milgram and Zimbardo discovered in their experiments with ordinary subjects placed in
extraordinary contexts (see Section 3).
Context matters not only on the battlefield, but also in the financial industry. Recently, Cohn,
Fehr, and Maréchal (2014)50 documented the impact of context on financial culture in an
experiment involving 128 human subjects recruited from a large international bank. These
subjects were asked to engage in an exercise that measured their honesty, using a simple cointossing exercise in which self-reported outcomes determined whether they would receive a cash
prize. Prior to this exercise, subjects were split into two groups, one in which the participants
were asked seven questions pertaining to their banking jobs, and the other in which the
participants were asked seven non-banking-related questions. By bringing the banking industry
to the forefront of the subjects’ minds just prior to the exercise, the authors induced the subjects
to apply the cultural standards of that industry to the task at hand. The subjects in the former
group showed significantly more dishonest behavior than the subjects in the latter group, who
exhibited the same level of honesty as participants from non-banking industries. The authors
concluded “the prevailing business culture in the banking industry weakens and undermines
the honesty norm, implying that measures to re-establish an honest culture are very

50

Cohn, Fehr, and Maréchal (2014).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 19 of 44

important.”51 However, innate variation determines how much the individual is influenced by
context. Gibson, Tanner, and Wagner (2015) have shown that even in cultures where there has
been a crowding-out of honest behavior by situational norms, individuals with strong intrinsic
preferences to honesty as a “protected” value resist the bad norm, and may potentially be able
to form the nucleus of a good norm in an altered situation.52
Two recent empirical studies of fraud provide additional support for the impact of context on
financial culture. Dyck, Morse, and Zingales (2013) used historical data on securities class
action lawsuits to estimate the incidence of fraud from 1996 to 2004 in U.S. publicly traded
companies with at least $750 million in market capitalization.53 They document an increasing
amount of fraud as the stock market rose, which eventually declined in the wake of the bursting
of the Internet Bubble in 2001–2002 (see Figure 2). This interesting pattern suggests that the
business environment may be related to changes in corporate culture that involve fraudulent
activity and corporate risk-taking behavior. Deason, Rajgopal, and Waymire (2015) found a
similar pattern in the number of Ponzi schemes prosecuted by the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) between 1988 and 2012 (see Figure 3): an upward trend during the bull
market of the late 1990s, a decline in the aftermath of the Internet Bust of 2001–2002, and
another increase as the market climbed, until the Financial Crisis and the subsequent stock
market decline between 2008 and 2009, after which the number of Ponzi schemes declined
sharply.54 In fact, Deason, Rajgopol, and Waymire estimate a correlation of 47.9% between the
S&P 500 quarterly return and the number of SEC-prosecuted Ponzi schemes per quarter, which
they attribute to several factors: Ponzi schemes are harder to sustain in declining markets; SEC
enforcement budgets tend to increase after bubbles burst; and there may be more demand for
enforcement by politicians and the public. They also found that Ponzi schemes are more likely
when there is some affinity link between the perpetrator and the victim, such as a common
religious background or shared membership in an ethnic group, or when the victim group
tends to place more trust in others (e.g., senior citizens), reminding us that culture can also be
exploited maliciously.

51

Cohn, Fehr, and Maréchal (2014, p. 86).

52

Gibson, Tanner, and Wagner (2015).

53

Dyck, Morse, and Zingales (2013).

54

Deason, Rajgopal, and Waymire (2015).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 20 of 44

Figure 2. Dyck, Morse, and Zingales’s (2013, Figure 1) estimates of the percentage of large corporations starting
and engaging in fraud, from 1996 to 2004.

Figure 3. Frequency of SEC-prosecuted Ponzi schemes by calendar quarter from 1988
to 2012. Source: Deason, Rajgopal, and Waymire (2015, Figure 1).

These two studies confirm what many already knew instinctively: culture is very much a
product of the environment, and as environments change, so too does culture. Therefore, if we
wish to change culture, we must first understand the forces that shape it over time and across
circumstances. This broader contextual, environmental framework—informed by psychology,
evolutionary theory, and neuroscience, and quantified through empirical measurement—will
play a key role in Section 11 where we consider what can be done about culture from a practical
perspective.
17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 21 of 44

8 Examples from the Financial Industry
Moving from the general to the specific, several recent financial debacles demonstrate the role
of corporate culture in financial failure. Let us start with a control case, the fall of Long-Term
Capital Management (LTCM). In organizational theorist Charles Perrow’s terminology, its
collapse was a “normal accident.”55 That is, it was caused by a combination of “tight coupling”
in the engineering sense—in which the execution of one process depends critically on the
successful completion of another—and complex interactions within the financial system. To
summarize a well-known story very briefly, LTCM’s sophisticated models were caught offguard by the aftermath of Russia’s default on its GKO bonds on August 17, 1998, triggering a
short and vicious cycle of losses and flights to liquidity, and ultimately leading to its bailout on
September 23, 1998.56
On paper, LTCM’s corporate culture was excellent. Its composition was elite: founded by John
Meriwether, the former head of bond trading at Salomon Brothers, and future Nobelists Robert
C. Merton and Myron Scholes. Its culture was individualistic, as many trading groups are, but it
derived its authority from a legal-rational basis, the superiority of its mathematics. Its corporate
culture played little direct role in its failure. In fact, with much of their personal fortunes
invested in the business, LTCM’s managing partners were perfectly aligned with their
investors. Not a single client has sued them for inappropriate behavior. Not a single regulator
has cited them for violations of any sort.
However, Wall Street’s corporate culture was apparently caught off-guard by LTCM’s
predicament. It had perceived LTCM to be a paragon of Wall Street’s highest values—a
combination of intelligence, market savvy, and ambition that was sure to succeed—when a
more accurate assessment of LTCM might have been as an experimental engineering firm,
working daringly (or hubristically, as some have argued) on the cutting edge. Their creditors
notoriously gave LTCM virtually no “haircut” on their loans, on the assumption that their
trades were essentially risk-free. In addition to these very low, or even zero, margin
requirements, LTCM was able to negotiate other favorable credit enhancements with its
counterparties, including two-way collateral requirements, rehypothecation rights, and high
thresholds for loss.57 These were often made on the strength of their reputation, rather than
detailed examination of LTCM’s methods. Daniel Napoli, then Merrill Lynch’s head of risk

55

Perrow (1999).

56

See, for example, GAO (1999, pp. 38–45).

57

GAO (1999, p. 42).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 22 of 44

management, was quoted as saying, “We had no idea they would have trouble—these people
were known for risk management. They had taught it; they designed it [emphasis in original].”58
(Napoli himself lost his position shortly after LTCM’s collapse.) LTCM’s failure may be viewed
as akin to the failure of a bridge whose experimental materials were exposed to an unfamiliar
stress, but the behavior of LTCM’s creditors is more likely a failure of their corporate culture.
Corporate cultures can be overconfident in their abilities to assess risk. This can be seen in the
fall of the large multinational insurer, American International Group (AIG), in 2008. Under its
original chairman, Maurice “Hank” Greenberg, AIG was run not merely hierarchically, but
almost feudally, with reciprocal chains of loyalty and obligation centered on Greenberg.59 In
fact, Greenberg had structured AIG’s compensation plan deliberately to promote lifetime
loyalty to the firm. Greenberg was, in Weberian terms, a charismatic authority, overseeing each
division of his large multinational organization personally. In particular, in regular questioning
sessions Greenberg demanded to know exactly what risks each unit of AIG was taking, and
what measures were being used to reduce them. Many observers ascribed AIG’s continued
growth to AIG’s excellent practice in insurance underwriting, closely monitored by Greenberg.
However, the “headline risk” of Greenberg’s possible role in financial irregularities caused
AIG’s board of directors to replace him with Martin Sullivan in early 2005. Sullivan had risen
through the ranks of AIG, originally starting as a teenage office assistant. Sullivan assumed that
AIG’s vigorous culture of risk management would maintain itself without Greenberg at the
helm. Meanwhile, Joseph Cassano, the head of AIG’s Financial Products (AIGFP) unit, had a
working relationship with Greenberg that did not transfer to Sullivan. Cassano’s conduct grew
more aggressive without Greenberg’s check on his behavior.60
AIGFP’s portfolio contained billions of dollars of credit default swaps on “toxic” collateralized
debt obligations. This was not the only toxic item on AIG’s balance sheet, which also had
significant problems in its securities lending program, but it was the largest, and it created the
most visible effects during the financially dangerous autumn of 2008. While AIGFP’s first sales
of credit default swaps on collateralized debt obligations began in 2004, during Greenberg’s
tenure, they accelerated into 2005, before executives within AIGFP convinced Cassano about
declining standards in the subprime mortgage market. AIGFP’s final sale of credit default
swaps took place in early 2006, leaving a multibillion-dollar time bomb on its balance sheet.

58

Lowenstein (2000, p. 179).

59

Boyd (2011) and Shelp and Ehrbar (2009) provide two viewpoints of AIG’s culture from which a
triangulation can be made.
60

Boyd (2011, p. 161).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 23 of 44

Cassano defended his actions in an increasingly adverse environment until his ouster from AIG
in early 2008.61
It is probably too easy to ascribe AIGFP’s extended period of credit default swap sales to
Greenberg’s departure. As noted, Cassano’s unit began selling credit default swaps well before
Greenberg’s exit. However, Robert Shiller’s insight into the Milgram experiment is pertinent
here. Greenberg’s culture of risk management, which was accompanied by consistently high
growth in the traditionally low-growth insurance industry, led Cassano and Sullivan to believe
that AIG’s risk management procedures were consistently reliable in conditions where they
were not. Paradoxically, the moral hazard of past success may have led AIG to make much
riskier investments than a company with a poorer track record of risk management.
Some corporate cultures actively conceal their flaws and irregularities, not only from the public
or from regulators, but also from others within the corporation itself because of the risk that this
knowledge might undermine their position. For example, let us look at Lehman Brothers’ use of
the so-called “Repo 105” accounting trick.62 Briefly, this was a repo, or repurchase agreement,
valued at $1.05 for every dollar, which was designed to look like a sale. Lehman Brothers paid
more than five cents on the dollar to temporarily pay down the liabilities on its balance sheet
before it repurchased the asset. Lehman Brothers used this accounting trick in amounts totaling
$50 billion in late 2007 and 2008 to give the firm a greater appearance of financial health—which
of course was ultimately a failure.
Was this tactic legal? No American law firm would agree to endorse this practice, so Lehman
Brothers engaged in regulatory arbitrage, and found a distinguished British law firm,
Linklaters, willing to give the practice its imprimatur. Linklater’s endorsement of Repo 105 was
kept secret from the outside world, except for Lehman’s outside auditors, Ernst & Young, who
also allowed the practice to pass.63 However, Lehman’s use of Repo 105 was also kept from its
board members.64 Lehman Brothers omitted its use of Repo 105 in its quarterly disclosures to
the SEC, and also neglected to tell its outside disclosure counsel.65
In contrast to LTCM, the corporate culture at Lehman Brothers resembled less a cutting-edge
engineering firm experiencing an unforeseen design failure, and more like Zimbardo’s Stanford

61

Boyd (2011, pp. 258–262).

62

Valukas (2010).

63

Valukas (2010, pp. 782–786, 948–951).

64

Valukas (2010, pp. 945–947).

65

Valukas (2010, pp. 853–856).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 24 of 44

experiment. An internal hierarchy within Lehman’s management deliberately withheld
information about its misleading accounting practices to outsiders who might have objected,
even within the firm, because it believed that was its proper role. When Lehman’s global
financial controller reported his misgivings to two consecutive chief financial officers that Repo
105 might be a significant “reputational risk” to the company, his concerns were ignored.66
Lehman’s hierarchical culture defended its values against voices from its border, even though
they occupied central positions on its organizational chart. Instead of taking measures to avoid
headline risk, it instead buried its practices in secrecy.
The case of rogue trader Jérôme Kerviel illustrates another possible type of failure of corporate
culture, that of neglect. In January 2008, Kerviel built up a €49 billion long position on index
futures in the corporate and investment banking division of the French bank, Société Générale,
before his trades were detected.67 For comparison purposes, Société Générale’s total capital at
that time was only €26 billion. Unwinding his unauthorized position cost Société Générale €6.4
billion, an immense loss that threatened to take down the bank. Kerviel’s legal difficulties are
still ongoing, but he has stated Société Générale turned a blind eye to his activities when they
were making money—and Société Générale’s own internal investigation reports that he made
€1.5 billion for the bank on his unauthorized trades in 2007.
However, the internal investigation paints a very different, if equally unflattering, picture of
Société Générale’s corporate culture. Kerviel’s first supervisor did not notice his early
fraudulent trades or their cover-up, but in fact allowed Kerviel to make intraday trades, a
privilege well above Kerviel’s status as a junior trader. In January 2007, Kerviel’s supervisor
quit, and his trading desk was left effectively unsupervised for three months. During this time,
Kerviel built up a futures position of €5.5 billion, his first very large position. His new desk
manager, hired in April 2007, had no prior knowledge of trading activities, and did not use the
monitoring programs that would have detected Kerviel’s trades. Moreover, Kerviel’s new
manager was not supported by his supervisor in assisting or supervising his new activities. The
Société Générale report found that a culture of inattention and managerial neglect existed up to
four levels above Kerviel’s position, to the head of Société Générale’s arbitrage activities.68
Ultimately, it was the attention and perseverance of a monitor in Société Générale’s accounting
and regulatory reporting division which caught Kerviel, after the monitor noticed an unhedged

66

Valukas (2010, pp. 884–887).

67

Société Générale (2008, p. 2).

68

Société Générale (2008, pp. 3–8).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 25 of 44

€1.5 billion position while calculating the Cooke ratio for Société Générale’s Basel compliance
requirements.69
This is Douglas’s individualistic culture taken to a point of absurdity. Mark Hunter and N.
Craig Smith believe that the roots of Société Générale’s Corporate and Investment Banking
division’s inept management culture can be found in its complex corporate history.70 Société
Générale was a private retail bank nationalized after the Second World War, and then
privatized again in 1986. Throughout its postwar history, however, it was a proving ground for
French elite graduates, similar to the way Wall Street investment banks recruit from Ivy League
universities in the U.S. The key difference is that the elite focused on Société Générale’s retail
banking oversight because of its close connection to French policymakers in the public and
private sectors, rather than its proprietary trading desks. Société Générale’s corporate culture
viewed the Corporate and Investment Bank as a “cash machine,” not central to its elite
outcomes. Kerviel was a graduate of provincial universities, and was not expected to rise in the
elite hierarchy. Therefore, little attention was paid to his activities, even when he made
surprisingly large amounts of money.

9 Regulatory Culture
Regulatory culture is hardly immune to these challenges—consider the unraveling of the
mother of all Ponzi schemes: Bernard Madoff. The SEC formally charged Madoff with securities
fraud on December 11, 2008, the day after Madoff’s sons turned him in to the FBI. Justice was
swift in this case; on March 12, 2009, Madoff pled guilty to all charges.71 However, although
justice was swift, the SEC’s internal Office of Investigations discovered that the SEC was not.
The Office of Investigations learned that the SEC had received six “red flag” complaints about
Madoff’s hedge fund operations, reaching as far back as 1992, and had been presented with two
reputable articles in the trade and financial press from 2001 that questioned Madoff’s
abnormally consistent returns.72
It is instructive to consider how the SEC’s culture dealt with these claims. Harry Markopolos
submitted the earliest of the analytical complaints about Madoff’s performance to the SEC.
Markopolos, originally a portfolio manager for Rampart Investment Management, found he

69

Société Générale (2008, pp. 31–34).

70

Hunter and Smith (2011).

71

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 1).

72

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 21–22), Ocrant (2001), Arvedlund (2001).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 26 of 44

could not replicate Madoff’s returns without making impossible assumptions. Markopolos
submitted his findings several times to the SEC: in 2000, through its Boston office, which was
never recorded reaching the SEC’s Northeast Regional Office (NERO);73 in 2001, which NERO
decided not to pursue after one day’s analysis;74 in 2005, of which more below; a significant
follow-up email in 2007, which was “ignored,” in the words of the Office of Investigations
report;75 and in April 2008, which failed to arrive due to an incorrect email address.76
Two similar analyses were brought to the SEC’s attention, one directly and one indirectly. In
May 2003, an unnamed hedge fund manager contacted the SEC’s Office of Compliance
Inspections and Examinations (OCIE) with a parallel analysis.77 In November 2003, upper
management at Renaissance Technologies became concerned that Madoff’s returns were
“highly unusual” and that “none of it seems to add up.” In April 2004, this Renaissance
correspondence was flagged for attention by a compliance examiner at NERO during a routine
examination.78
The OCIE and NERO conducted two separate, independent examinations of Madoff. Each
examination was unaware of the other, until Madoff himself informed examiners of their
mutual existence. (OCIE had not used the SEC’s tracking system to update the status of its
examination; however, NERO had not checked the system, rendering the point moot.)79 OCIE
passed its unresolved examination documents to NERO, and made no further communication
with them about the case.80 Although NERO examiners still had important questions about
Madoff’s actions, NERO closed the examination before they were answered due to cultural time
constraints. “There’s no hard and fast rule about field work but… field work cannot go on
indefinitely because people have a hunch,” one NERO assistant director later testified.81

73

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 61–67).

74

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 67–74).

75

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 61, 354).

76

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 361–363).

77

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 77–80).

78

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 145–149).

79

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 195–197).

80

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, pp. 136–138).

81

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 223).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 27 of 44

Markopolos’ 2005 complaint reached NERO with the strong endorsement of the SEC’s Boston
office.82 However, the previous fruitless examination of claims against Madoff biased the NERO
examiners against Markopolos’ claim.83 The examiners quickly discounted Markopolos’ idea
that Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme. The staff attorney involved with the examination
wrote at the beginning of the investigation that there wasn’t “any real reason to suspect some
kind of wrongdoing…all we suspect is disclosure problems [emphasis in original]”.84 The Office
of Investigations was harsh in its verdict: “As a result of this initial failure, the Enforcement staff
never really conducted an adequate and thorough investigation of Markopolos’ claim that
Madoff was operating a Ponzi scheme.”85
The Madoff failure, of which the earlier summary was necessarily a streamlined account, was
only one of many events that caused the internal culture of the SEC to fall under scrutiny. An
extensive study of the SEC in 2012 and 2013 by the Government Accountability Office (GAO)
found systemic problems throughout its organizational culture:86
Based on analysis of views from Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
employees and previous studies from GAO, SEC, and third parties, GAO
determined that SEC’s organizational culture is not constructive and could
hinder its ability to effectively fulfill its mission. Organizations with constructive
cultures are more effective and employees also exhibit a stronger commitment to
mission focus. In describing SEC’s culture, many current and former SEC
employees cited low morale, distrust of management, and the
compartmentalized, hierarchical, and risk-averse nature of the organization.
According to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) survey of federal
employees, SEC currently ranks 19th of 22 similarly sized federal agencies based
on employee satisfaction and commitment. GAO’s past work on managing for
results indicates that an effective personnel management system will be critical
for transforming SEC’s organizational culture.
Apparently, the SEC’s hierarchical culture was hardened into “silos,” which not only prevented
the flow of information from one division to another, but also hindered the flow of information
between management and staff.87 Morale, the sense of shared purpose, was low among staff,

82

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 240–244).

83

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 255–259).

84

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 266–268).

85

SEC Office of Investigations (2009, p. 368).

86

GAO (2013).

87

GAO (2013, pp. 33–38).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 28 of 44

but management believed it was much higher.88 Despite earlier initiatives, the SEC’s culture had
grown more risk averse over time, a majority of both staff and senior officers explicitly agreeing
that this was due to the fear of public scandal. Some staff members anonymously reported that
“managers have been afraid to close cases or make decisions because senior officers want to
minimize the chances that they would be criticized later.”89
The GAO concluded its report with seven specific recommendations for changing the SEC’s
culture. These included improvements in coordination and communication across internal
departments and other agencies—presumably to prevent future cases like Madoff from slipping
through the cracks—and changes in personnel management practices to better align job
performance with compensation and promotions.

The SEC agreed with all seven

recommendations. By its own account, it has made significant progress in addressing each of
them since then. For example:90
Based on GAO’s recommendations, SEC made significant efforts to improve
communication and collaboration. In an effort to optimize communications and
collaboration, the SEC benchmarked and implemented a variety of best practices
used both within the public and private sector, including cross-agency working
groups, an agency-wide culture change initiative and a more robust internal
communication strategy. Work continues in this area to ensure that employees
across the SEC are sharing critical information… The purpose of OPM’s audit
was to determine SEC's adherence to merit system principles, laws, and
regulations, and to assess the efficiency and effectiveness in administering
human resources programs under the Talent Management System of the Human
Capital Framework. OHR is currently in the process of addressing all of the
required and recommended actions identified in the OPM audit and anticipates
that all recommendations will be resolved by the end of FY 2015.
These changes seem to be having an impact. The SEC’s score on the OPM’s Global Satisfaction
Index—based on the same survey91 cited in the GAO’s earlier report—improved from 59 to 2012
to 65 in 2014. For comparison, in 2014 the agency with the highest job satisfaction rating was
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (an index value of 74), the agency with the
lowest rating was the Department of Homeland Security (an index value of 48), and the
government-wide index value was 59.

88

GAO (2013, p. 11).

89

GAO (2013, pp. 16–17).

90

SEC (2014, p. 132).

91

Office of Personnel Management (2014).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 29 of 44

10 The Role of Feedback Loops
Although the SEC’s improvements may seem too little too late to those swindled by Madoff, the
process by which these changes were proposed and implemented is a significant mechanism
through which culture can be modified. By conducting a thorough, non-partisan analysis of
what happened, how it happened, why it happened, and what can be done to reduce the
likelihood of future occurrences, the GAO provided important feedback that led to
improvements at the SEC, including improvements in its organizational culture. This is not the
only institutional feedback mechanism now in place at the SEC. The SEC Office of the Inspector
General—an independent office within the SEC that conducts periodic audits and investigations
within the agency—provides ongoing feedback to the SEC’s leadership to “prevent and detect
fraud, waste, and abuse and to promote integrity, economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the
Commission's programs and operations.”92 Meanwhile, regular employee surveys conducted
by the OPM and the SEC provide objective metrics by which to measure progress and identify
problems with morale and culture as they emerge. The well-known adage that “one cannot
manage what one does not measure” encapsulates the critical role that metrics and feedback
play in managing culture.
Perhaps the best example of the impact that negative feedback can have is the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), an independent government agency with no regulatory
authority whatsoever. The NTSB’s mandate is to investigate accidents, provide careful and
conclusive forensic analysis, and make recommendations for avoiding such accidents in the
future. When an airplane crashes, the NTSB assembles a pre-arranged team of on-call engineers
and flight-safety experts who are immediately dispatched to the crash site to conduct a
thorough investigation. This laborious process includes interviewing witnesses, poring over
historical flight logs and maintenance records, and sifting through the wreckage to recover the
flight recorder or “black box” and, if necessary, reassembling the aircraft piece by jigsaw piece
to determine the ultimate cause of the crash. Once its work is done, the NTSB publishes a
report summarizing the team's investigation, concluding with specific recommendations for
avoiding future occurrences of this type of accident. The report is entered into a publicly
available searchable database.93 Despite having no regulatory authority, the NTSB has had
enormous impact through these reports, which have been one of the major factors underlying
the stunning improvements in the safety record of modern air transportation.

92

http://www.sec.gov/about/offices/inspector_general.shtml (accessed March 18, 2015).

93

http://ntsb.gov/_layouts/ntsb.aviation/index.aspx.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 30 of 44

One concrete example involves the now-standard practice to spray airplanes with de-icing fluid
just prior to takeoff when it is raining or snowing and the temperature is near freezing. This
procedure was instituted in the aftermath of USAir Flight 405's crash on March 22, 1992. Flight
405 stalled just after becoming airborne because of accumulated ice on its wings, despite the fact
that de-icing fluid was applied just before it left its gate. Flight 405's takeoff was delayed on its
way to the runway because of air traffic, and ice re-accumulated on its wings while it waited for
a departure slot in the freezing rain.

The NTSB Aircraft Accident Report AAR-93/02—

published February 17, 1993 and available through several Internet sites—summarized the
NTSB's findings:
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of
this accident were the failure of the airline industry and the Federal Aviation
Administration to provide flightcrews with procedures, requirements, and
criteria compatible with departure delays in conditions conducive to airframe
icing and the decision by the flightcrew to take off without positive assurance
that the airplane's wings were free of ice accumulation after 35 minutes of
exposure to precipitation following de-icing. The ice contamination on the wings
resulted in an aerodynamic stall and loss of control after liftoff. Contributing to
the cause of the accident were the inappropriate procedures used by, and
inadequate coordination between, the flightcrew that led to a takeoff rotation at a
lower than prescribed air speed.
Rather than placing blame on the technology, or on human error, the NTSB conducted a
thorough forensic examination and concluded that a system-wide failure to apply the
technology correctly—waiting too long after de-icing, and not checking for ice build-up just
before takeoff—caused the crash. The change in de-icing procedures following this tragedy
have no doubt saved many lives thanks to NTSB Report AAR–93/02, but this particular
innovation did not come cheaply. It was paid for by the lives of the 27 individuals who died in
the crash of Flight 405. Imagine the waste if the NTSB did not investigate this tragedy and
produce concrete recommendations to prevent this from happening again.
Financial crashes are far less deadly, generally involving no immediate loss of life. However,
the recent financial crisis and its impact on people’s lives should be enough motivation to create
a “Capital Markets Safety Board” (CMSB) dedicated to investigating, reporting, and archiving
the “accidents” of the financial industry. The CMSB would maintain teams of experienced
professionals—forensic accountants, financial engineers from industry and academia, and
securities and tax attorneys—who work together on a regular basis. Over the course of many
cases investigating every major financial disaster, a number of new insights, common threads,
and key issues would emerge from CMSB analyses. The publicly available reports from the
CMSB would yield invaluable insights to investors seeking to protect their future investments

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 31 of 44

from similar fates, and once in the hands of investors, this information would eventually drive
financial institutions to improving their “safety records.”
A case in point is the Madoff Ponzi scheme. While several reports have been written on the
SEC’s failure to recognize and stop this massive fraud, the forensic analysis on how Bernard
Madoff—a highly respected and successful businessman who accumulated a huge fortune long
before he began conning investors—came to commit such a crime has yet to be written. What
was the cultural milieu that gave rise to Madoff? How did someone with so many genuine
accomplishments come to defraud friends and family, not to mention legions of admiring and
(in not a few cases) worshipful investors? Is this an isolated incident that can be forgotten now
that the perpetrator is behind bars, or should it serve as a cautionary tale because we each
possess the capacity for similar crimes within us? And what were the factors that allowed even
sophisticated institutional investors to be duped and seduced by Madoff? Greed? Exclusivity?
Competitive pressures from a low-yield environment and gyrating stock markets? Madoff’s
power and wealth? Unless we begin conducting forensic analyses of cultures gone wrong so we
can learn what and how to change, we will be condemned to repeat the mistakes of our past.
We need a CMSB.
As an aside, consider the cultural features that have led to the NTSB’s success. The NTSB’s
culture of definitive expertise and teamwork has earned the public’s trust, and it is widely
regarded as “the best in the business,” not just in the U.S. but throughout the world.94 Following
the earlier classification scheme, the NTSB has an individualistic culture with an elite
composition and a legal-rational basis for its authority, but with a twist: small teams are the
cohesive, accountable unit in the organization, rather than individuals per se. This increases the
sense of shared purpose during an investigation, while allowing flexibility of assignments at
other times. Unlike other regulatory agencies, a job at the NTSB is considered the capstone of a
career, rather than a stepping stone. As a result, the NTSB is that rarest of government agencies:
a highly focused, effective organization with strong morale.95

11 Practical Implications for Regulators and Risk Managers
Corporate culture is clearly a relevant factor in financial failure, error, and malfeasance. As we
have seen, risk priorities mirror a corporate culture’s values, since no corporation has the
resources to manage risk perfectly. Société Générale put very little priority in managing its

94

Lebow et al (1999, p. 2).

95

Fielding, Lo, and Yang (2011, pp. 29–33).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 32 of 44

trading desks, which reflected the low value it placed on its traders. Lehman Brothers spent
more time concealing the flaws in its balance sheet than it spent remedying them: the risk of
disclosure was more important than the risk of bankruptcy. AIG felt so secure in its practice of
risk management that it allowed billions of dollars of toxic assets to appear on its balance sheet
not once, but twice. While such banal generalizations may contain grains of truth, they offer
little guidance on what to change and how to change it.
What is the best way to immunize against the Gekko effect? The psychologist Philip Zimbardo
put it succinctly enough: resist situational influences.96 Zimbardo was lucky enough to have a
dissenting opinion he implicitly trusted before his prison experiment spiraled out of control.
Since that time, Zimbardo has investigated how good people can be influenced into doing evil
things by their surrounding culture, much as the character of Bud Fox was seduced by Gordon
Gekko’s culture in Wall Street. Zimbardo offers ten key behaviors that he believes will minimize
the effectiveness of a destructive culture in spreading its values, whether corporate or
otherwise. Among them are the willingness to admit mistakes, the refusal to respect unjust
authority, the ability to consider the future rather than the immediate present, and the
individual values of honesty, responsibility, and independence of thought. These behaviors
may sound hackneyed, but they are no more hackneyed than the instructions to cover one’s
mouth while coughing or to wash one’s hands regularly to prevent the spread of communicable
diseases.
However, many skeptics would argue that, like fighting City Hall or trying to cheat Death,
attempting to change a large organization’s culture is a Sisyphean task. How can any single
agent expect to change attitudes and behavioral patterns that can span years and tens of
thousands of current and former employees? While I believe such skepticism is misplaced, the
dual-process theory of moral and ethical decision-making does explain one source of this
skepticism: it is, indeed, hard to change innate behavior by definition. But the dual-process
theory also implies a path by which culture can be changed. More practically, the Adaptive
Markets Hypothesis provides a framework in which we can think systematically about taking
on this challenge.
The first step is a subtle but important semantic shift. Instead of seeking to “change culture,”
which seems naïve and hopelessly ambitious, suppose our objective is to engage in “behavioral
risk management.”97 Despite the fact that we are referring to essentially the same goal, the

96

Zimbardo (2007, p. 451–456).

97

I thank Hamid Mehran for suggesting this terminology.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 33 of 44

latter phrase is more concrete, actionable, and unassailable from a corporate governance
perspective.

Human behavior is clearly a factor in virtually every type of corporate

malfeasance, hence it is only prudent to take steps to manage those behaviors most likely to
harm the business franchise. Once this semantic leap has been made, it is remarkable how
readily more practical implications follow.

By drawing on traditional risk management

protocols used at all major financial institutions, we can develop a parallel process for
managing behavioral risk.
Consider, for example, the typical process by which the risk of a financial portfolio is
managed,98 which can be summarized by the mnemonic SIMON (Select, Identify, Measure,
Optimize, Notice). First, select the major risk factors driving portfolio returns; second, identify
the objective function to be optimized, along with any constraints that must be satisfied; third,
measure the statistical laws of motion governing portfolio-return dynamics; fourth, optimize
the objection function subject to the return dynamics and any constraints, which yields the
optimal portfolio weights and hedging positions; and finally, notice any change in the system
and repeat the previous four steps as needed.

Any systematic financial risk-management

protocol must have every element of SIMON represented in some fashion. For example, an
emerging market debt fund might select exchange rates and interest rates as the major risk
factors affecting the fund; identify the information ratio as the objective to be optimized;
measure

exchange-rate

and

interest-rate

dynamics

using

statistical

time-series

and

mathematical term-structure models; optimize the information ratio subject to these dynamics
and a volatility or tracking-error constraint; and notice when the optimal weights for futures
and forward contracts require rebalancing, and start the process all over again. SIMON says
“manage your risk!”
Now consider applying SIMON to the management of behavioral risks. First, select the major
behavioral risks facing the firm, for example, a lack of appreciation and respect for compliance
procedures, intolerance by senior management for opposing views, cutting corners with respect
to operational policies and procedures to achieve growth and profitability targets, and so on.
Second, identify the objective function and constraints, e.g., corporate values, short- and longrun goals, and the firm’s mission statement. Third, measure the statistical “laws of motion”
governing behavior, e.g., the dual-process theory of moral reasoning, Haidt’s five-factor model,
and the OPM Global Satisfaction Index. Fourth, optimize the objective function subject to
constraints, which yields the optimal compensation structures and hedging instruments—that is
to say, compliance procedures, reporting requirements, and supervisory relationship—for

98

Lo (1999).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 34 of 44

aligning the culture with the objectives. Finally, and most importantly, notice any changes in
the system to ensure that the behavioral risk management protocol is achieving the desired
result, and repeat the previous four steps as often as needed.
The weakest link in this analogical chain is the third: measuring behavioral laws of motion. Our
quantitative understanding of human behavior is still in its infancy, and without reasonably
accurate predictive analytics, behavioral risk management is more aspirational than operational.
In the case of financial risk management, the laws of motion of asset returns are readily
available from a multitude of risk-management software platforms and real-time data vendors
in the form of linear factor models, credit scores, and value-at-risk and loss-probability models.
There is currently nothing comparable to support behavioral risk managers. Psychological
profiles, social network maps, and job-satisfaction surveys like those conducted by the OPM are
currently relegated to human resources departments, not risk committees or corporate boards.
However, the starting point for any scientific endeavor is measurement. Psychological profiles,
social networks, and human resources data can serve as the basis for constructing behavioral
risk models, perhaps along the lines implied by the work of social psychologists such as Haidt
(2007), and empirically based models of the systematic and idiosyncratic factors underlying
fraud, malfeasance, and excessive risk-taking behavior, as described in Dyck, Morse, and
Zingales (2013) and Deason, Rajgopal, and Waymire (2015). But even before attempting to
construct such models, a great deal can be learned by simply documenting the reward structure
for individuals within an organization so as to develop an integrated view of the corporate
ecosystem. For example, if a financial institution’s chief risk officer (CRO) is compensated
through bonuses tied only to the firm’s profitability and not to its stability, it should be obvious
that risk may not be this individual’s primary focus.
From a quantitative perspective, the ultimate achievement would be an empirically based
methodology for predicting individual and group behavior to some degree as a function of
observable systematic and idiosyncratic factors. For example, imagine being able to quantify
the risk appetite of financial executive i by the following linear factor model:

where the coefficients measure how important each factor is to the executive’s risk appetite, and
the factors vary across time, circumstances, and institutions.

If we could estimate such a

behavioral risk model for each executive, then we would be able to define “culture”
quantitatively as a preponderance of individuals with numerically similar factor loadings. A

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 35 of 44

culture of excessive risk-taking and blatant disregard for rules and regulations might consist of
an entire division of individuals that share very high loadings for the “Reward” and
“Competitive Pressure” factors, and very low loadings for the “Potential Loss” and “Regulatory
Environment” factors. If such a risk model could be empirically estimated, we would begin to
understand the Gekko effect at a more granular level and develop ways to address it.
Moreover, since this framework implicitly acknowledges that the factors driving behavior are
time-varying and context-dependent, as competitive pressures increase due to low yields and
increased competition, regulators can expect behavior to change, and should adapt accordingly.
Such a framework may seem more like science fiction than science at this point, but its
development has already begun.

In 2009, in the aftermath of the Financial Crisis, De

Nederlandsche Bank (DNB), the Dutch central bank, proposed a new approach to supervising
banks in a memorandum titled “The Seven Elements of Ethical Culture”:99
This document presents DNB’s strategy on the issue of behaviour and culture. It
describes the background and reasons why it is important to include ethical
behaviour and culture in supervision, sets out the legal framework for doing so,
and explains what the current situation is, both within institutions and in the
exercise of supervision by DNB. In presenting these elements for an ethical
culture and sound conduct, this document describes the supervisory model that
DNB wishes to follow in determining its supervisory efforts and, in a general
sense, the plan of action for 2010–2014.
To support this effort, DNB has created the Expert Centre on Culture, Organisation and
Integrity, hired organizational psychologists and change experts, and launched several internal
research projects to develop new supervisory methods specific to corporate culture.100
More recently, researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York undertook an important
empirical first step in creating a behavioral risk model: they conducted and published a survey
of the Fed’s supervisory activities for large financial institutions, describing how these activities
are staffed, organized, and implemented on a day-to-day basis.101 This survey provides an
unprecedented level of transparency into bank supervision for the many stakeholders not privy
to these policies and procedures. As observed by the authors of the survey, “Understanding
how prudential supervision works is a critical precursor to determining how to measure its
impact and effectiveness.”

99

De Nederlandsche Bank (2009).

100

See Nuijts and de Haan (2013) for further details of DNB’s current efforts on supervising bank culture.

101

Eisenbach et al (2015).

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 36 of 44

Once the specific behaviors, objectives, and value systems in the corporate culture are
identified, the alignment of corporate values and mission with behavior can be facilitated in a
number of ways. Economic incentives are the most direct approach, and favored by economists
and the private sector (see Section 6). However, there are other tools available to the behavioral
risk manager, including changes in corporate governance, the use of social networks and peer
review, and public recognition or embarrassment.
If, for example, an organization is concerned about insufficient controls due to a culture that
equates risk-taking with power and prestige, consider the following three measures. One
solution is to appoint a CRO who: (1) reports directly to the company’s board of directors; (2)
can only be removed by a vote of the board; and (3) has the authority and the responsibility to
temporarily relieve the CEO of his or her responsibilities if the CRO determines that the firm’s
risk levels are unacceptably high, and the CEO has not responded to the CRO’s request to
reduce risk. A more radical measure to change the risk-taking culture of an organization is to
make all employees who are compensated above some threshold, e.g., $1 million, jointly and
severally liable for all lawsuits against the firm. Such a measure would greatly increase the
scrutiny that such highly compensated individuals would place on their firm’s activities,
reducing the chances of misbehavior. An even more extreme measure is Kane’s (2015) proposal
to hold individual executives criminally liable for not fulfilling a fiduciary duty to the public,
which would no doubt change the corporate culture of important financial institutions.
Of course, such measures would also greatly decrease the amount of risk the firm would be
willing to take, which may not sit well with shareholders. Balancing the tradeoffs between
various incentives and governance mechanisms will ultimately determine the kind of culture
that emerges, and whether this culture is consistent with the corporation’s core values and
mission.
A similar behavioral risk model can of course be estimated for regulators. The recent reforms at
the SEC provide an opportunity to consider how quantitative metrics, such as those produced
by the OPM survey, can be combined with empirical patterns of corporate fraud and
malfeasance to produce more adaptive regulation. For example, rising markets should be
accompanied by increasing surveillance for potential Ponzi schemes among the most vulnerable
affinity groups, and regulatory examinations should target those institutions with cultures most
likely—as defined by their behavioral risk models—to violate key regulations.
In addition, there is the potential for regulators to pick up elements of culture from the
corporations they regulate which can render them less effective, much like public health
workers being infected by the disease they are fighting. Sometimes this leads to cases of fullfledged regulatory capture, while in others, it merely leads to an inaccurate bill of good health.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 37 of 44

It is essential for regulatory efficacy that regulators remain immune to the values of other
corporate cultures, while maintaining a sufficiently deep working knowledge of them. This is
easier said than done, but measurement of regulatory culture may be a starting point for
identifying potential problems before they turn into more serious lapses.
These hypothetical examples show that culture can be a choice, not a fixed constraint. The
emerging discipline of behavioral risk management can be the means by which a corporation’s
culture is measured and managed. And thanks to advances in the behavioral and social
sciences, big data, and human resources management, for the first time in regulatory history,
we have the intellectual means to construct behavioral risk models. We just need the will to do
so. To paraphrase Reinhold Niebuhr’s well-known serenity prayer, the behavioral risk manager
must seek the serenity to accept those parts of culture that cannot be changed, the courage and
the means to change those parts of culture that can and should, and the behavioral risk models
and forensic studies required to distinguish one from the other.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 38 of 44

References
Abbot, Patrick, et al. 2011. “Inclusive fitness theory and eusociality.” Nature 471, E1–E4.
Arvedlund, Erin. 2001. “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.” Barron’s. May 7.
Beck, Ulrich. 1992. Risk Society: Towards A New Modernity. London: Sage Publications.
Bénabou, Roland J. 2013. "Groupthink: Collective Delusions in Organizations and
Markets." Review of Economic Studies 80, 429-462.
Bénabou, Roland J. and Jean Tirole. 2015. “Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, Screening,
and Multitasking.” Forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.
Boyd, Roddy. 2011. Fatal risk: A cautionary tale of AIG's corporate suicide. Hoboken, N.J.:
Wiley.
Burns, Monica P. and Jessica A. Sommerville. 2014. “‘I pick you’: the impact of fairness
and race on infants’ selection of social partners.” Frontiers in Psychology 5,
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00093.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan and Jonathan Morse. 2010. “Your house or your credit card, which
would you choose? Personal delinquency tradeoffs and precautionary liquidity
motives”. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1411291 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1411291
Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, and Michel André Maréchal. 2014. “Business culture and
dishonesty in the banking industry.” Nature 516, 86–89.
De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB). 2009. “The Seven Elements of an Ethical Culture.”
http://www.dnb.nl/en/binaries/The%20Seven%20Elements%20of%20an%20Ethic
al%20Culture_tcm47-233197.pdf
De Waal, Frans. 2006. Primates and philosophers: How morality evolved. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Deason, Stephen, Shivaram Rajgopal, and Gregory Waymire. 2015. “Who gets swindled
in Ponzi schemes?” unpublished working paper, Goizeta Business School, Emory
Univeristy, Atlanta, GA.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley and Robert Van Order. 2000. “Mortgage
Terminations, Heterogeneity and the Exercise of Mortgage Options.”
Econometrica 68, 275—307.
Douglas, Mary, and Aaron Wildavsky. 1982. Risk and culture: An essay on the selection of
technological and environmental dangers. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 39 of 44

Durkheim, Émile. 1893. The division of labor in society. Trans. W. D. Halls, intro. Lewis A.
Coser, 1997. New York: Free Press.
Dyck, Alexander, Adair Morse, and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “How pervasive is corporate
fraud?” working paper, April.
Eisenbach, Thomas, Andrew Haughwout, Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, David Lucca,
and Matthew Plosser. 2015. “Supervising large, complex financial institutions:
What do supervisors do?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
729. http://www.ny.frb.org/research/staff_reports/sr729.pdf
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, and
Robert Hunt. 2010. “What “triggers” mortgage default?” American Economic
Review 100, 490–94.
Fielding, Eric, Andrew W. Lo, and Jian Helen Yang. 2011. “The National Transportation
Safety Board: A Model for Systemic Risk Management.” Journal of Investment
Management 9, 17-49.
Geanakoplos, John and Susan Koniak. 2009. “Matters of principal.” New York Times,
March 5.
General Accounting Office (GAO). 1999. “Long-Term Capital Management: Regulators
Need to Focus Greater Attention on Systemic Risk.” GAO/GGD-00-3. October.
Gibson, Rajna, Carmen Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner. 2015. “Do situational social
norms crowd out intrinsic preferences? An experiment regarding the choice of
honesty.” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract= 2557480
Gordon, George G. and Nancy DiTomaso. 1992. “Predicting corporate performance
from organizational culture.” Journal of Management Studies 29, 783-798.
Goodstein, Ryan, Paul Hanouna, Carlos D. Ramirez, and Christof W. Stahel, 2013.
“Contagion effects in strategic mortgage defaults.” GMU Working Paper in
Economics No. 13-07. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2229054 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2229054
Government Accountability Office. 2013. “Securities and Exchange Commission:
Improving Personnel Management Is Critical for Agency's Effectiveness.” GAO13-621. July.
Graham, Jesse, Jonathan Haidt, and Brian A. Nosek. 2009. “Liberals and conservatives
use different sets of moral foundations.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 96, 1029-1046.
Greene, Bob. 1986. “A $100 million idea: Use greed for good.” Chicago Tribune.
December 15.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 40 of 44

Greene, Joshua. 2014. “Beyond point-and-shoot morality: Why cognitive (neuro)science
matters for ethics.” Ethics 124, 695–726.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2006. “Does culture affect economic
outcomes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 23-48.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “The determinants of attitudes
toward strategic default on mortgages.” Journal of Finance 68, 1473–1515.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2007. “The new synthesis in moral psychology.” Science 316, 998-1002.
Hamilton, William. 1964. “The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I and II.” Journal
of Theoretical Biology 7 (1): 1–52.
Haney, Craig, Curtis Banks, and Philip Zimbardo. 1973a. “Interpersonal dynamics in a
simulated prison.” International Journal of Criminology and Penology 1, 69-97.
Haney, Craig, Curtis Banks, and Philip Zimbardo. 1973b. “Study of prisoners and
guards in a simulated prison.” Naval Research Reviews 9, 1-17.
Hill, Claire A. and Richard W. Painter. 2015. Better bankers, better banks. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Ho, Karen Zouwen. 2009. Liquidated: An ethnography of Wall Street. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Hunter, Mark and N. Craig Smith. 2011. Société Générale: The rogue trader.
Fontainebleau, France: INSEAD. Available at:
http://cases.insead.edu/publishing/case?code=26046
Iyer, Ravi, Spassena Koleva, Jesse Graham, Peter Ditto, and Jonathan Haidt. 2012.
“Understanding libertarian morality: The psychological dispositions of selfidentified libertarians.” PLoS ONE 7(8): e42366. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042366
Janis, Irving L. 1982. Groupthink: psychological studies of policy decisions and fiascoes.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Kane, Edward J. 2015. “Unpacking and reorienting the executive subcultures of
megabanks and their regulators.” Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2594923.
Kroeber, Alfred Louis and Clyde Kluckhohn. 1952. Culture: A critical review of concepts
and definitions. Cambridge, MA: Peabody Museum of American Archaeology.
Kronman, Anthony T. 1983. Max Weber. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lebow, Cynthia C., Liam P. Sarsfield, William L. Stanley, and Emile Ettedgui. 1999.
Safety in the skies: Personnel and parties in NTSB aviation accident investigations.
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 41 of 44

Lo, Andrew W. 1999. “The three P's of total risk management.” Financial Analysts Journal
55, 13–26.
Lo, Andrew W. 2004. “The adaptive markets hypothesis: Market efficiency from an
evolutionary perspective.” Journal of Portfolio Management 30, 15–29.
Lo, Andrew W. 2013. “The origin of bounded rationality and intelligence.” Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 157, 269–280.
Lowenstein, Roger. 2000. When genius failed: The rise and fall of Long-Term Capital
Management. New York, NY: Random House.
Lyng, Stephen. 1990. “Edgework: A social psychological analysis of voluntary risk
taking.” The American Journal of Sociology 95, 851-886.
Milgram, Stanley. 1963. “Behavioral study of obedience.” The Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology 67, 371-378.
Nowak, Martin and Roger Highfield. 2011. SuperCooperators: Altruism, evolution, and why
we need each other to succeed. New York, NY: Free Press.
Nowak, Martin. A., Corina E. Tarnita, and Edward O. Wilson. 2010. “The evolution of
eusociality.” Nature 466, 1057–1062.
Nuijts, Wijnand and Jakob de Haan. 2013. “DNB supervision of conduct and culture.”
In Financial supervision in the 21st century, edited by A. Joanne Kellermann, Jakob
de Haan, and Femke de Vries. 151–164. Berlin: Springer-Verlag
O'Reilly, Charles A. and Jennifer Chatman. 1996. “Culture as social control:
Corporations, culture, and commitment.” In B. M. Staw and L.L. Cummings,
editors, Research in organizational behavior 18, 157–200. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Ocrant, Michael. 2001. “Madoff tops charts; skeptics ask how.” MARHedge. May.
Office of Personnel Management. 2014. 2014 federal employee viewpoint survey: Agency
ratings. Accessed March 18, 2015.
http://www.fedview.opm.gov/2014FILES/Global_Satisfaction_Index_Score_Tren
ds_2014.xls.
Perrow, Charles. 1999. Normal accidents: Living with high-risk technologies. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Quercia, Roberto G. and Lei Ding. (2009). “Loan Modifications and Redefault Risk: An
Examination of Short-Term Impact.” Cityscape 11, 171–193.
Schein, Edgar H. 2004. Organizational culture and leadership. San Francisco, CA: JosseyBass.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 42 of 44

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Office of Investigations. 2009. Investigation
of failure of the SEC to uncover Bernard Madoff’s ponzi scheme. Public version. Report
OIG-509. August 31. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 2014. Agency financial report: Fiscal year
2014. Washington, DC: Securities and Exchange Commission.
Shapira, Zur. 1995. Risk taking: A managerial perspective. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Shelp, Ronald Kent, and Al Ehrbar. 2009. Fallen giant: The amazing story of Hank
Greenberg and the history of AIG. Second edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Shiller, Robert. 2005. Irrational Exuberance. Second edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Simon, Herbert A. 1997. Administrative behavior: A study of decision-making processes in
administrative organizations. Fourth edition. New York, NY: Free Press.
Smith, Charles W. 2005. “Financial edgework: Trading in market currents.” In Edgework:
The sociology of risk taking, edited by Stephen Lyng, 187–200. London, UK:
Routledge.
Snow, Richard. 2013. I invented the modern age: The rise of Henry Ford. New York, NY:
Scribner.
Société Générale. 2008. “Mission green: Summary report.” May 20. English translation.
Accessed September 20, 2014.
Sørensen, Jesper B. 2002. “The strength of corporate culture and the reliability of firm
performance.” Administrative Science Quarterly 47, 70-91.
Steinberg, Laurence. 2008. “A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risktaking.” Developmental Review 28, 78-106.
Sterngold, James. 1987. “Boesky sentenced to 3 years in jail in insider scandal.” New
York Times. December 19.
Trivers, Robert L. 1971. “The evolution of reciprocal altruism.” Quarterly Review of
Biology 46, 35–57.
Valukas, Anton R. 2010. “Report of Anton R. Valukas, examiner: Chapter 11, Case No.
08-13555 (JMP), In Re Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., et al, debtors.” Volume 3.
March 11. United States Bankruptcy Court, Southern District Of New York.
Accessed September 23, 2014. http://jenner.com/lehman/VOLUME%203.pdf.
Venkatesh, Sudhir Alladi. 2006. Off the books: The underground economy of the urban poor.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 43 of 44

Weeks, John. 2004. Unpopular culture: The ritual of complaint in a British bank. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Weiser, Stanley. 2008. “Repeat after me: Greed is not good.” Los Angeles Times. October
5.
Wilson, Margo and Martin Daly. 1985. “Competitiveness, risk taking, and violence: The
young male syndrome.” Ethology and Sociobiology 6, 59-73.
Zhang, Ruixun, Thomas J. Brennan, and Andrew W. Lo. 2014. “Group selection as
behavioral adaptation to systematic risk.” PLoS ONE 9(10): e110848.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0110848.
Zimbardo, Philip G. 2007. The Lucifer effect: Understanding how good people turn evil. New
York, NY: Random House.

17 July 2015

Gordon Gekko Effect

Page 44 of 44

