NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHAMING TAX DELINQUENTS
Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Ugo Troiano
Working Paper 21264
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21264

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2015
We thank the MITRE Anonymous Donor for financial support, Mary Mangum, Sam Russell and the
Office of the General Counsel at the University of Michigan for invaluable support for the field experiment.
Special thanks to Manisha Padi and Joel Slemrod for very useful feedback in the early stage of the
project and for detailed comments. We also thank feedback from Nageeb Ali, David Autor, Charlie
Brown, Raj Chetty, Magali Delmas, Mihir Desai, Leopoldo Ferguson, Mary L. Gray, Jonathan Gruber,
Jim Hines, Caroline Hoxby, Wojciech Kopczuk, Greg Lewis, Day Manoli, Ben Marx, Nolan Miller,
Markus Mobius, J.J. Prescott, Matthew Rabin, Justin Rao, David Rothschild, Jeff Smith, Alan Viard,
Duncan Watts, Matthew Weinzierl, Glen Weyl and seminar participants at Harvard Business School,
UCLA Anderson, Columbia University, University of California San Diego, Boston University, Barcelona
IPEG, Microsoft Research New England, Microsoft Research New York, University of Michigan,
Universidad Nacional de Los Andes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Society for Economic
Dynamics Annual Meeting, ASSA Annual Meeting, RIDGE Workshop on Political Economy and
the NBER Summer Institute. This project was reviewed in advance and declared exempted from IRB
oversight at the University of Michigan. We thank Will Boning, Kamala Kanneganti and Felipe Montano
Campos for outstanding research assistance. A previous version of the paper circulated under the title
“Tax Debt Enforcement.” The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2015 by Ricardo Perez-Truglia and Ugo Troiano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Shaming Tax Delinquents
Ricardo Perez-Truglia and Ugo Troiano
NBER Working Paper No. 21264
June 2015, Revised August 2018
JEL No. H26,H63,K42
ABSTRACT
Many federal and local governments rely on shaming penalties to achieve policy goals, but little is
known about how shaming works. Such penalties may be ineffective, or even backfire by crowding
out intrinsic motivation. In this paper, we study shaming in the context of the collection of tax delinquencies.
We sent letters to 34,334 tax delinquents who owed a total of half a billion dollars in three U.S. states.
We randomized some of the information contained in the letter to vary the salience of financial penalties,
shaming penalties, and peer comparisons. We then measured the effects of this information on subsequent
payment rates, and found that increasing the visibility of delinquency status increases compliance
by individuals who have debts below $2,500, but has no significant effect on individuals with larger
debt amounts. Financial reminders have a positive effect on payment rates independent of the size
of the debt, while information about the delinquency of neighbors has no effect on payment rates.

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ricardo.truglia@anderson.ucla.edu
Ugo Troiano
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
troiano@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Many federal and local governments rely on shaming as a penalty to achieve policy goals
(Kahan (1996); Kahan and Posner (1999)). Yet little is known about whether shaming
penalties work as intended. There are reasons to believe that shaming could be ineffective;
for example, antisocial individuals may not care about social sanctions. Shaming penalties
could even backfire—for example, if they crowd out the intrinsic motivation to do the right
thing (Bénabou and Tirole (2003). In this paper, we study specific channels through which
shaming penalties may affect behavior, using an important context in which they have been
widely implemented: the collection of tax delinquencies. To do so, we implemented a field
experiment with 34,334 tax delinquents from three U.S. states who collectively owed half a
billion dollars.
Tax delinquencies are the debts owed to tax agencies by citizens. Even though they have
been understudied relative to other aspects of tax collection, such as tax evasion and tax
avoidance, tax delinquencies play an important role in the tax collection process. For instance,
in the United States, where debt collection tools are believed to be effective, delinquent taxes
still comprised more than 25 percent of the total gross tax gap in 2006. 1 Moreover, tax
delinquencies are the potential tax revenues that are most readily available to tax enforcement
agencies. As a result, tax agencies invest substantial resources in policies aimed at reducing
tax delinquency.
Some of the most traditional tools used to collect tax delinquencies are financial penalties
and income garnishment. Additionally, tax delinquencies are collected through shaming
penalties, by which the identities of tax debtors are publicly revealed. For instance, as of
January 2015, 23 U.S. states maintained online shaming lists with the names, addresses, and
other information on individuals and businesses with delinquent taxes (see Table 1 for a list
of states and more details). Other local and national governments around the world use
similar penalties.2 Despite the popularity of shaming penalties, to the best of our knowledge
there is no evidence on how they work or whether they have the intended effect.
Studying the effectiveness of financial and shaming penalties in the context of tax delin1

The U.S. Treasury reported $46 billion in underpayment of declared taxes and $65 billion in enforced
and other late payments as of 2006. The tax gap amounts to $450 billion dollars, which in addition to the
previous items includes nonfiling and underreporting. Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal
Revenue Service (2012), “Updated Estimates of the TY 2006 Individual Income Tax Underreporting Gap.
Overview,” Washington, D.C.: Office of Research, Analysis, and Statistics.
2
For example, online lists of tax delinquents are or have been published by local or national governments in
Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, El Salvador, Greece, Macedonia, Mexico, Montenegro, Portugal,
Serbia, Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom. Other countries, such as Canada, Ireland, Italy and New
Zealand, published lists of tax evaders in newspapers or newsletters. A notable example is the city of
Bangalore, India, which hires drummers as tax collectors to visit the homes of tax evaders and to bang the
drum if they refuse to pay.

2

quency is challenging. For instance, the ideal experiment would randomly assign different
penalties to a sample of taxpayers. Unlike the randomization of audit probabilities, however,
randomizing financial and shaming penalties would imply punishing the same crime differently, which would likely be infeasible for legal and other reasons.3 Instead, our research
design consists of varying the salience of different incentives. We sent letters by mail to a
sample of existing tax delinquents. These letters were identical except for a few pieces of information that were cross-randomized to vary the salience of financial incentives, the salience
of shaming incentives, and the salience of peer comparisons. We then estimated the effects of
these random variations on the probability of paying the tax debt by using publicly available
data to identify whether the subjects were still listed as delinquent after they received our
letters.
We sent letters to 34,334 individuals from the online lists of tax delinquents published
by the states of Kansas, Kentucky, and Wisconsin. These letters were sent independently
by the research group, without mentioning the tax agency. 4 Individuals in this sample owed
between $250 and $150,000, with a median of $5,500. All of these tax delinquents had already
been informed by the tax agencies that their information, including full name, address, and
debt amount, had been listed online.5 These subjects had been delinquent for years, despite
numerous solicitations from the tax agency, financial penalties, and, possibly, failed collection
attempts through income garnishing. For example, subjects in Kentucky had been delinquent
for an average of 2.7 years and faced annual interest rates of up to 30 percent.6
We sent letters to all individuals in our subject pool, but cross-randomized the information
contained in the letter. The first treatment arm was designed to study the shaming incentives
through the social interactions channel. We altered the visibility of recipients’ delinquency
status offered to delinquents’ neighbors. We randomized subjects into two treatment groups.
In the first treatment, the delinquent was the only individual from the same area (defined
as the 9-digit ZIP code) who was randomly chosen to be informed about the online list of
delinquents. The second treatment was identical, except that other individuals from the
same area were also randomly chosen to be informed about the online list of delinquents.
The letter communicated the nature of the randomization explicitly and conspicuously—in
other words, it was apparent to individuals in the first treatment group that their neighbors
3

For example, tax authorities have co-operated in the past with researchers for randomizing audit probabilities in the context of tax evasion (Slemrod et al. (2001); Kleven et al. (2011)).
4
Note that our delivery method differs from most of the literature on tax compliance involving mailing
experiments, in which the letters are sent from the tax agency. It is possible that some of our results would
have been different if the letters had been sent directly by the tax agency. For example, the letters from the
tax agency could be more effective if taxpayers trust the tax agency more than they trust researchers.
5
Tax agencies are required to notify delinquents before disclosing the identity of tax delinquents.
6
Kentucky is the only one of the three states that publishes the date when the delinquent debts were
originated.

3

would not receive a letter, and apparent to individuals in the second treatment group that
their neighbors would receive a letter. Compared to the first treatment group, the second
treatment should make delinquents feel that they are being monitored more closely by their
neighbors—and, if they are sensitive to social pressure, this should render them more likely
to pay their debts.
It is important to note that in the letter, we refer generically to the other people who were
being contacted as “neighbors.” For practical, legal, and ethical considerations, we contacted
neighbors who were themselves delinquent—and therefore on the shaming list—but did not
contact any neighbors who were not. Although in reality we only contacted delinquent
neighbors, the letter was worded to suggest that nondelinquent neighbors would be contacted.
As a result, our estimates must be interpreted as such.
The second treatment arm was designed to create exogenous variation in the knowledge
and salience of financial penalties. It has been documented in a variety of settings that
subjects systematically underestimate financial penalties (Stango and Zinman (2011); Frank
(2011); Ausubel (1991)) and are inattentive to financial penalties (Karlan et al. (2016)). In
the first treatment, the letter contained a message that summarized the financial penalties
incurred by the debt. The second treatment group was identical, except that it did not
include the message about financial penalties. If recipients cared about financial penalties
but were inattentive to them, adding the financial reminder to the letter should increase the
likelihood of paying the debt.
The third and final treatment arm was designed to create exogenous variation in peer
comparisons. If delinquents use the online lists of tax delinquents to compare their own debt
amount to the amounts owed by other delinquents, that comparison may affect their decision
to pay. For instance, a delinquent who learns that the other delinquents in her area owe
larger amounts may feel less guilty about not paying her own debt. This mechanism could
change, for better or worse, the effects of shaming policies. To measure this mechanism,
our experimental letters included some information about the delinquent behavior of others.
Using a nondeceptive method, we created random variation in the amounts owed by the
individuals listed in the letter. This allowed us to test whether, consistent with the social
norm hypothesis, payment rates go down when delinquents observe that their neighbors owe
larger amounts.
First, our evidence suggests that the salience of the shaming penalties can increase the
probability of repayment. For delinquents in the first quartile of the debt distribution
($250–$2,273), higher visibility increased the probability of repayment 10 weeks after mail
delivery by 2.1 percentage points. This effect is statistically significant at the 1% level, and
also economically significant: The 2.1 percentage points effect amounts to 21 percent of the

4

average payment probability. Given that our visibility treatment was marginal, this effect size
is remarkable. Among individuals in the other three quartiles ($2,274–$149,738), the effect of
the visibility treatment on the payment rate was close to zero and statistically insignificant.
Our preferred interpretation for the heterogeneity by debt amount is that social incentives
may be difficult to scale up. This interpretation is consistent with a simple social signaling
model, according to which there is a limit to how much an individual would be willing to pay
in order to protect her reputation in the eyes of neighbors. Additionally, this interpretation is
consistent with the prior beliefs of the tax agencies that implemented these shaming penalties.
For example, the Vermont deputy tax commissioner stated during an interview: “When you
are talking about large debts, you do tend to get some people who just don’t care. It’s just
not worth paying off their $450,000 or $1.2 million debt. Down on the lower levels, you get
more of the Average Joe who is concerned.”7 However, our preferred interpretation is by no
means the only possible interpretation. Since the amount of tax debt was not randomized, it
is possible that delinquents with larger debts are more sensitive to our shaming intervention
because of unobservable characteristics correlated to debt size, such as liquidity constraints
or concern for one’s reputation.
Second, our evidence suggests that individuals respond to financial reminders: Over the
same 10-week period, the financial reminders increased the probability of payment by 0.7
percentage points (about 7 percent of the average probability). The effectiveness of financial
reminders did not depend on the debt amount, which is consistent with the fact that financial
penalties are proportional to the amount of the debt. Also, the effect of the financial reminder
was significantly higher in Kentucky, where the financial penalty was significantly higher.
Third, we find that showing an individual that their delinquent neighbors owe larger
amounts does not have a significant effect on payment rates. This constitutes suggestive
evidence against the peer comparisons mechanism. Also, this evidence is consistent with
findings from field experiments that messages of moral appeal are ineffective for reducing tax
evasion (e.g., Blumenthal et al., 2001).
It is important to note that we conducted a mechanism experiment (Ludwig, Kling, and
Mullainathan, 2011) instead of a policy evaluation experiment. That is, our experiment was
not aimed at measuring the average effect of introducing online lists of tax delinquents on
tax compliance, but rather at measuring some specific channels through which this method
may influence tax compliance.8 As in other mechanism experiments, this evidence can shed
7

Source: “To Collect Revenue, Some States Put Tax Scofflaws in Virtual ’Stocks’,” Stateline, May 28,
2015.
8
While we focus on specific mechanisms (i.e., social interactions and peer comparisons), we are not
implying that these are the only possible mechanisms or the most important. Also, our experimental design
measures the effect of shaming on a specific group of the population, delinquents who were already being
listed online, but the shaming policy can also affect other individuals (e.g., the website can deter individuals

5

light on the nature of human behavior and provide insights for policymakers on how to
design new tools to leverage established mechanisms more effectively. Also, we note that
our experiment is focused on a convenience sample composed of tax delinquents who ignored
previous shaming penalties imposed by the tax authority. Thus, one must be careful when
extrapolating the results to other samples that may be relevant for policy analysis, such
as individuals who are not delinquent or delinquents who responded promptly to the first
communication from the tax authority.
This paper builds on and relates to the tax enforcement, social incentives, and behavioral public finance literatures. A growing body of evidence shows that tax compliance can
be increased by a range of policies, such as auditing (Slemrod et al. (2001)); third-party
reporting (Kleven et al. (2011)); paper trails (Pomeranz (2015)); cross-checking (Bø et al.
(2015); Carrillo, Pomeranz, and Singhal (2017); Drago, Mengel and Traxler (2011); Naritomi
(2015)); and satellite detection of unregistered properties (Casaburi and Troiano (2016)). We
contribute to this literature by being the first to study shaming as a policy to increase tax
compliance.
This paper is also related to the literature in which social incentives are shown to be
significant in prosocial contexts such as voting, charitable and political contributions, and
energy conservation (Gerber, Green and Larimer (2008); DellaVigna et al. (2012); Delmas
and Lessem (2014); Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017); Allcott (2011)). It is unclear, however,
whether social incentives would also be significant in the context of antisocial behavior, which
is the most relevant context for shaming penalties. We provide evidence suggesting that social
pressure is effective in the context of antisocial behavior, but peer comparisons are not. Last,
this paper is related to a growing literature on behavioral public finance that proposes the use
of less traditional incentives, such as social incentives, to attain public policy goals (Chetty,
Saez and Sandor, 2014; Chetty, 2015).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the institutional framework, the
data sources and the experimental design. Section 3 presents the results. The last section
concludes.

2
2.1

Design of the Field Experiment
Data Sources and Subject Pool

At the time of our field experiment, 23 of the 50 U.S. states published online lists of tax
delinquents (we present the full list in Table 1). From these 23 states, we selected our
from being listed in the first place).

6

experimental states based on the following criteria.9 Each state lists delinquents with debt
amounts above a certain threshold. First, we restricted our sample to thresholds of $5,000
or less, so that the list would include a significant number of subjects. Of the five states that
satisfied this criteria, we excluded Georgia—because it does not publish the precise street
address, and thus it would be impossible to mail letters—and Indiana because we wanted to
focus on individual delinquents, and Indiana only lists business delinquents.
The resulting experimental subjects were delinquents listed in Kentucky, Kansas, and
Wisconsin. Some differences exist in the way the program is implemented across the three
states, as discussed in more detail in Appendix B.3. The main difference is the debt threshold
above which delinquents are listed: $250 in Kentucky, $2,500 in Kansas, and $5,000 in
Wisconsin.10 In our subject pool, 52.7 percent of subjects are from Kentucky, 25.4 percent
from Kansas, and the remaining 21.9 percent from Wisconsin.
We downloaded the online lists of individuals for these three states on May 26, 2014. At
that point, the online lists contained 57,744 individual tax delinquents who owed a total of
$968,764,474 to departments of revenue in the three states. We ex ante excluded the following
individuals from the subject pool: (i) individuals with unreliable address information; (ii)
records with full names that corresponded to multiple addresses in the same state, because
we could not confirm whether they corresponded to the same or different individuals; (iii)
individuals living in Wisconsin whose debts were not for state income tax; (iv) individuals
who had moved out of the state; and (v) individuals with debts exceeding $150,000. We sent
letters to a sample of 34,334 delinquents.11
Publication of lists of tax delinquents is regulated by state legislation.12 In these three
states, tax agencies are required by law to notify taxpayers and to allow time for payment
before they are publicly listed. It is thus reasonable to assume that most subjects knew that
9

The existence of these thresholds suggests that an alternative research design could exploit the exogenous
variation generated by these discontinuities. A first limitation of such a design would be that delinquents
right above the threshold receive an additional letter from the state, that not only informs them about the
shaming policy, but also reminds them about their tax debt and other information unrelated to the shaming
policy. Therefore, such a design would not be ideal to study the effect of the shaming policies. A second
limitation of such a design would be that those results would not necessarily be externally valid to delinquents
owing amounts that are farther away from the threshold. Indeed, our experimental results suggest that effects
of shaming may vary sharply with the size of the debt.
10
In Wisconsin, the public list at its inception in 2006 included delinquent taxpayers who owed more than
more than $25,000 while, on January 2008, the threshold was lowered at $5,000. The Communications Officer
of the Wisconsin Department of Revenue declared that the policy had been highly successful at increasing
collected tax revenues, as one of the reasons to explain the lowering of the threshold (Communications Officer
Press Release December 26, 2007, Wisconsin Department of Revenue).
11
About 150 letters were returned to us as undeliverable. The results are virtually unchanged if we exclude
ex-post these individuals.
12
A related policy is the one of shaming sex offenders. There is a large literature focused on estimating
the effects of shaming sex offenders, which we do not summarize here – e.g., Schram and Milloy (1995) and
Adkins, Huff, and Stageberg (2000).

7

they were included in these online lists of delinquents. The taxpayer’s consent, however, is
not needed before publication. The websites provide an e-mail address and phone number
that tax delinquents can use to pay their debts and be removed from the list. Once an
individual is listed, his or her information is updated on a weekly basis, to reflect revisions
to the original debt, new debts, interest, penalties, and fees. Tax agencies do not attempt to
list individuals immediately after the tax obligation has been incurred, but rather wait for
a period of time (for details, see Appendix B.3). As a result, the individuals in our subject
pool had already received notifications from the tax agencies about their tax obligations, and
the tax agencies may have already tried and failed to garnish their income.
Our subjects had been delinquent for a significant period of time. For example, subjects in
Kentucky (the only state that publishes the date the debt was incurred) had been delinquent
for an average of 2.7 years (median of 2 years). In addition to other fees, the amounts
owed were subject to annual interest rates of around 30 percent, 12 percent, and 18 percent
in Kentucky, Kansas, and Wisconsin, respectively. The mean initial debt amount (i.e., as
of May 26, 2014) ranged from $250 to $150,000, with a median of $5,500 and a mean of
$13,000. The online lists do not include any demographic information about delinquents.
Using auxiliary data on the distribution of gender and ethnicity by first and last names, we
estimate that our sample of delinquents is 35 percent female and 71 percent white. These
figures imply that delinquents are somewhat more likely to be male and non-white relative
to the general population in these three states.13 We do not have data on subjects’ incomes,
although the fact that tax debts arose primarily from state income tax suggests that the
income of these individuals is above the tax-exempted level.14 For the same reason, if an
individual owes a small tax debt, that does not necessarily imply that the debtor is poor.

2.2

Basic Descriptive Analysis of the Delinquency Rates

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that these administrative data on delinquents have been used for research. The determinants of tax delinquency have been understudied relative to other aspects of tax compliance, such as tax evasion and tax avoidance.
In this section, we use this administrative data to provide some basic descriptive analysis.
We created a database with the number of delinquents living in each 5-digit ZIP code
13

In comparison, the frequency of females and whites in these three states are respectively 50 percent and
85 percent.
14
In Kansas, only individuals who owe state income tax debts are listed. In Kentucky, the debts can be
originated with non-income taxes, but it is not specified in the list. Even though there are no public statistics,
private communications suggest that most delinquents from Kansas on the list had debts originating from
state income tax. In Wisconsin, the list includes delinquents for both income and a variety of other taxes (e.g.,
estate tax). To improve the similarity across states, we ex ante excluded from the subject pool delinquents
with debts not originated from state income tax.

8

of the three experimental states as of May 26, 2014 (the date we formed our experimental
sample). Given that the three states have different debt thresholds, and to keep delinquency
rates comparable, we compute delinquency rates of debts over $5,000, which coincides with
the highest of the three thresholds.15 We estimate a negative binomial regression of the
number of delinquents in a ZIP code on the logarithm of population and a few additional
place characteristics that we believe to be important for understanding tax delinquency. All
of these variables, with the exception of population, have been normalized to have a zero
mean and standard deviation of one. As a result, the coefficient on each of these variables
can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard deviation increase in the covariate on the
log of the expected number of delinquents.
A first characteristic of interest is Mean Income, which corresponds to the mean gross
income in the ZIP code. Share of Wage Income is the share of income originating from wage
income in the ZIP code, constructed using the Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income
database for 2012, and is intended to proxy for income garnishability. EITC Bunching is a
proxy for the propensity for tax evasion, computed as the share of self-employed individuals in
the 3-digit ZIP code estimated to be misreporting income to take advantage of EITC benefits
(see Chetty, Friedman, and Saez (2013)). Share Republican is the share of Republican votes
in the 2012 U.S. Presidential election at the county level. Civic Life Index is a county-level
measure of social capital based on a number of indicators, such as the density of civic and
nonprofit organizations (Rupasingha et al., 2006).
Table 2 shows the regression results. Column (1) corresponds to the pooled data for
the three states. The coefficient on Log(Population) is close to one and precisely estimated,
indicating that increasing the population in the ZIP code by 1% would increase the expected
number of delinquents by 1%. The coefficient on Mean Income is close to zero and statistically
insignificant, which is consistent with the view that tax delinquents are not limited to any
particular income group. Given that wage income is easier to garnish by the tax agency, areas
with a higher share of wage income should find it more difficult to avoid income garnishment
and thus should have fewer delinquents. Consistent with this prediction, the coefficient on
Share of Wage Income is negative and statistically significant (p-value<0.01). The magnitude
of this correlation is also economically significant: A one standard deviation increase in Share
of Wage Income decreases the expected number of delinquents in the area by about 8%.
The coefficient on EITC Bunching is positive and statistically significant (p-value<0.01).
The magnitude of this correlation is large: A one standard deviation increase in EITC Bunching reduces the expected number of delinquents in the area by about 17%. This finding sug15

The mean number of delinquents with debts above $5,000 per 1,000 inhabitants is very similar across
states: 2.27 in Kentucky, 2.31 in Kansas and 2.54 in Wisconsin.

9

gests that the type of individuals who take advantage of opportunities to evade taxes may be
the same type of individuals who take advantage of opportunities to avoid tax collection—for
example, they may be more sophisticated agents, or agents with fewer moral constraints. The
coefficient on Share Republican is negative and both statistically and economically significant (p-value<0.01), suggesting that partisanship may play a role in shaping tax compliance
(Cullen, Turner, and Washington (2015)). The coefficient on Civic Life Index is negative
and both statistically and economically significant (p-value<0.01). This negative correlation
between tax delinquency and social capital suggests that intrinsic motivation, such as civic
responsibility, may play a significant role in the decision to pay tax obligations (Putnam
(2001); Casaburi and Troiano (2016)).16
In principle, the institutional context and regulation for tax collection may vary so much
across states that there could be significant differences in the relationship between tax delinquency and covariates across states. Columns (2) through (4) show the results for each state
on a separate basis. The results indicate that the majority of correlations are qualitatively
similar across states.

2.3

Experimental Design

Appendix A provides a snapshot of a sample letter and a sample envelope. The first paragraph explained that the letter was part of a research study on tax delinquency. Both the
envelope and the letter bore the logo of the Department of Economics at the University of
Michigan, in the hope that this would serve to identify the letter as a legitimate communication from researchers. The letter also contained a table that listed 10 tax delinquents from
the recipient’s geographic area, which always included the recipient. All delinquents were
identified by full name and in ascending order by debt amount, with the recipient’s listing
highlighted. The second paragraph identified the corresponding state’s revenue department
as the data source, and stated: “Names, addresses and other details about tax delinquents
are freely available to see for anyone with access to the Internet. You can search for individual
debtors by first and last name, or by ZIP code, by visiting the following web-page [...].” The
second page of the letter contained a screenshot of this online search tool (for illustration
purposes) and some additional information to reinforce the perceived legitimacy of the letter
(e.g., the researchers’ contact information, a link to the project’s website, and a link to an
online survey).17
16

On the relationship between cultural norms and tax compliance see also: Torgler (2003); Spicer and
Becker (1980) and Alm, Jackson, and McKee (1992).
17
The website provided basic information about the research project, and contact information to reach
the research team. The main purpose of the website was to provide contextual information about our study
to interested subjects, and to dissipate any doubts about its legitimacy, emphasizing its academic and non-

10

Every subject is sent a letter that looks like the sample letter from Appendix A, except
that we cross-randomized three aspects of the information contained in the letter: The letter
may or may not be sent to the recipient’s neighbors; the letter may or may not include
information about financial penalties; and the amounts owed by the delinquents listed in the
table may be lower or higher. After the letters were sent, we measured how each piece of
information affected the probability that the recipient would be taken off the list.
Note that our experimental design does not compare individuals who received a letter
to those who did not, because of the difficulty of determining the exact mechanism through
which the letter can affect behavior. Additionally, as stated above, the respective revenue
departments had already notified all of our subjects that they would be included on the list
of delinquents. Last, our experimental design does not yield information on the effect of
introducing these penalties.
At this point, a reader may wonder why there should be a response to our experimental
intervention when our subjects were unresponsive to earlier communications from the tax
authority. At least two reasons might explain this. First, there could be some difference in
credibility or other factors between receiving a researcher’s letter versus a tax department
letter. Second, and more important, while a letter from the tax authority is directed only to
the recipient, our letters also informed recipients that their neighbors were receiving information on how to access the shaming website. Since the website is not actively promoted to
the general public, it is plausible that before our intervention, the delinquents did not expect
their neighbors to know about the website. As a result, our higher-visibility intervention can
increase the perceived probability that neighbors will use the website in the future to look
them up, and thus create an incentive to pay quickly to avoid remaining on the list.
Table 3 summarizes the three treatment arms, including the number of subjects in each
subtreatment. The first treatment arm was designed to alter the visibility of the recipient’s
delinquency status with respect to their neighbors. The letter always included information
intended to make the shaming penalty salient, such as the list of delinquents from the area and
the snapshot of the online search tool. Conditional on this baseline salience, we randomized
the visibility of the search tool in the eyes of neighbors. We followed the design of PerezTruglia and Cruces (2017) by constructing a lower-visibility message and a higher-visibility
message, which was prominently displayed in a box located right below the list of tax debtors:
Lower Visibility: “Your household was the only household randomly chosen from your
partisan nature. Although the website provided some general information about the main research objective,
to avoid the contamination of the experimental results, it did not provide any details about the precise
hypotheses to be tested, nor about the existence of several different treatment types. We don’t report the
survey results because of its extremely low response rate (0.2 percent), but these results are available upon
request.

11

area to receive a letter of this type.”
Higher Visibility: “Your household and other households in your area were randomly
chosen to receive a letter of this type.”
Neither of these messages was deceptive: We divided the sample states into small areas
based on 9-digit ZIP codes and then, consistent with the message, randomized whether only
one household from the area was selected to receive a letter or all households in the area
were selected to receive a letter.18 We test the social interactions channel by comparing the
behavior of individuals receiving the higher-visibility statement to those receiving the lowervisibility statement. The only difference between the lower-visibility and higher-visibility
groups was that recipients in the latter group were informed that their neighbors also received
information about how to access the online list of tax delinquents. The purpose of this
notification was to cause recipients to feel that they were being monitored more closely by
their neighbors. The hypothesis is that this would render delinquents more likely to pay
based on the fear of losing reputation in the eyes of their neighbors (Appendix D provides a
formalization of this argument by means of a simple social signaling model).
Our visibility intervention was not meant to maximize the response to the letters, but
rather to estimate a precise channel through which publishing lists of delinquents may affect
payment: social interactions. This final design was the result of a collaboration with the Institutional Review Board and attorneys in the Office of the General Counsel at the University
of Michigan, which took into account a number of ethical, legal, budgetary, and practical constraints. In practice, shaming penalties used by governmental agencies are expected to have
a much larger effect on visibility and payment rates than our mild experimental intervention.
For instance, our intervention increases visibility only among neighbors, while online lists of
delinquents published by governmental agencies arguably increase visibility among a much
broader set of social contacts that includes friends, relatives, coworkers, and employers.
Since interest rate payments are proportional to the debt amount, we would expect the
effectiveness of financial penalties not to depend on the debt amount. On the contrary,
however, there is no obvious reason the effectiveness of the shaming penalty should be independent of the debt amount. This possibility is consistent with anecdotal evidence from
the tax agencies. For example, assume that by getting off the list a tax debtor can “salvage”
$500 worth of respect from her neighbors. As a result, being taken off the delinquent list
may be worth paying a debt of $250, but may not be worth paying a debt of $150,000.
In the social signaling model from Appendix D, we provide a formalization of this in18

Note that the probability of assignment to the message is conditional on the number of delinquents in
the area, which we always include as a control variable in the regressions. Also, we chose the number of areas
to be assigned to each group as to generate roughly the same number of letters in each of the two treatment
groups.

12

tuition. According to this model, taxpayers pay on time to signal their social type, as in
Bénabou and Tirole (2006). Under this assumption, the effectiveness of the debt amount
turns out to be inversely proportional to the debt amount. That being said, this is not the
only way of modeling shaming incentives. Just as there is no obvious reason why the effectiveness of shaming should be constant with respect to the debt amount, we could think of
reasons why this effectiveness may increase or decrease with the debt amount.
In sum, how the effects of shaming scale up with the debt amount is ultimately an
empirical question. It is also related to the broader literature on social incentives, because
one of the most common criticisms of this literature is that social incentives may only be
significant for low stakes (Levitt and List, 2007).19 One advantage of our empirical setting is
that the amounts owed by our subjects vary extensively, from $250 to about $150,000, which
allows us to provide suggestive evidence on how the effect of higher visibility scales up with
the stakes.
The second treatment arm is related to financial penalties. To measure the effect of
financial penalties, the ideal experiment would consist of randomizing the individual’s interest
rate. Because randomizing financial penalties was not feasible, we instead created exogenous
variation in the salience of financial penalties by altering the letter as follows. The letter
included or excluded a message with a brief summary of the interest rates applied to the
recipient’s debt amount. To make this information more salient, the message was printed in
boldface below the snapshot of the search tool. We then compare the behavior of individuals
who received a letter with the reminder to those who received a letter without the reminder.
For example, the financial reminder for Wisconsin recipients was: “This website also
includes information about penalties. For instance, your tax debt is subject to, among other
penalties, an annual interest rate of 18%.” The corresponding interest rates were 12% in
Kansas and 30% in Kentucky. In comparison, the U.S. average for the annual interest rate
on a credit card was 14% (Source: CreditCards.com, accessed on January 5, 2015).20 If, on
average, delinquents underestimated or ignored the size of the financial penalties, then our
reminder about financial penalties could motivate recipients to pay sooner. Indeed, there is
evidence that people underestimate interest rates in many markets (Ausubel (1991); Stango
and Zinman (2011); Frank (2011)), and that they are inattentive to interest rates (Karlan et
19

For instance, DellaVigna et al. (2017) estimate that the social signaling value of voting is between
$5 and $15, and DellaVigna et al. (2012) estimate that the social signaling value of charitable giving to a
door-to-door solicitor is between $1.40 and $3.80. As a proportion of the average cost of voting and giving,
these values of social signaling are significant. However, it is unclear how these social incentives would scale
up with higher stakes.
20
Individuals using less conventional sources of credit, which presumably would be the most liquidityconstrained individuals, can pay several times this rate; for example, the average annual interest rate for
payday loans is estimated to be over 100% (Stegman (2007)).

13

al. (2016)).
The third and last treatment arm explores the role of peer information. By publishing the
list of tax delinquents, a delinquent’s payment decision may be affected; this is because the
information contained in the list changes the delinquent’s perception of the delinquent behavior of others. For instance, individuals have been documented to behave more prosocially
when they perceive that others behave prosocially (e.g., Frey and Meier, 2004; Perez-Truglia
and Cruces, 2017).21 Alternatively, an individual may react to peer information because that
information changes her perceptions about the costs and benefits of being a delinquent—for
instance, observing that other people decided not to pay may serve as a negative signal about
the effectiveness of the enforcement tools.
To test the effect of peer information, we created some exogenous variation in the recipient’s perception of the delinquent amounts owed by others. To do this without being
deceptive, we followed the methodology of Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017). For each recipient, we identified her or his 20 closest delinquents. The nine neighbors to be shown in the
table were selected by ordering the 20 closest delinquents according to a composite index,
then selecting the top nine delinquents from the ordered list. The index is composed of a
random term plus the debt amount of the individual weighted by a parameter α. Using a
higher α results in a table with nine delinquents with higher debt amounts. Table 4 illustrates this by showing the tables of delinquents that would be shown to a given recipient
under three different values of α.
We randomly assign each recipient to α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1 with equal probability.
By generating random variation in α, we generate random variation in the distribution of
amounts owed by the delinquents shown in the table. According to the social norms hypothesis, being randomly assigned to a higher value of α should reduce the recipient’s subsequent
probability of paying her debt.

2.4

Outcome of Interest and Econometric Specification

Once an individual is listed online as a tax delinquent, the main way to get off the list is
to pay the entire amount upfront or enter into a payment plan for the full amount and pay
the first installment. That is, individuals cannot get off the list by paying the difference
between the debt and the disclosure threshold. This feature of the law is clearly explained on

21

In the public finance literature, the peer information interventions normally provide information to
potential or discovered tax evaders on the population-wide extent of compliance or non-compliance. Such
social comparisons are meant to highlight that the tax evader is part of a minority of non-compliers, and
that his/her behavior goes against the social norm. Instead, we restrict our analysis, and our conclusion, to
a population of tax delinquents.

14

the websites of the tax agencies.22 Our dependent variable indicates whether the delinquent
is or is not listed online at a given point in time.23 We interpret changes in this variable
as an indication of either paying the debt in full or agreeing to a repayment plan for the
full amount, although we do not have data on the relative composition of these two.24 The
baseline econometric specification is given by:
Yit

=θ+

4
X
j=1

βj Qji Vi

+

4
X

γj Qji Fi

+

j=1

4
X
j=1

µj Qji Pi

+

4
X

φj Qji + δXi + i

(1)

j=1

The outcome variable (Yit ) takes the value 100 if the individual is not included in the
online list of tax delinquents t weeks after the letters were sent, and 0 otherwise – as a result,
the coefficients can be interpreted directly as percentage point effects. The dummy for higher
visibility (Vi ) takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive
a letter and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. The dummy for
financial reminder (Fi ) takes the value 1 if the letter included the financial reminder and 0
if not. The peer information (Pi ) variable takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1 depending on whether
the individuals to be shown in the table of delinquent neighbors were selected with α = −1,
α = 0 or α = 1, respectively. Note that we allow the treatment effects to differ by the quartile
n o4
of the initial debt amount ( Qji
). Finally, Xi is a vector of controls, including variables
j=1
such as state dummies and the initial debt amount.

2.5

Random Assignment

Randomization into treatment groups was conducted so that all members of the same household were assigned to the same treatment group, and the randomization was stratified at the
3-digit ZIP code level. In Table 5, we present some descriptive statistics across treatment
22

For the statutory evidence, see in Appendix B.3. For empirical evidence, see Appendix B.1. Also, note
that even if someone had access to a loophole to pay just enough to take the debt amount slightly below the
disclosure threshold, that would only result in being taken off the list for a short time period, because the
financial penalties would accumulate over time and take the total amount back above the threshold.
23
We must note that it is not uncommon for delinquents to leave the list to then re-enter a few months
later, after contracting new tax debt with the government. For example, 9.3 percent of our subjects leave the
list temporarily during the 37 weeks after the sample began (May 26). Our empirical model does not treat
exiting as an absorbing state. An individual may have exited the list at week 5 (in which case the dependent
variable takes the value 100) and re-entered by week 10 (in which case the dependent variable goes back to
0). In the traditional survival models, the individual who exits is counted as exiting forever. As a result,
estimating a survival model would make it look like the effects are larger than they actually are.
24
There are some alternative ways to get off the list, such as due to death, bankruptcy or surpassing
the 10-year limit since the debt was originated. Even though we do not have direct data on the share of
individuals leaving the list due to these reasons, conversations with officials of the tax agency indicate that
a very small minority leaves the list through these mechanisms. Appendix B.3 discusses in more detail the
specific laws and requirements. Additionally, this appendix provides graphs with the week-by-week evolution
of this outcome variable in the subject pool.

15

groups to check that the treatment assignment was balanced in observable pretreatment
characteristics. The only pretreatment outcome that we observe directly is the initial debt
amount (and its logarithm). Additionally, we included other variables that we did not observe
directly but could impute from secondary data sources, such as gender and ethnicity.25 This
table includes the p-value of a test of the null hypothesis that the average characteristics are
the same across all seven treatment groups. As expected from random assignment, individuals were balanced on pretreatment characteristics, with the exception of a small difference
in the percentage of African Americans.26 As an additional robustness check, we present falsification tests by estimating the “effects” of the treatments on the initial debt amount (i.e.,
the debt amount as of three weeks before the letters were delivered).27

3

Results

3.1

Effect of Higher Visibility

Figure 1.a presents the effects of higher visibility (i.e., the difference between higher-visibility
and lower-visibility treatment groups) on the probability of leaving the list 10 weeks after
the letters were sent. The effects are broken down by quartiles of the initial debt amount, as
described in equation (1). For reference, Table 6 shows the corresponding average payment
rates, as well as regressions results, in table form. Figure 1.a shows that for the lowest quartile
($250–$2,273), higher visibility increased the payment rate 10 weeks after mail delivery by
2.1 percentage points. This effect is statistically significant at the 1% level, and compared
to the baseline rate of 10 percentage points, suggests an economically significant effect of 21
percent of the baseline rate. The effect of higher visibility, however, was estimated to be very
close to zero and statistically insignificant for the other three quartiles of the initial debt
amount.
As a falsification test, Figure 2.a shows the same average treatment effects of Figure 1.a,
but on the logarithm of the initial debt amount, three weeks before the experimental letters
25

Data for these characteristics is imputed using data on the joint distribution of first names and gender
(several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint distribution of last names and
ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau).
26
The null hypothesis of equality is rejected statistically for one of the seven individual characteristics, the
percentage of African-Americans, albeit the size of the difference is small and one rejection may be due to
chance given the the large number of combinations between treatment groups and individual characteristics.
In any case, we always control for the percent of African-Americans in the analysis, but the results are similar
if we do not control for this variable.
27
One of the concerns with the results presented by debt quartiles is that our sample is not balanced
within the quartiles. As a robustness check, Appendix C.2 shows that there is treatment balance within each
of the four quartiles of the initial debt amount.

16

were delivered. As expected, the “fake” treatment effects are not statistically significant for
any quartile of the initial debt amount.
Since the financial and shaming penalties differ across states, the effects of our reminders
may vary by state.28 To explore this, Figure 3 presents the results on state-level heterogeneity.
Given that the distribution of debt amounts is notably different in Kentucky compared with
the other two states, we separated heterogeneity by state from heterogeneity by debt amount.
We did this by splitting the Kentucky sample in two: initial amounts between $250 and $2,500
and initial amounts above $2,500. The resulting four groups each contain about one quarter
of the sample. We used $2,500 to split the Kentucky sample because it corresponds to the
disclosure threshold for Kansas, but the results are very similar if we instead split the sample
using the first quartile ($2,273), as before.
Figure 3.a presents state-level heterogeneity for the effect of higher visibility. Although
debtors in Kentucky with debts below $2,500 reacted to the higher visibility, debtors in Kentucky with debts above $2,500 did not react to the higher visibility, and neither did debtors
with debts above $2,500 in Kansas and Wisconsin. These results suggest that even within
Kentucky, the effects of higher visibility decline significantly with the debt amount.29 These
results also suggest that once we control for heterogeneity by debt amount, no significant
differences remain in the effects of higher visibility across states.
To illustrate the timing of the effects, Figure 4.a shows week-by-week estimates of the
effects of higher visibility (for the first quartile). This figure shows that individuals who react
to the higher visibility leave the list promptly: The vast majority of the reaction occurs during
the second to fifth week after mail delivery. After week 10, the effects of higher visibility
decline slightly. Even 29 weeks after the letters were delivered, the probability of leaving the
list was still 1.6 percentage points higher, compared to the 2.1 percentage points effect at
week 10. This suggests that nearly 75 percent of the individuals who reacted to the higher
visibility by week 10 did not intend to pay during the subsequent 19 weeks. Unfortunately,
the effects are less precisely estimated for longer time horizons. As a result, we cannot reject
that these longer horizon effects are statistically different from the effects in week 10, but we
also cannot reject that they are different from zero. The finding that the salience of shaming
seems more effective for smaller debts is consistent with the perception of tax practitioners,
as mentioned above based on private conversations and press releases.
A key result is that for delinquents in the bottom quartile of the distribution of debt
28

For instance, the Kentucky website features a search tool to search individuals by name, lien balance
and/or location (e.g., street, city, state, ZIP code, county), while the Wisconsin website does not feature a
search tool, but it provides the opportunity to sort the list of delinquents alphabetically by name or by city.
The Kansas website allows for a name search, and it also provides the full list that can be sorted by name,
county and amount due, among others.
29
For a finer break-down of the effects in Kentucky, see Appendix Figure C.2.

17

amounts, the higher-visibility intervention increases tax compliance. Our preferred interpretation for this finding is based on social signaling models, as formalized in Appendix D.
This interpretation is consistent with complementary evidence from Gerber et al. (2016),
who conducted a survey experiment in which they showed participants information about
a hypothetical individual, then asked how favorably they viewed the person. The authors
found that respondents viewed the hypothetical individual less favorably when the individual
was described as never voting in presidential elections relative to someone who always votes.
Additionally, they found that other forms of antisocial behavior, such as failing to vote or
recycle, has an effect on social image of similar magnitude as being late with tax payments.
Another notable result is that higher visibility is less effective for delinquents who owe
higher amounts.30 Our preferred interpretation for this finding is that social incentives do
not scale up well, as in the social signaling model provided in Appendix D. There is, however,
an important caveat with this interpretation: We did not randomize the initial debt amount,
and therefore it is possible that delinquents who owe larger amounts have unobservable
characteristics that cause less responsiveness to higher visibility.
Perhaps the most natural confounding factor could be that individuals who owe larger
amounts are less reactive to shaming incentives because they face larger liquidity constraints.
However, we have reason to believe that this is not the case in our context. First, household
credit constraints may not play a large role in the decision to pay delinquent debt, because
the tax agency is offering to finance debts of all sizes and for every household. In other words,
if a delinquent who owes a large amount does not have the liquidity to pay the entire amount
upfront, the delinquent can still be taken off the list by entering into a payment plan for the
full amount. Second, if delinquents with higher debt amounts react less to higher visibility
because they are more liquidity constrained, we should expect them to also react less to
financial reminders. However, as discussed below, the effectiveness of financial reminders
does not decrease with debt amount.
Even though we cannot rule out alternative interpretations, Appendix C.3 reports some
suggestive evidence consistent with our preferred interpretation of the heterogeneity by debt
amount. This appendix reports regressions in which we allow for heterogeneity by debt
amount as well as for heterogeneity by other observable characteristics (e.g., ZIP code income, ZIP code credit score, and individual debt age). We show that these other forms of
heterogeneity are not nearly as important for the effects of higher visibility as is the heterogeneity by debt amount. Most important, we show that controlling for those alternative
sources of heterogeneity does not change the magnitude or statistical significance of the het30

This evidence does not rule out that shaming can be effective even with large debt amounts in other
contexts such as in other populations (e.g., taxpayers who have not become delinquents yet) or with more
substantial shaming interventions (e.g., making the delinquency status to friends, coworkers and relatives).

18

erogeneity by debt amount. Last, the appendix also discusses obvious limitations with this
suggestive evidence—for example, we cannot rule out the possibility that the heterogeneity
by debt amount is spuriously driven by unobservable sources of heterogeneity.
We have at least three reasons to believe that our visibility intervention provides a conservative lower bound for the potential effect of the shaming policy. First, our treatment
increased the visibility of the recipient’s delinquency status among neighbors. For most individuals, however, the most valuable social interactions are with relatives, friends, coworkers,
bosses, and clients—a majority of whom are not neighbors—and these interactions would
more likely be affected by publication of online lists of delinquents. Second, the tax agencies
in all three experimental states are required to send letters to allow individuals to resolve
their debts prior to being included in online lists, and a significant fraction of the response
to the shaming penalty happens when these warning letters are received.31 Our subject pool
comprised only those individuals who received such notification and did not respond, which
by construction is a subset of individuals who are selected against caring about social interactions.32 Last, a significant share of individuals may not have read the letter. For instance,
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that only about one-half of unsolicited
correspondence is opened. Thus, the average treatment effect on the treated (i.e., on those
who actually read the letter) is probably a multiple of the intention-to-treat estimates reported in this paper. On the other hand, it is also possible that the effects of our visibility
intervention exaggerate the effects of publication of online lists of tax delinquents. For example, it is possible that delinquents do not react to the shaming policy because they believe
that none of their social contacts would ever visit the website that lists tax delinquents. Our
mailing intervention would be more effective, therefore, because it provides neighbors with
access to the website.

3.2

Effect of Financial Reminder

Figure 1.b shows the effects of the financial reminder (i.e., the difference between letters
with and without information about financial penalties). Effects of the financial reminder
were roughly similar for individuals who owed different amounts. This is not surprising,
given that the financial penalties are proportional to the amount owed. For the first three
31

For instance, the chairman of the California Board of Equalization declared that when the list was
introduced in California 41 percent of those who were about to appear on the list made payment arrangements
before their names were published (Source: Stateline, May 28, 2015). Additionally the spokeswoman for the
Illinois Department of Revenue declared that “The real success of the program is before the postings are
made” (Source: CNN Money, December 23, 2005).
32
Our experiment was not designed to provide an impact-evaluation of the shaming policy – for that, it
would be key to measure the deterrence effect on all taxpayers, not only the ones who are already being
shamed.

19

income quartiles, the financial reminder increased the probability of leaving the list by about
1 percentage point (or 10 percent of the baseline rate). Although individually these three
coefficients are statistically insignificant, they are jointly significant; the average effect is
0.98, with a p-value of 0.034. Unlike the effect for the first three quartiles, the effect of the
financial reminder seems to be close to zero and statistically insignificant for the top quartile
($13,347–$150,000). As before, Figure 2.b shows that the financial reminder did not have
a significant effect on the pretreatment outcome, which is the logarithm of the initial debt
amount.33
Figure 3.b explores state-level heterogeneity of the effects of the financial reminder. For
debtors in Kentucky with debts both below and above $2,500, the financial reminder had
a significant and similar effect. In other words, the effect of the financial reminder did not
appear to change with the debt amount in Kentucky. On the other hand, the effect of the
financial reminder was close to zero and statistically insignificant for Kansas and Wisconsin.
This evidence suggests that the effect of the financial reminder differed between Kentucky
and the other two states.34 One simple explanation for this finding is that the financial
penalty in Kentucky (30%) is significantly higher than the financial penalties in the other
two states (12% in Kansas and 18% in Wisconsin), and also significantly higher than the
typical interest rate on credit card debt (14%). In other words, if an average individual from
Kentucky found out about the 30% annual interest rate on her tax debt, she should be able
to save a significant amount of money by paying off the tax debt with her credit card. In
contrast, if the average individual from Kansas (Wisconsin) found out about the 12% (18%)
interest rate on her tax debt, she should gain nothing (little) from paying off the her tax debt
with her credit card.35
Figure 4.b shows the week-by-week estimates of the effects of the financial reminder (for
the full sample). This figure suggests that the effects of the financial reminder build up
during the first four months and then decline slowly.36 Individuals who react to the financial
reminder react more slowly than those who react to higher visibility. This may be because
they owe higher amounts on average, and thus may need more time to gather the funds needed
33

Appendix C.2 provides some robustness checks for this heterogeneity – for instance, we show that the
results are similar if, instead of splitting the sample by quartiles of initial debt amount, we split the sample
using terciles or quintiles of initial debt amount.
34
We can reject the hypothesis that the average effect in Kentucky (for all debt amounts) is equal to the
average effect in Kansas and Kentucky (pooled together).
35
Another possible explanation is that individuals in Kentucky were more likely to underestimate the true
financial penalty. For instance, it is possible that Kentucky disseminated less information about the financial
penalties.
36
There is a jump around the tenth week, corresponding to one of the major updates to the databases
made in Kentucky, that, as discussed above, is the state for which the financial reminder had the highest
effect.

20

to pay the full amount or the first installment. Just as in the case of higher visibility, the
slow decline implies that a majority of individuals who paid because of the financial reminder
were individuals who, in the absence of this reminder, would not have paid in subsequent
weeks.

3.3

Effect of Peer Information

Figure 1.c shows the effects of Peer Information—a variable that takes a value from 0 to
1, depending on the weighting parameter used to form the list of delinquent neighbors. To
interpret the coefficient on this variable, recall that higher values of Peer Information are
associated with higher amounts in the table of delinquent neighbors shown to the recipient.
On average, increasing Peer Information from 0 to 1 has the following effects on the distribution of delinquent amounts of the nine neighbors listed in the letter: The mean amount
increases by $28,000, the median amount increases by $14,000, and the recipient’s rank in
the list goes down by four positions.37
The coefficients on Peer Information reported on Figure 1.c indicate that showing higher
debt amounts in the letter does not have significant effects on payment decisions 10 weeks
after delivery of the letter. Each of the four coefficients is statistically insignificant. The average effect over the entire sample is close to zero (0.10 percentage points), precisely estimated
(s.e. 0.42), and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.811). Figure 3.c and Figure 4.c show
that this null result is robust across specifications. Figure 3.c shows the heterogeneity by
state: The effects of peer information are close to zero and statistically insignificant in each
of the states. Figure 4.c shows the week-by-week estimates of the effects of peer information
(for the full sample). This figure shows that the effects of peer information are close to zero
and statistically insignificant for every time horizon.
This finding may suggest that peer comparisons do not play a significant role in the
payment decisions of tax delinquents. This interpretation would be consistent with related
evidence from field experiments showing that messages of moral appeal are ineffective at
reducing tax evasion. For instance, Blumenthal et al. (2001), Fellner, Sausgruber, and
Traxler (2013), and Dwenger et al. (2016) find that messages with moral appeals fail to
reduce tax evasion. In the context of tax delinquency, the evidence on the effect of moral
appeals is mixed: Although Hallsworth et al. (2017) find significant effects, Castro and
Scartascini (2015) do not.38
However, our evidence concerns the effects of a specific form of social information—the
delinquency of nine other debtors—so we cannot rule out that other pieces of social infor37
38

For details about this calculations, see the discussion of Appendix Table C.1.
For a more general discussion about moral suasion see Luttmer and Singhal (2014).

21

mation may have a significant effect.39 Furthermore, our evidence indicates that the social
information does not affect the behavior of individuals who are already tax delinquents. It
is still possible, however, that this same social information would affect the behavior of nondelinquents. Given that delinquents may have lower tax morals, it is somewhat unsurprising
that social comparisons are ineffective in shaping their behavior. This interpretation would
imply that the same moral interventions that have been proven to be effective with prosocial
individuals (e.g., individuals who give to charity) may not be equally effective with antisocial
individuals (e.g., tax delinquents).

4

Conclusions

Increasing the efficiency of tax compliance is a key issue for fostering economic development.
Even though there is little evidence on the effects of shaming penalties, these penalties are
being increasingly used for various purposes in the United States and the rest of the world.
We provide evidence from a field experiment in the context of tax debt enforcement, and
show that increasing the salience of shaming penalties has a positive effect on the payment
rate, which is the direction intended by the policymakers when introducing shaming policies.
Increasing the salience of shaming penalties, however, is only statistically significant for
lower debt amounts. Reminders of financial penalties also increased payment rates, and their
effectiveness did not depend on the size of the debt amount; it did, however, seem to depend
on the size of the interest rate. Last, we provide evidence that payment decisions are not
significantly affected by specific information about the amounts owed by other delinquents.
Our results provide some avenues for future research. First, our evidence comes from
a tax delinquency setting, but shaming penalties may also be applied for other aspects of
tax compliance, such as tax evasion and tax avoidance. Consistent with this observation,
some tax agencies outside the United States have started to publish lists of tax evaders,
although this policy is arguably less widespread compared to the the policy of disclosing
the identity of tax delinquents.40 Future research could use our methods to test whether
shaming is also effective for these other aspects of tax compliance. Second, we focused on a
specific form of nonfinancial reminder consisting of the online publication of lists of debtors.
In practice, tax agencies use other nonfinancial penalties, such as direct pressure through
39

Other margins of peer effects may be important. For instance, individuals may care more about the
number or share of taxpayers who are delinquent. Our experiment cannot identify the effect at this margin,
because all letters included the same number of delinquent neighbors.
40
For example, the U.K. publishes a list of top tax evaders (http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/defaulters/). Also,
even though it was not part of a regular policy, Chetty, Mobarak and Singhal (2014) present results from an
intervention in Bangladesh that peer pressure may be effective in reducing tax evasion.

22

home visits and revocation of drivers’ licenses and passports (Blank, 2014). Future research
may use a variation of our experimental design to test the effectiveness of these other types
of nonfinancial policies.
Last, our evidence suggests that the salience of shaming penalties has effects in the direction intended by the policymakers. This does not imply that shaming penalties have effects
in the desired direction, although it is suggestive evidence. Even if they have, however, the
evidence would not imply that, from a normative perspective, shaming penalties ought to
be used. Given that financial penalties are available, it is not obvious why tax agencies are
interested in using shaming penalties in the first place.41 Thus, theoretical and empirical
study of the normative aspects of shaming should be a priority for future research.

References
[1] Adkins, G., D. Huff, and P. Stageberg (2000), “The Iowa Sex Offender Registry and Recidivism.” Iowa Department of Human Rights, Division of Criminal and Juvenile Justice Planning
and Statistical Analysis Center, Des Moines.
[2] Ali, S.N. and C. Lin (2013), “Why People Vote: Ethical Motives and Social Incentives,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, Vol. 5 (2), pp. 73–98.
[3] Allcott, H. (2011), “Social norms and energy conservation,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol.
95, pp. 1082–1095.
[4] Alm, J., B. R. Jackson, and M. McKee (1992). “Estimating the Determinants of Taxpayer
Compliance with Experimental Data.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, March,
39(4): 107–114.
[5] Ausubel, L. (1991), “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, pp. 50–81.
[6] Bénabou, R.J.M. and J. Tirole (2011), “Laws and Norms,” NBER Working Paper No. 17579.
[7] Bénabou, R.J.M. and J. Tirole. (2006), “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Review, Vol. 96 (5), pp. 1652–1678.
[8] Bénabou, R.J.M. and J. Tirole. (2003), “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70, pp. 489–520.
[9] Bernheim, B.D. (1994), “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102 (5),
pp. 841–77.
[10] Blank, J.D. (2014), “Collateral Compliance,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 162,
pp. 719–800.
41

Similarly, the fact our financial reminders increased payment rates does not imply that financial penalties
are desirable from the perspective of social welfare.

23

[11] Bø, E.E.; J. Slemrod and T.O. Thoresen (2015), “Taxes on the Internet: Deterrence Effects of
Public Disclosure,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7 (1), pp. 36–62
[12] Blumenthal, M.; C. Christian and J. Slemrod (2001), “Do Normative Appeals Affect Tax
Compliance? Evidence From a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota,” National Tax Journal,
Vol. 54, pp. 125–38.
[13] Carrillo, P., D. Pomeranz, and M. Singhal (2017), “Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting
and Limits to Tax Enforcement.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 9 (2),
pp. 144–64.
[14] Casaburi, L. and U. Troiano (2016), “Ghost-house Busters: The Electoral Response to a Large
Anti-Tax Evasion Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 131 (1), pp. 273–314.
[15] Castro, L. and C. Scartascini (2015), “Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas. Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 116,
pp. 65–82.
[16] Chetty, R.; Saez, E., and Sándor, L. (2014), “What Policies Increase Prosocial Behavior? An
Experiment with Referees at the Journal of Public Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 28 (3), pp. 169–88.
[17] Chetty, R. (2015), “Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105 (5), pp. 1–33.
[18] Chetty, R.; J. N. Friedman and E. Saez (2013), “Using Differences in Knowledge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” American Economic Review, Vol.
103 (7), pp. 2683–2721.
[19] Chetty R.; M. Mobarak and M. Singhal (2014), “Increasing Tax Compliance Through Social
Recognition.” Policy Brief.
[20] Cole, H.L.; G.J. Mailath and A. Postlewaite (1992), “Social Norms, Savings Behavior, and
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, pp. 1092–1125.
[21] Cullen, J.; N. Turner and E. Washington (2015), “Heterogeneity in Behavioral Responses to
Taxation: the Role of Partisanship and Perceived Net Benefits,” Working Paper.
[22] Delmas, M.A. and N. Lessem (2014), “Saving power to conserve your reputation? The effectiveness of private versus public information,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, Vol. 67 (3), pp. 353-370.
[23] DellaVigna, S.; J. List and U. Malmendier (2012), “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure
in Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127 (1), pp. 1-56.
[24] DellaVigna, S.; J. List; U. Malmendier and G. Rao (2017), “Voting to Tell Others,” The Review
of Economic Studies, Vol. 84 (1), pp. 143–181.
[25] Drago, F.; Mengel, F. and C. Traxler (2011), “Compliance Behavior in Networks: Evidence
from a Field Experiment,” Mimeo.

24

[26] Dwenger, N.; H. Kleven; I. Rasul and J. Rincke (2016), “Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivations
for Tax Compliance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Germany,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 8 (3), pp. 203-32.
[27] Fellner, G.; R. Sausgruber and C. Traxler (2013), “Testing Enforcement Strategies in the Field:
Threat, Moral Appeal and Social Information,” Journal of the European Economic Association
Vol. 11 (3), pp. 634–660.
[28] Frank, J.M. (2011), “Do Credit Card Users Systematically Underestimate Their Interest Rates?
Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, Vol.
30 (1), pp. 133-139.
[29] Frey, B. and S. Meier (2004), “Pro-Social Behavior in a Natural Setting,” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, Vol. 54, pp. 65–88.
[30] Gerber, A.S.; Green, D.P. and Larimer, C.W. (2008), “Social Pressure and Voter Turnout:
Evidence from a Large-scale Field Experiment,” American Political Science Review, Vol. 102
(1), pp. 33–48.
[31] Gerber, A.S.; Huber, G.A.; Doherty, D. and Dowling , C.M. (2016), “Why People Vote: Estimating the Social Returns to Voting,” British Journal of Political Science, Vol. 46 (2), pp.
241–264.
[32] Hallsworth, M.; J.A. List; R.D. Metcalfe and I. Vlaev (2017), “The Behavioralist As Tax
Collector: Using Natural Field Experiments to Enhance Tax Compliance,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 148, pp. 14–31.
[33] Kahan, D.M. (1996), “What Do Alternative Sanctions Mean?” University of Chicago Law
Review, Vol. 63, pp. 591–693.
[34] Kahan, D. M. and E. Posner (1999), “Shaming White-Collar Criminals: A Proposal for Reform
of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines.” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 42(365).
[35] Karlan, D.; M. McConnell; S. Mullainathan and J. Zinman (2016), “Getting to the Top of
Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving,” Management Science, Vol. 62 (12), pp. 3393–3411.
[36] Kleven, H. J.; M. B. Knudsen; T. Kreiner; S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011), “Unwilling or
Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,” Econometrica, Vol. 79 (3), pp. 651–692.
[37] Kumler, Todd; E. Verhoogen and J. Frías (2013), “Enlisting Employees in Improving PayrollTax Compliance: Evidence from Mexico,” NBER Working Paper No. 19385.
[38] Levitt, S.D. and J.A. List (2007), “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences Reveal about the Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21 (2), pp.
153–174.
[39] Ludwig, J., J. R. Kling, and S. Mullainathan (2011), "Mechanism Experiments and Policy
Evaluations." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25 (3), pp. 17–38.

25

[40] Luttmer, E. P. and Monica Singhal (2014). “Tax morale,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28(4): 149–168.
[41] Naritomi, J, (2015), “Consumers as Tax Auditors.” Working paper
[42] Perez-Truglia, R. and G. Cruces (2017), “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field Experiment in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 125 (4), pp. 1208–1243.
[43] Pomeranz, D. (2015), “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in
the Value Added Tax,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105 (8), pp. 2539-2569.
[44] Putnam, R. (2001), “Social Capital: Measurement and Consequences.” ISUMA - Canadian
Journal of Policy Research, 2, 1, 41-51.
[45] Rupasingha, A.; Goetz, S. and Freshwater, D. (2006), “The Production of Social Capital in US
Counties,” Journal of Socio-Economics, Vol. 35, pp. 83–101.
[46] Schram, D. and C. D. Milloy (1995), “Community Notification: A Study of Offender Characteristics and Recidivism.” Working Paper No. 95-10-1101. Washington State Institute for
Public Policy, Olympia.
[47] Slemrod, J.; M. Blumenthal, and C. Christian (2001), “Taxpayer Response to an Increased
Probability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota,” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 79 (3), pp. 455-483.
[48] Spicer, M. W., and L. A. Becker (1980). “Fiscal Inequity and Tax Evasion: An Experimental
Approach.” National Tax Journal, June, 33(2):171-175.
[49] Stango, V. and D.J. Zinman (2011), “Fuzzy Math, Disclosure Regulation, and Market Outcomes: Evidence from Truth-in-Lending Reform,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24 (2), pp.
506-534.
[50] Stegman, M. A. (2007), “Payday Lending,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21 (1),
pp. 169-190.
[51] Torgler, B. (2003). “Tax Morale, Rule-Governed Behaviour, and Trust.” Constitutional Political
Economy, June, 14(2): 119-140.

26

Figure 1: Effects of Information Treatments, 10 Weeks after Mail Delivery, by Quartile of Debt Amount
b. Effect of Financial Reminder
3

a. Effect of Higher Visibility

Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Initial Debt Amount

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

3

c. Effect of Peer Information

−2

−1

0

1

2

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

Notes: N=34,334. The debt amount in the x-axis corresponds to the amount owed when the subject
pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The effects
were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis) where the dependent variable
takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were delivered
and 0 otherwise, and the right hand side variables are the treatment dummies plus a set of control
variables: gender, ethnicity and state dummies, initial debt amount and its logarithm (with statespecific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher Visibility is a dummy that
takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others
in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1
if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer Information indicates
if the recipient was shown neighbors with higher delinquent amounts – it takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1
depending on whether the individuals to be shown in the table of delinquent neighbors we selected with
a parameter α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1, respectively. Confidence intervals computed with standard errors
clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.
27

Figure 2: Falsification Test: “Effects” of Information Treatments on the Pre-Treatment (Log) Debt Amount
b. (Pre-Treatment) Effect of Financial Reminder
5

5

a. (Pre-Treatment) Effect of Higher Visibility

1

2

3

4

Average Effect
95% CI

−5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

−5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Initial Debt Amount

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

5

c. (Pre-Treatment) Effect of Peer Information

−5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

1

2

3

4

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

Notes: N=34,334. The debt amount in the x-axis corresponds to the amount owed when the subject
pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The effects
were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis) where the dependent variable
is the logarithm of the initial debt amount multiplied by 100, and the right hand side variables are the
treatment dummies. Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only
one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter
too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about
the financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer Information indicates if the recipient was shown neighbors
with higher delinquent amounts – it takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1 depending on whether the individuals to
be shown in the table of delinquent neighbors we selected with a parameter α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1,
respectively.. Confidence intervals computed with standard errors clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.

28

Figure 3: Effects of Information Treatments, 10 Weeks after Mail Delivery, by State and Debt Amount
b. Effect of Financial Reminder
4

4

a. Effect of Higher Visibility
3

Average Effect
95% CI

Debt Amount
$250−$2,499

Debt Amount
$2,500+

Debt Amount
$250−$2,499

Wisconsin

Kansas

Kentucky

Kentucky

Wisconsin

Kansas

Kentucky

Kentucky

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

Average Effect
95% CI

Debt Amount
$2,500+

4

c. Effect of Peer Information

Debt Amount
$250−$2,499

Wisconsin

Kansas

Kentucky

Kentucky

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

Average Effect
95% CI

Debt Amount
$2,500+

Notes: N=34,334 (9,029 from Kentucky $250-$2,499, 9,072 from Kentucky $2,500+, 8,710 from Kansas
and 7,523 from Wisconsin). The debt amount in the x-axis corresponds to the amount owed when the
subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The
effects were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis) where the dependent
variable takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were
delivered and 0 otherwise, and the right hand side variables are the treatment dummies plus a set of
control variables: gender, ethnicity and state dummies, initial debt amount and its logarithm (with
state-specific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher Visibility is a dummy
that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if
others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the
value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer Information
indicates if the recipient was shown neighbors with higher delinquent amounts – it takes the value 0, 0.5
or 1 depending on whether the individuals to be shown in the table of delinquent neighbors we selected
with a parameter α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1, respectively. Confidence intervals computed with standard
errors clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.
29

Figure 4: Week-by-week Evolution of Effects of Information Treatments

4

b. Effect of Financial Reminder (All Sample)

Average Effect
95% CI

Mean Effect
95% CI

−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

a. Effect of Higher Visibility (Lowest Quartile)

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Average Effect
95% CI

−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

−1

0

1

2

3

4

c. Effect of Peer Information (All Sample)

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Notes: (a) N=8,584; (b) N=34,334 (c) N=34,334. In the x-axis, Week -3 corresponds to the date when
the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The green vertical line shows the approximate date when
the letters were delivered. The units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The effects were
estimated from OLS regressions (one for each graph) where the dependent variable takes the value 100
if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were delivered and 0 otherwise,
and the right hand side variables are the treatment dummies plus a set of control variables: gender,
ethnicity, and state dummies, initial debt amount and its logarithm (with state-specific coefficients) and
the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the
recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen
to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included
information about the financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer Information indicates if the recipient was
shown neighbors with higher delinquent amounts – it takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1 depending on whether
the individuals to be shown in the table of delinquent neighbors we selected with a parameter α = −1,
α = 0 or α = 1, respectively. Confidence intervals computed with standard errors clustered at the
5-digit ZIP code level.
30

Table 1: States with Online Lists of Tax Delinquents (as of December 31, 2014)
State Rank (1st to 50th) in...
State

Experiment

Start Year

Current Threshold

Type

Website

Income

Social Capital

Tax Compliance

Kansas

Yes

2004

$2,500

I, B

Link

24th

16th

10th

Kentucky

Yes

2007

$250

I, B

Link

47th

40th

37th

Wisconsin

Yes

2006

$5,000

I, B

Link

28th

11th

19th

California

No

2007

Top-500

I, B

Link

5th

27th

32nd

Colorado

No

2003

$20,000

I, B

Link

11th

15th

17th

Connecticut

No

1995

Top-50

I, B

Link

1st

17th

28th

Delaware

No

2007

Top-100

I, B

Link

19th

23rd

29th

Florida

No

2014

$100,000

I, B

Link

23rd

37th

46th

Georgia

No

2004

$0

I, B

Link

33rd

47th

47th

Indiana

No

2010

$0

B

Link

41st

25th

33rd

Maryland

No

2000

Top-25

I, B

Link

6th

32nd

30th

Massachusetts

No

2004

$25,000

I, B

Link

2nd

18th

20th

Montana

No

2010

$10,000

I, B

Link

40th

5th

6th

Nebraska

No

2010

$20,000

I, B

Link

21th

6th

5th

New Jersey

No

2010

Unknown

I, B

Link

3rd

36th

42nd

New York

No

2010

Top-250

I, B

Link

4th

35th

36th

North Carolina

No

2001

Unknown

I, B

Link

37th

41st

39th

Oklahoma

No

2009

$25,000

I, B

Link

26th

26th

25th

Pennsylvania

No

2010

Unknown

I, B

Link

17th

30th

21st

Rhode Island

No

2003

Top-100

I, B

Link

20th

24th

45th

South Dakota

No

2012

Top-200

B

Link

27th

2nd

1st

Vermont

No

2014

Top-100

I, B

Link

36th

3rd

8th

Washington

No

1997

$10,000

I, B

Link

9th

10th

18th

Notes: Experiment indicates whether the state was included in the field experiment. Start year is the
year when the online list of delinquents was published for the first time. Current threshold indicates
the minimum amount of debt such as the debtor is included in the public list (Top-N means that the
list includes the N debtors with the highest debt amounts). Type indicates whether the lists includes
Individuals (I) and/or Businesses (B). This list does not include states that maintain lists for minor taxes
(e.g., Alabama for property tax and Minnesota for liquor tax). This table does not include other states
which had lists of delinquents in the past but discontinued the policy (e.g., Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana,
South Carolina, Virginia). Income, Social Capital and Tax Compliance correspond to state ranks, from
1st (the state with the highest outcome) to 50th (the state with the lowest outcome). Income corresponds
to gross household income from IRS-SOI data. Social capital corresponds to Putnam’s social capital
index. Tax compliance corresponds to the share of self-employed individuals in the 3-digit ZIP code
estimated to be mis-reporting income to take advantage of EITC benefis (Chetty et al., 2013).
31

Table 2: Place Characteristics Associated to the Rate of Tax Delinquency

Number of Delinquents in 5-digit ZIP code

Mean Income (STD)

Share of Wage Income (STD)

EITC Bunching (STD)

Share Republican (STD)

Civic Life Index (STD)

Log(Population)

Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All

Kentucky

Kansas

Wisconsin

-0.001

-0.162∗∗∗

0.064∗∗∗

-0.056∗∗

(0.015)

(0.061)

(0.023)

(0.022)

-0.079∗∗∗

-0.123∗

0.057

-0.115∗∗∗

(0.030)

(0.073)

(0.051)

(0.035)

0.177∗∗∗

0.392∗∗∗

0.178∗∗∗

0.225∗∗∗

(0.023)

(0.054)

(0.067)

(0.025)

-0.086∗∗∗

-0.104∗

-0.063

0.106∗∗∗

(0.029)

(0.061)

(0.047)

(0.032)

-0.140∗∗∗

0.089

-0.237∗∗∗

0.017

(0.031)

(0.074)

(0.041)

(0.052)

1.030∗∗∗

1.088∗∗∗

1.000∗∗∗

0.950∗∗∗

(0.018)

(0.036)

(0.026)

(0.021)

1,972

657

603

712

Notes: * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Heteroskedastic-robust
standard errors in parenthesis. The coefficients correspond to a Negative Binomial Regression of the
number of delinquents in the ZIP-5 on a number of place characteristics. All the independent variables
(except Log(Population)) were normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1. Number of
Delinquents in ZIP-5 counts the number of unique individuals on the online lists of delinquents as
of May 26th 2014 who owed $5,000 or more. The sample includes individuals with debts originating
from Kentucky, Kansas and Wisconsin who are still living in the same state where the debt originated.
Log(population) is constructed at the ZIP-5 level and comes from the 2012 U.S. Census data. Mean
Income corresponds to the mean gross income at the ZIP-5 level, based on data from 2012 IRS SOI.
Share of Wage Income is the share of gross income originating from wage income, also constructed at
the ZIP-5 level and using data from the 2012 IRS SOI. EITC Bunching is the share of self-employed
individuals in the 3-digit ZIP code estimated to be mis-reporting income to take advantage of EITC
benefits (data source: Chetty et al., (2013)). Share Republican is the county-level share of votes for
the Republican candidate in the 2012 U.S. Presidential Election. Civic Life Index is a county-level
measure of social capital based on density of civic and non-profit organizations, voting turnout and
census completion rates as of 2005 (Rupasingha et al., 2006). The regression in column (1) includes
state dummies.

32

Table 3: Overview of Treatment Arms

Treatment Arm
Visibility

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Sub-treatment

Number of letters

Description

Higher Visibility

17,179

“Your household and other households in
your area were randomly chosen to receive a
letter of this type”

Lower Visibility

17,155

“Your household was the only household randomly chosen from your area to receive a letter of this type”

Reminder

18,209

Wisconsin: “This website also includes information about penalties. For instance, your
tax debt is subject to, among other penalties,
an annual interest rate of 18%.” Kansas:
“This website also includes information about
penalties. For instance, your tax debt is subject to, among other penalties, an annual interest rate of 12%.” Kentucky: “This website also includes information about penalties. For instance, your tax debt is subject
to, among other penalties, an annual interest
rate of 30%.”

No Reminder

16,125

α = −1

11,431

α=0

11,384

α=1

11,519

Higher α includes neighbors with higher
delinquent amounts in the table of
delinquents displayed in the letter.

Notes: We sent letters to all 34,334 subjects, and this table summarizes how we cross-randomized some
of the information contained in the letter.

33

Table 4: Peer Information Treatment: Sample Treatment Lists Generated with Different Parameter Values
Lower Amounts (α = −1)
Name

Amount

Medium Amounts (α = 0)
Name

Amount

Higher Amounts (α = 1)
Name

Amount

J. W. C.

$68,509

F. D.

$82,142

B. J.

$95,935

G. J. D.

$12,051

J. W. C.

$68,509

F. D.

$82,142

Recipient

$2,648

R. P.

$23,188

J. W. C.

$68,509

L. N. L.

$2,638

G. J. D.

$12,051

R. P.

$23,188

T. C.

$2,024

W. S.

$6,247

G. J. D.

$12,051

R. T. C.

$1,944

Recipient

$2,648

E. T.

$8,244

D. N.

$1,505

L. N. L.

$2,638

W. S.

$6,247

S. M.

$1,158

T. C.

$2,024

G. G.

$4,312

T. S.

$873

R. T. C.

$1,944

Recipient

$2,648

J. V.

$269

D. N.

$1,505

L. N. L.

$2,638

Notes: This is an example of how the algorithm generates different lists of nine neighbors from a given sample
of the recipient’s twenty closest delinquent neighbors. The actual letters include the full names instead of the
initials. See Section 2.3 for a description of the algorithm.

34

Table 5: Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Balance Test

Visibility

Initial Debt Amount ($1,000s)

Log(Initial Debt Amount)

Percent Male

Percent White

Percent Black

Percent Hispanic

Percent Other

Observations

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Lower

Higher

No

Yes

α = −1

α=0

α=1

P-value

12.86

12.90

12.85

12.91

12.86

13.16

12.63

0.43

(0.16)

(0.16)

(0.16)

(0.15)

(0.19)

(0.20)

(0.19)

8.58

8.58

8.57

8.59

8.57

8.60

8.57

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

64.32

64.56

64.81

64.11

64.26

64.10

64.95

(0.37)

(0.36)

(0.38)

(0.36)

(0.45)

(0.45)

(0.44)

70.87

70.85

70.50

71.17

70.95

70.98

70.64

(0.22)

(0.22)

(0.22)

(0.21)

(0.27)

(0.27)

(0.27)

13.94

13.73

14.13

13.57

13.75

13.87

13.88

(0.11)

(0.11)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.14)

5.86

5.83

6.02

5.69

5.75

5.82

5.97

(0.15)

(0.15)

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.18)

(0.18)

(0.18)

3.33

3.37

3.36

3.35

3.34

3.37

3.35

(0.05)

(0.06)

(0.06)

(0.05)

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.07)

17,155

17,179

16,125

18,209

11,431

11,384

11,519

0.28

0.40

0.23

0.01

0.48

0.98

Notes: N=34,334. Pre-treatment mean individual characteristics by treatment group (standard errors
in parenthesis). Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one
in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too.
Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the
financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer Information corresponds to the value of the weighting parameter
used to select the delinquents to be listed in the table shown to the recipient. The p-value corresponds to
the test of the null hypothesis that the average characteristics are the same across all treatment groups.
The initial debt amount corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26,
2014). Gender and ethnicity are not observed directly, but imputed using data on the joint distribution
of first names and gender (several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint
distribution of last names and ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau). The omitted category for
gender is male, and the omitted category for ethnicity corresponds to unmatched last names.

35

Table 6: Effects of Information Treatments on Probability of Payment
Probability of Leaving the List Log(Amount)
(1)
Week 5

(2)
Week 10

(3)
Week -3

First Quartile (250−2,273)

1.914∗∗∗
(0.662)

2.083∗∗∗
(0.726)

0.003
(0.013)

Second Quartile (2, 273−5,439)

-0.275
(0.631)

0.033
(0.795)

-0.001
(0.006)

Third Quartile (5, 439−13,347)

0.399
(0.694)

0.279
(0.859)

0.003
(0.006)

Fourth Quartile (13, 350−149,738)

-0.414
(0.636)

-0.662
(0.705)

0.012
(0.014)

First Quartile (250−2,273)

0.939
(0.652)

1.061
(0.740)

-0.002
(0.014)

Second Quartile (2, 273−5,439)

0.578
(0.619)

1.023
(0.803)

-0.001
(0.006)

Third Quartile (5, 439−13,347)

0.010
(0.666)

0.874
(0.821)

0.010∗
(0.006)

Fourth Quartile (13, 350−149,738)

-0.120
(0.636)

-0.123
(0.766)

-0.009
(0.015)

First Quartile (250−2,273)

0.082
(0.703)

0.325
(0.780)

-0.006
(0.016)

Second Quartile (2, 273−5,439)

-0.796
(0.668)

-0.574
(0.890)

-0.014∗∗
(0.006)

Third Quartile (5, 439−13,347)

1.515∗∗
(0.693)

1.132
(0.837)

-0.003
(0.007)

Fourth Quartile (13, 350−149,738)

-0.543
(0.736)

-0.728
(0.840)

-0.024
(0.016)

First Quartile (250−2,273)

9.874
(7.880)

13.431
(9.000)

6.786∗∗∗
(0.015)

Second Quartile (2, 273−5,439)

12.275
(7.896)

22.305∗∗
(8.864)

8.190∗∗∗
(0.006)

Third Quartile (5, 439−13,347)

10.321
(8.387)

21.597∗∗
(9.481)

9.005∗∗∗
(0.006)

Fourth Quartile (13, 350−149,738)

17.377∗∗
(8.696)

27.315∗∗∗
(9.885)

10.355∗∗∗
(0.016)

Effect of Higher Visibility:

Effect of Financial Reminder:

Effect of Peer Information:

Mean Outcomes:

Notes: N=34,334. * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the 5-digit
ZIP code level. The coefficients were estimated from OLS regressions (one per column). The dependent variable in column (1) (column (2)) takes
the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 5 (10) weeks after the letters were delivered and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable in
column (3) is equal to the logarithm of the initial debt amount multiplied by 100. The right hand side variables are the treatment dummies, interacted
with the quartile amount dummies, plus a set of control variables: gender dummy, ethnicity, state dummies, initial debt amount and its logarithm
(with state-specific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. See notes to Figure 1 for definitions for Higher Visibility, Financial
Reminder and Peer Information.

36

A

Sample of the Envelope and the Letter
Sample Envelope

37

B. Sample Mailing

Ann Arbor, May 26th 2014
Dear Lakisha Nechole Leavell,
This letter is part of a research study about tax delinquency conducted by researchers at University of
Michigan. We would like to share with you a sample of the public records from the Kentucky Department
of Revenue. The following is a sample of tax delinquents living close to your household as of today:
First and Last name

Debt Amount

Jerry W Clines

$68,509

Garresha Jonell Dillard

$12,051

Lakisha Nechole Leavell

$2,648

Ted Chambers

$2,638

Reginald T Carlton

$2,024

Donald Newkirk

$1,944

Shameka Martin

$1,505

Troy Sargent

$1,158

Lewis Anderson

$873

James Vandeventer

$269

YOUR HOUSEHOLD AND OTHER HOUSEHOLDS IN YOUR AREA WERE RANDOMLY
CHOSEN TO RECEIVE A LETTER OF THIS TYPE
Names, addresses and other details about tax delinquents are freely available to see for anyone with
access to the Internet. You can search for individual debtors by first and last name, or by zipcode, by
visiting the following web-page from the website of the Kentucky Department of Revenue:
http://ilp.ky.gov/ILPInterNet.aspx?dt=I
You can find a screenshot of this search tool on the reverse of the page.

219 Lorch Hall, 611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220

Program Page: http://www.umich.edu/~taxproj/tax.html
Email: taxproject@umich.edu

38

Please recycle

10001

For illustration purposes, the following is a screenshot of the search tool:

This website also includes information about penalties. For instance, your tax debt is subject to,
among other penalties, an annual interest rate of 4% and a monthly late payment fee of 2%.
We kindly ask you to visit our website and fill out an anonymous questionnaire:
http://www.umich.edu/~taxproj/survey.html
Additionally, on our website you will also be able to find more information about this project, including
our contact information.

Ugo Troiano and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Contact email: taxproject@umich.edu
Program website: http://www.umich.edu/~taxproj/tax.html

T38 P58 AUTO**SCH 5-DIGIT 40504
Lakisha Nechole Leavell
1692 Hill Rise Dr Apt 2
Lexington KY 40504-2529

TADFATDTADTDADFADDTAFATDAAADAFTFAATDAFDTAATDTTTFTATTDTFDTAATAAFFD
39

Online Appendix: For Online Publication Only
B
B.1

More Details about the Experimental Sample
Descriptive Evidence about How Delinquents can Get Off the
List

In this subsection we discuss the observational evidence supporting the statutory claim that,
once included in the list, a delinquent can be taken off the list if and only if she commits to
pay the full amount of the debt (rather than the minimum amount necessary to take the debt
amount just below the threshold).
The evidence for Kentucky, Kansas and Wisconsin is shown in Figures B.1.a, B.1.b and B.1.c.
The data corresponds to the subject pool. For each state, the figure shows the distribution of
debt amounts. If individuals could pay a small amount of money to get below the threshold
and get off the list, this would imply that there would be some “missing density” just above
the threshold (i.e., those individuals could “aim” at having unpaid debts below the threshold).
However, we do not find evidence of such missing density in any of the states. The graph also
shows the mean probability of leaving the list in the next 6 months, for each of the bins of the
initial debt. If individuals could pay epsilon below the threshold to get off the list, we should
observe a spike in the probability of leaving the list just above the threshold (in the extreme
case, the individual that is $1 to the right of the threshold could pay $1.01 and get off the list).
Again, we find no evidence consistent with that conjecture. Last, it should also be noted that,
even if there was a way of paying to be taken below the threshold, that would only result in
being taken off the list for a short time period, because the financial penalties would accumulate
and take the total amount back above the threshold.
In sum, all the evidence supports the statutory claim that, once listed, individuals must pay
the entire debt amount or enter a payment plan for the entire debt amount.

B.2

Further Descriptive Statistics

In this subsection, we present some complementary figures and tables. First, Figure B.2 shows
the evolution of this outcome variable for each week from the beginning of the sample (Monday,
May 26, 2014). Figure B.2.a shows the evolution over the entire sample, while Figures B.2.bB.2.d show the evolution in each of the three states separately. These figures show that the
probability that a given delinquent is off the list increases quite smoothly over time, although in
Kentucky and Wisconsin there are some specific points in time when a larger-than-usual fraction
of individuals leave the list (e.g., fifth week in Wisconsin and eleventh week in Kentucky).
i

According to our conversations with the tax agencies, those discontinuities reflect time points
when, for administrative reasons, the tax authority makes a higher number of updates to the
list.42

B.3
B.3.1

Regulations of Lists of Tax Delinquents
Kentucky

A snapshot of the webpage with the list of tax delinquents from Kentucky is shown in Figure
B.3. In Kentucky the publication of delinquents owning taxes or other fees is regulated by KRS
131.650. According to it, “a taxpayer may be included on a list if: (a) The taxes or fees owed
remain unpaid at least forty-five (45) days after the dates they became due and payable; and
(b) A tax lien or judgment lien has been filed of public record against the taxpayer before notice
is given under KRS 131.654.” The provision related to the privacy of taxpayers are regulated by
KRS 131.190. The notification to tax debtors is regulated by KRS 131.654. The requirements
to qualify as tax delinquent are regulated by KRS 131.652.
B.3.2

Kansas

A snapshot of the webpage with the list of tax delinquents from Kansas is shown in Figure B.4.
In Kansas taxation matters are regulated by chapter 79 of the state Statute. Article 79-3235
regulates the collection of debts arising from state income tax. A warrant is issued if taxes are
not paid within 60 days after they become due. The warrant comprises the delinquent taxes,
with the added penalties, interest and the costs associated with the warrant itself. The process
of state income taxation is regulated by article 32 in chapter 79 of the Kansas Statute. Article
79-3228 regulates the process of administering interests and penalties.
B.3.3

Wisconsin

A snapshot of the webpage with the list of tax delinquents from Wisconsin is shown in Figure B.5. In Wisconsin the publication of tax delinquents is regulated by section 73.03(62)
of the Wisconsin statute. A requirement for publication is that the amount is unpaid more
than 90 days after all appeal rights have expired. The Wisconsin department will not post
the accounts of taxpayers who have: entered into a valid installment agreement, submitted a
complete Petition for Compromise, or filed for bankruptcy. The process of reaching a repayment plan agreement with the Wisconsin Department of Revenue is regulated by section 71.92.
The process of updating the online lists is regulated by s. 562.01 (3m). The process of taxing
42

For example, given that many individuals submit their tax forms close to the same deadline, that tends to
create spikes in the rate with which new individuals enter the list.

ii

individuals is regulated by section 71.01. The interests and penalties are regulated by sections
71.82, 71.83, 71.84 and 71.85. The expression “liable for delinquent taxes” means that a person
has exhausted all legal remedies to challenge the assertion that the person owes taxes, including
penalties, interest, fees and costs, under ch. 71, 72, 76, 77, 78, 125 or 139 and sufficient time
has elapsed so that the person is delinquent in the payment of those taxes.

iii

Figure B.1: Descriptive Evidence about the Behavior of Tax Delinquents
b. Kansas
Initial Distribution
Probability of Leaving (Left Axis)

0
$2400
$2500
$2600
$2700
$2800
$2900
$3000
$3100
$3200
$3300
$3400
$3500
$3600
$3700
$3800
$3900
$4000
$4100
$4200
$4300
$4400
$4500
$4600
$4700
$4800
$4900
$5000

$950

$1000

$900

$850

$800

$750

$700

$650

$600

$550

$500

$450

$400

$350

$300

$250

$200

0

5

5

10

15

10

20

25

15

30

35

Initial Distribution
Probability of Leaving (Left Axis)

20

40

a. Kentucky

Initial Debt Amount

Initial Debt Amount

$4800
$5000
$5200
$5400
$5600
$5800
$6000
$6200
$6400
$6600
$6800
$7000
$7200
$7400
$7600
$7800
$8000
$8200
$8400
$8600
$8800
$9000
$9200
$9400
$9600
$9800
$10000

0

Initial Distribution
Probability of Leaving (Left Axis)

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

c. Wisconsin

Initial Debt Amount

Notes: N=18,101 in Kentucky (a.), 8,710 in Kansas (b.) and 7,523 in Wisconsin (c.). The blue bars
show the histogram with the distribution of amounts owed by the subjects who appeared on the online
lists of delinquents as of May 26th 2014. The red dots indicates, for the group of individuals in a given
bin of amount owed as of May 26th 2014, the share of those individuals who are not listed as delinquents
in exactly 6 months after May 26th 2014.

iv

Figure B.2: The Evolution of the Probability of Leaving the List

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

0
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

b. Kentucky

40

a. All States

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Number of weeks since mail delivery

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

0
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

c. Wisconsin

40

c. Kansas

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Number of weeks since mail delivery

Notes: N=34,334 (18,101 from Kentucky, 8,710 from Kansas and 7,523 from Wisconsin). In the x-axis,
week -3 corresponds to the date when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The green vertical
line shows the approximate date when the letters were delivered. The y-axis corresponds to the share
of the subjects who were not longer listed online.

v

Figure B.3: Snapshot of Online Search Tool, Kentucky Department of Revenue

Figure B.4: Snapshot of Online Search Tool, Kansas Department of Revenue

vi

Figure B.5: Snapshot of Online Search Tool, Wisconsin Department of Revenue

vii

C

Additional Robustness Checks

In this Section we discuss some additional results and robustness checks that complement the
results from the body of the paper.

C.1

Effects of the α-Parameter on the Characteristics of the Table
of Delinquents

In Table C.1 we present the effects of the parameter α on the distribution of amounts by delinquent neighbors. The coefficients were estimated from OLS regressions (one per column/state).
The dependent variables are different characteristics of the lists of delinquents included in the
letter mailed to the recipient: Peer Mean is the mean of delinquent amount by neighbors listed
in the letter (in $1,000s), excluding the recipient; Peer Median is the median of delinquent
amount by neighbors listed in the letter (in $1,000s), excluding the recipient; Own Rank is the
recipient own position in the table of delinquent amounts in the area, from bottom of the table
(1) to top of the table (10); Own Share is the recipient’s own amount divided by the sum of
over the amounts of the 10 delinquents listed in the table. The key right hand side variable,
Peer Information, takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1 depending on whether the individuals to be shown
in the table of delinquent neighbors we selected with a parameter α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1,
respectively.
The top panel of Table C.1 presents the results for the entire sample (the findings are similar
within each of the three states). These results indicate that increasing Peer Information is
associated with large changes in the composition of the table of delinquents. The results
from column (1) indicate that increasing Peer Information from 0 to 1 increases the mean
amount in the table of delinquents included in the list by $28,040. The results from column
(2) indicate that increasing Peer Information from 0 to 1 increases the median amount in the
table of delinquents included in the list by $14,282. The results from column (3) indicate that
increasing Peer Information from 0 to 1 decreases the recipient’s rank in the table of delinquents
by 4 positions. The results from column (4) indicate that increasing Peer Information from 0
to 1 decreases the recipient’s own share of the debt listed in the table of delinquents by 35.3
percentage points.

C.2

Heterogeneity by Debt Amount: Robustness Checks

One basic concern with the results presented by debt quartiles is that our sample is not balanced
across treatment groups within-quartiles. To rule out this concern, Tables C.2C.3, C.4 and C.5
report the randomization balance tests for each of the four quartiles. The differences across
treatment groups are always economically small. Even though a few differences are statistically
viii

significant, we should expect this given the large number of tests we are conducting – our of a
total of 21 tests, we would expect a couple of them to be significant at the 10% level just by
chance.
Next, we show that the heterogeneity by debt amounts is robust if, instead of splitting
the sample by quartiles of debt about we use alternative splits. In Figure C.1 we present the
coefficients of our main regression for our two main treatments (social information and financial
reminder) first by terciles (in the top two graphs of the panel), then by quartiles (in the middle
graphs of the panel) and finally by quintiles (in the bottom graphs of the panel). What one can
learn from these graphs is that the results are similar regardless of the split used: the effects of
the higher visibility treatment are concentrated among the smaller debtors and the effects of
the financial reminders are more homogeneous across all the levels of debt.
Debtors in Kentucky constituted the majority of the sample in our experiment, and Kentucky was the only state in our sample to publish relatively smaller debts. As a robustness
check, Figure C.2 presents our main results for both the social information and financial reminder treatment restricting to the tax debtors residing in Kentucky. The general picture of
our results is unchanged when we restrict to Kentucky: the effects of the visibility treatment are
concentrated on the smaller debts, while the effects of the financial reminder are homogeneous
across levels of debt. It should be noted that is re-assuring that even restricting to Kentucky
does not alter the fact that the visibility treatment seems to affect only smaller debtors, and
suggests that the main results of the paper were not driven by the fact that the visibility intervention was (on average) ineffective in Kansas and Wisconsin, two states that only publish
relatively bigger debtors.

C.3

Heterogeneity by Debt Amount: Interpretation

One important result from the paper is that higher visibility is less effective for delinquents
who owe higher amounts. Our favorite interpretation for this finding is that social incentives
do not scale up well. There is, however, an important caveat with this interpretation: we
did not randomize the initial debt amount and, as a result, it is possible that delinquents
who owe larger amounts have unobservable characteristics, such as dishonesty, selfishness or
financial stress, that cause less responsiveness to higher visibility. Even though we cannot rule
out these alternative interpretations, below we report some suggestive evidence that alleviates
these concerns.
We use the following regression specification, which is a slight variation of the baseline
specification given by equation (1):




Yit = θ + η1 Vi + η2 Vi 1 − Q1i +

K
X
k=1

ix

λk Zik + Q1i +

K
X
k=1

νk Zik + δXi + i

(C.1)

The two key parameters from this specification are η1 and η2 . The coefficient η1 measures
the effect of the higher visibility intervention for the delinquents in the first quartile of debt
amounts. The coefficient η2 measures the heterogeneity in the effects of higher visibility by
debt amount (i.e., the difference in effects between the first quartile and the top-three quartiles
of the distribution of debt amounts). Additionally, this regression specification allows us to
control for heterogeneity of Higher Visibility by other characteristics besides debt amount (i.e.,
the interactions between Vi and the Zik ’s). These additional variables were standardized to have
mean zero and standard deviation one, so that we can continue to interpret the coefficients η1
and η2 in the same way. First, these additional interactions allow us to assess how “special”
the heterogeneity by debt amount is. Second, this specification allows us to assess whether the
heterogeneity by debt amount changes once we control for other sources of heterogeneity.
The results are presented in Table C.6. The results from column (1) simply provide a rearrangement of the results from Figure 4.a: the coefficient on Higher Visibility indicates that our
visibility intervention increased the payment rate by 2.081 percentage points (p-value=0.004) for
subjects in the lowest quartile of initial debt amount; and the coefficient on the interaction with
Dummy Top-3 Debt Quartiles indicates that the average effect over the other three quartiles
of debt amount is close to zero and statistically different from the effect for the first quartile.
Column (2) of the same table controls for an additional heterogeneity, by adding the interaction
between Higher Visibility and the average zipcode income.
After we control for this source of heterogeneity, the values of η1 and η2 remain similar in
magnitude and statistical significance. For example, the coefficient on Higher Visibility is 2.081
in column (1) and 1.919 in column (2), and statistically significant at the 1% level in both cases.
Also, the additional interaction coefficient, indicates that increasing the zipcode income by one
standard deviation would decrease the effect of higher visibility by -0.705 percentage points.
This source of heterogeneity by income is statistically significant at the 10% level, but smaller in
magnitude than the heterogeneity by debt amount. Columns (3) and column (4) progressively
includes interactions with other two variables: a proxy for financial liquidity and trustworthiness
(the share of the county population with a credit score below 660, using data from the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York); and a county-level measure of social capital. Again, we do not find
statistically significant evidence for these alternative sources of heterogeneity, and the estimated
η1 and η2 are qualitatively and quantitatively consistent across the different specifications.
The last two columns explore the interaction between higher visibility and the debt age.
This variable is available for the state of Kentucky, whose shaming website lists the debt
origination date. Column (5) provides the baseline results for the state of Kentucky alone, to
provide a benchmark. Column (6) is identical to column (5), only that it includes the additional
interaction between Higher Visibility and debt age. Again, the coefficient on the interaction
with debt age is small and statistically insignificant; and the estimated η1 and η2 are broadly
x

consistent across the two specifications.43
The results from this check constitute suggestive evidence in favor of our preferred interpretation that shaming incentives may be not scale up well. However, there are obvious limitations
with this evidence. First, the characteristics that we used are defined at the area level rather
than at the individual level and thus are subject to attenuation bias. Second and most important, we cannot rule out the possibility that this heterogeneity by debt amount is spuriously
driven by other sources of observable or unobservable heterogeneity.

43

As complementary evidence, Figure C.3 provides a break down of the effects of higher visibility and financial
reminders by the quartiles of debt age.

xi

Figure C.1: Robustness Check: Effects of Information Treatments, 10 Weeks after Mail Delivery, by Terciles/Quartiles/Quintiles of Initial Debt Amount

b. Financial Reminder, by Tercile
3

3

a. Higher Visibility, by Tercile

−1

0

1

2

Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

0

1

2

Average Effect
95% CI

First Tercile
($250−$3,100)

Second Tercile
($3,100−$9,350)

Third Tercile
($9,352−$149,738)

First Tercile
($250−$3,100)

Second Tercile
($3,100−$9,350)

Initial Debt Amount

Initial Debt Amount

d. Financial Reminder, by Quartile
3

c. Higher Visibility, by Quartile
Average Effect
95% CI

Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

Third Tercile
($9,352−$149,738)

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

First Quartile
($250−$2,273)

Second Quartile
($2,273−$5,439)

Initial Debt Amount

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($5,439−$13,347) ($13,350−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

e. Higher Visibility, by Quintile

f. Financial Reminder, by Quintile
Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quintil Second Quintil Third Quintil Fourth Quintil
Fifth Quintil
($250−$1,598) ($1,598−$3,858)($3,858−$7,352)
($7,355−$17,172)
($17,180−$149,738)

First Quintil Second Quintil Third Quintil Fourth Quintil
Fifth Quintil
($250−$1,598) ($1,598−$3,858)($3,858−$7,352)
($7,355−$17,172)
($17,180−$149,738)

Initial Debt Amount

Initial Debt Amount

Notes: N=34,334. The debt amount in the x-axis corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The
units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The effects were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis) where
the dependent variable takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were delivered and 0 otherwise,
and the right hand side variables are the treatment dummies plus a set of control variables: gender, ethnicity and state dummies, initial debt
amount and its logarithm (with state-specific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher Visibility is a dummy that
takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a
letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not.
Confidence intervals computed with standard errors clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.

xii

Figure C.2: Effects of Information Treatments, 10 Weeks after Mail Delivery, Kentucky Sample, by Quartile
of Debt Amount
a. Effect of Higher Visibility

b. Effect of Financial Reminder
Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
($250−$988)

Second Quartile
($988−$2,515)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($2,517−$8,028) ($8,035−$149,548)

First Quartile
($250−$988)

Initial Debt Amount

Second Quartile
($988−$2,515)

Third Quartile
Fourth Quartile
($2,517−$8,028) ($8,035−$149,548)

Initial Debt Amount

Notes: N=18,101. The debt amount in the x-axis corresponds to the amount owed when the subject
pool was formed (May 26, 2014). The units of the y-axis correspond to percentage points. The effects
were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis) where the dependent variable
takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were delivered
and 0 otherwise, and the right hand side variables are the treatment dummies plus a set of control
variables: gender, ethnicity and state dummies, initial debt amount and its logarithm (with statespecific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher Visibility is a dummy that
takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive a letter, and 1 if others
in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy that takes the value 1 if
the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not. Confidence intervals computed
with standard errors clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.

xiii

Figure C.3: Effects of Information Treatments, 10 Weeks after Mail Delivery, Kentucky Sample, by Quartile
of Pre-Treatment Debt Age
a. Effect of Higher Visibility

b. Effect of Financial Reminder
Average Effect
95% CI

−2

−2

−1

−1

0

0

1

1

2

2

3

3

Average Effect
95% CI

First Quartile
(3.1−4.6)

Second Quartile
(4.6−5.5)

Third Quartile
(5.5−7.3)

Fourth Quartile
(7.3−13.6)

First Quartile
(3.1−4.6)

Time Spent in list (years)

Second Quartile
(4.6−5.5)

Third Quartile
(5.5−7.3)

Fourth Quartile
(7.3−13.6)

Time Spent in list (years)

Notes: N=18,101. The x-axis corresponds to the quartiles of the distribution of the time elapsed from
the origination of the debt until the date in which the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014) –
this information is only available for subjects from Kentucky. The units of the y-axis correspond to
percentage points. The effects were estimated from OLS regressions (one for each group in the x-axis)
where the dependent variable takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks
after the letters were delivered and 0 otherwise, and the right hand side variables are the treatment
dummies plus a set of control variables: gender, ethnicity and state dummies, initial debt amount and
its logarithm (with state-specific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. Higher
Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to
receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a
dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if
not. Confidence intervals computed with standard errors clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level.

xiv

Table C.1: Peer Information: Effects of the Parameter α on the Distribution of Amounts in the Table of
Delinquent Neighbors

Peer Mean

Peer Median

Own Rank

Own Share

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

28.040∗∗∗

14.282∗∗∗

-4.018∗∗∗

-0.353∗∗∗

(1.078)

(0.567)

(0.053)

(0.004)

4.132∗∗∗

2.422∗∗∗

7.412∗∗∗

0.604∗∗∗

(0.168)

(0.131)

(0.028)

(0.002)

18.852∗∗∗

8.617∗∗∗

-3.756∗∗∗

-0.378∗∗∗

(0.716)

(0.287)

(0.072)

(0.007)

1.742∗∗∗

0.543∗∗∗

7.307∗∗∗

0.596∗∗∗

(0.124)

(0.079)

(0.038)

(0.004)

17.222∗∗∗

7.117∗∗∗

-3.939∗∗∗

-0.293∗∗∗

(1.196)

(0.306)

(0.081)

(0.006)

4.025∗∗∗

3.172∗∗∗

7.398∗∗∗

0.605∗∗∗

(0.112)

(0.055)

(0.048)

(0.003)

63.295∗∗∗

34.754∗∗∗

-4.743∗∗∗

-0.365∗∗∗

(3.052)

(1.357)

(0.075)

(0.006)

9.841∗∗∗

6.656∗∗∗

7.678∗∗∗

0.623∗∗∗

(0.314)

(0.210)

(0.045)

(0.003)

All sample (N=34,334):
Peer Information

Constant

Kentucky (N=18,101):
Peer Information

Constant

Kansas (N=8,710):
Peer Information

Constant

Wisconsin (N=7,523):
Peer Information

Constant

Notes: * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Standard errors in
parentheses, clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level. The coefficients were estimated from OLS regressions
(one per column/state). Peer Mean is the mean of delinquent amount by neighbors listed in the letter
(in $1,000s), excluding the recipient. Peer Median is the median of delinquent amount by neighbors
listed in the letter (in $1,000s), excluding the recipient. Own Rank is the recipient own position in the
table of delinquent amounts in the area, from bottom of the table (1) to top of the table (10). Own
Share is the recipient’s own amount divided by the sum of over the amounts of the 10 delinquents listed
in the table. Peer Information indicates if the recipient was shown neighbors with higher delinquent
amounts – it takes the value 0, 0.5 or 1 depending on whether the individuals to be shown in the table
of delinquent neighbors we selected with a parameter α = −1, α = 0 or α = 1, respectively.
xv

Table C.2: Randomization Balance Test: 1st Quartile of Initial Debt Amount

Visibility

Initial Debt Amount ($1,000s)

Log(Initial Debt Amount)

Percent Male

Percent White

Percent Black

Percent Hispanic

Percent Other

Observations

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Lower

Higher

No

Yes

α = −1

α=0

α=1

P-value

1.04

1.04

1.04

1.04

1.05

1.03

1.04

0.83

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

6.78

6.78

6.78

6.78

6.79

6.78

6.78

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

59.38

60.38

59.88

59.88

60.39

59.40

59.82

(0.75)

(0.74)

(0.77)

(0.73)

(0.90)

(0.93)

(0.92)

73.38

73.33

73.20

73.49

73.57

73.67

72.83

(0.36)

(0.36)

(0.37)

(0.35)

(0.44)

(0.44)

(0.45)

15.83

15.82

16.03

15.63

15.55

15.84

16.08

(0.22)

(0.22)

(0.22)

(0.21)

(0.27)

(0.26)

(0.27)

4.07

4.22

4.35

3.96

4.05

3.90

4.48

(0.23)

(0.23)

(0.24)

(0.22)

(0.27)

(0.27)

(0.30)

3.02

3.04

3.12

2.95

3.00

3.03

3.06

(0.07)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.05)

(0.07)

(0.08)

(0.09)

4,271

4,313

4,088

4,496

2,951

2,786

2,847

0.97

0.83

0.65

0.44

0.41

0.47

Notes: Sample of individuals in the first quartile of the initial debt amount ($250–$2,273). Average individual (pre-treatment) characteristics by treatment group, with standard errors in parenthesis. Higher
Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive
a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a dummy
that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not. Peer
Information corresponds to the value of the weighting parameter used to select the delinquents to be
listed in the table shown to the recipient. The p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis
that the average characteristics are the same across all treatment groups. The initial debt amount corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). Gender and ethnicity
are not observed directly. Data for these characteristics is imputed using data on the joint distribution
of first names and gender (several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint
distribution of last names and ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau). The omitted category for
gender is male, and the omitted category for ethnicity corresponds to unmatched last names.

xvi

Table C.3: Randomization Balance Test: 2nd Quartile of Initial Debt Amount

Visibility

Initial Debt Amount ($1,000s)

Log(Initial Debt Amount)

Percent Male

Percent White

Percent Black

Percent Hispanic

Percent Other

Observations

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Lower

Higher

No

Yes

α = −1

α=0

α=1

P-value

3.68

3.68

3.68

3.68

3.70

3.69

3.65

0.25

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.02)

8.18

8.18

8.18

8.18

8.19

8.18

8.17

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

62.33

62.03

62.87

61.56

61.19

61.27

64.01

(0.74)

(0.74)

(0.76)

(0.72)

(0.93)

(0.91)

(0.89)

69.80

69.11

69.15

69.72

69.68

69.42

69.27

(0.43)

(0.45)

(0.45)

(0.43)

(0.55)

(0.53)

(0.54)

14.86

14.21

14.82

14.28

14.52

14.84

14.25

(0.23)

(0.23)

(0.24)

(0.22)

(0.30)

(0.29)

(0.27)

6.76

7.36

7.38

6.77

7.26

6.95

6.98

(0.32)

(0.33)

(0.34)

(0.31)

(0.41)

(0.39)

(0.39)

3.45

3.55

3.42

3.58

3.50

3.57

3.44

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.11)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.15)

(0.14)

4,290

4,293

4,051

4,532

2,775

2,874

2,934

0.23

0.09

0.67

0.07

0.43

0.82

Notes: Sample of individuals in the second quartile of the initial debt amount ($2,273–5,439). Average individual (pre-treatment) characteristics by treatment group, with standard errors in parenthesis.
Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen
to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a
dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not.
Peer Information corresponds to the value of the weighting parameter used to select the delinquents to
be listed in the table shown to the recipient. The p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis
that the average characteristics are the same across all treatment groups. The initial debt amount corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). Gender and ethnicity
are not observed directly. Data for these characteristics is imputed using data on the joint distribution
of first names and gender (several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint
distribution of last names and ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau). The omitted category for
gender is male, and the omitted category for ethnicity corresponds to unmatched last names.

xvii

Table C.4: Randomization Balance Test: 3rd Quartile of Initial Debt Amount

Visibility

Initial Debt Amount ($1,000s)

Log(Initial Debt Amount)

Percent Male

Percent White

Percent Black

Percent Hispanic

Percent Other

Observations

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Lower

Higher

No

Yes

α = −1

α=0

α=1

P-value

8.45

8.48

8.42

8.51

8.48

8.45

8.47

0.42

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.03)

(0.04)

(0.04)

(0.04)

9.01

9.01

9.00

9.01

9.01

9.01

9.01

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

64.74

64.55

65.39

63.99

64.78

64.87

64.28

(0.73)

(0.73)

(0.75)

(0.71)

(0.89)

(0.90)

(0.89)

69.14

69.30

68.78

69.61

69.39

69.74

68.54

(0.47)

(0.46)

(0.48)

(0.45)

(0.57)

(0.56)

(0.57)

13.47

13.42

13.81

13.12

13.30

13.15

13.88

(0.24)

(0.23)

(0.24)

(0.23)

(0.29)

(0.28)

(0.29)

6.60

6.29

6.75

6.17

6.14

6.57

6.62

(0.31)

(0.30)

(0.33)

(0.29)

(0.37)

(0.38)

(0.38)

3.60

3.55

3.70

3.46

3.66

3.58

3.49

(0.13)

(0.13)

(0.14)

(0.12)

(0.16)

(0.16)

(0.15)

4,271

4,313

4,002

4,582

2,862

2,844

2,878

0.40

0.71

0.41

0.09

0.53

0.67

Notes: Sample of individuals in the third quartile of the initial debt amount ($5,439–$13,347). Average individual (pre-treatment) characteristics by treatment group, with standard errors in parenthesis.
Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen
to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a
dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not.
Peer Information corresponds to the value of the weighting parameter used to select the delinquents to
be listed in the table shown to the recipient. The p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis
that the average characteristics are the same across all treatment groups. The initial debt amount corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). Gender and ethnicity
are not observed directly. Data for these characteristics is imputed using data on the joint distribution
of first names and gender (several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint
distribution of last names and ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau). The omitted category for
gender is male, and the omitted category for ethnicity corresponds to unmatched last names.

xviii

Table C.5: Randomization Balance Test: 4th Quartile of Initial Debt Amount

Visibility

Initial Debt Amount ($1,000s)

Log(Initial Debt Amount)

Percent Male

Percent White

Percent Black

Percent Hispanic

Percent Other

Observations

Financial Reminder

Peer Information

Difference

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Lower

Higher

No

Yes

α = −1

α=0

α=1

P-value

38.00

38.68

38.74

37.98

38.46

38.97

37.57

0.17

(0.43)

(0.44)

(0.46)

(0.41)

(0.53)

(0.53)

(0.52)

10.34

10.35

10.35

10.34

10.35

10.36

10.32

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

70.76

71.36

71.26

70.88

70.77

70.69

71.71

(0.69)

(0.69)

(0.72)

(0.67)

(0.85)

(0.85)

(0.84)

71.15

71.65

70.84

71.88

71.04

71.15

72.00

(0.47)

(0.47)

(0.49)

(0.45)

(0.58)

(0.57)

(0.56)

11.61

11.45

11.80

11.30

11.58

11.69

11.32

(0.22)

(0.21)

(0.23)

(0.21)

(0.27)

(0.27)

(0.26)

6.00

5.44

5.62

5.81

5.62

5.79

5.75

(0.29)

(0.28)

(0.30)

(0.28)

(0.35)

(0.35)

(0.35)

3.26

3.36

3.21

3.40

3.24

3.31

3.38

(0.11)

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.12)

(0.14)

(0.14)

(0.15)

4,323

4,260

3,984

4,599

2,843

2,880

2,860

0.16

0.84

0.32

0.41

0.70

0.72

Notes: Sample of individuals in the fourth quartile of the initial debt amount ($13,350–$149,738). Average individual (pre-treatment) characteristics by treatment group, with standard errors in parenthesis.
Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen
to receive a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Financial Reminder is a
dummy that takes the value 1 if the letter included information about the financial penalties and 0 if not.
Peer Information corresponds to the value of the weighting parameter used to select the delinquents to
be listed in the table shown to the recipient. The p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis
that the average characteristics are the same across all treatment groups. The initial debt amount corresponds to the amount owed when the subject pool was formed (May 26, 2014). Gender and ethnicity
are not observed directly. Data for these characteristics is imputed using data on the joint distribution
of first names and gender (several sources, including data from the U.S. Census Bureau), and the joint
distribution of last names and ethnicities (data from U.S. Census Bureau). The omitted category for
gender is male, and the omitted category for ethnicity corresponds to unmatched last names.

xix

Table C.6: Robustness Check: Heterogeneous Effects of Higher Visibility
Dep. Var: Dummy Exited List After 10 Weeks

Higher Visibility

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2.081∗∗∗
(0.725)

1.919∗∗∗
(0.732)

2.012∗∗∗
(0.773)

2.013∗∗∗
(0.773)

2.063∗∗∗
(0.724)

1.984∗∗∗
(0.718)

-2.201∗∗
(0.875)

-1.982∗∗
(0.886)

-2.113∗∗
(0.941)

-2.114∗∗
(0.942)

-1.890∗
(1.102)

-1.749
(1.078)

-0.705∗
(0.385)

-0.770∗
(0.423)

-0.794∗
(0.426)

-0.178
(0.421)

-0.417
(0.561)

Interaction with:
Dummy Top-3 Debt Quartiles

County Income (STD)

County Credit Score (STD)

County Social Capital (STD)

-0.320
(0.547)

Debt Age (STD)

Sample
Observations

-0.316
(0.586)
All

All

All

All

KY

KY

34,334

34,334

34,334

34,334

18,101

18,101

Notes: N=34,334. * significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level, *** at the 1% level. Standard errors in parentheses,
clustered at the 5-digit ZIP code level. The coefficients were estimated from OLS regressions (one per column) where the
dependent variable takes the value 100 if the subject is not listed as a delinquent 10 weeks after the letters were delivered and
0 otherwise. Higher Visibility is a dummy that takes the value 0 if the recipient was the only one in the area chosen to receive
a letter, and 1 if others in the area were chosen to receive a letter too. Dummy Top-3 Debt Quartiles is a dummy that takes
the value 1 if the initial debt amount is in the top three quartiles (i.e., amounts between $2,273 and $149,738). All variables
with (STD) have been standardized to take mean zero and standard deviation 1. County Income is the mean gross income
at the ZIP-5 level based on data from 2012 IRS SOI. County Credit Score is the share of the county population with a credit
score below 660 according to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Equifax data for the second quarter of 2014. County
Social Capital is a county-level measure of social capital based on density of civic and non-profit organizations, voting turnout
and census completion rates as of 2005 (Rupasingha et al., 2006). All regressions control for the other treatment dummies (for
financial reminder and peer information), a gender dummy, ethnicity dummies, state dummies, initial debt amount, its quartile
dummies and its logarithm (with state-specific coefficients) and the number of delinquents in the ZIP code. For each interaction
with higher visibility, the specifications always include the interacted variable on its own. See notes to Figure 1 for more data
definitions.

xx

D

A Simple Model of Social Signaling and Tax Collection

There is a continuum of taxpayers indexed by subscript i, who each have a tax responsibility
of size di . There are two periods. In the first period, the individual can either pay the tax due
(xi = 1) or not pay it (xi = 0) and as a result become a tax delinquent. Some individuals are
liquidity constrained, so that paying taxes in the first period will not allow them to conduct
their lives normally (e.g., eat, keep their businesses alive, pay medical bills). To represent this
preference for paying later, we assume that paying in the first period has a cost of Ri · di with
Ri > 1 uniformly distributed between R and R. The government does not observe each Ri ,
although it knows how this variable is distributed in the population. For individuals who did
not pay in their first period, the effective debt at the second period will be F · di , where F > 1
is the size of the financial penalty.
If the individual refuses to pay in the second period, the government will try to force the
payment using some collection tool. For example, the creditor can force payments of wage
earners through wage garnishment. However, the collection tool is imperfect: an individual
expects to be immune with probability 1 − qi ∈ [0, 1]. As a result, debtor i expects to pay
qi · F · di in the second period. We allow for heterogeneity in qi : a proportion θ ∈ (0, 1) of the
population expects its income to be “garnishable” with probability qi = q, and the remaining
1−θ expects to be garnishable with probability qi = q ≥ q. One easy interpretation is that 1−θ
is the share of future wage earners, from whom it is easier to garnish income. The government
knows the distribution of qi but does not observe the qi of each individual.
For the sake of simplicity, we assume that both di and qi are always observable to one’s
peers (this assumption does not change the results qualitatively, but does make the model
considerably more tractable). Whether the individual is a tax delinquent is observable to peers
with probability p, which is a parameter under the control of the tax agency. The creation of
an online list of tax delinquents can be seen as an increase from p = 0 to some p > 0. Further
steps, such as including a search tool or advertising the list of delinquents, can increase p even
further. We assume that increasing p has no significant costs. This simplifying assumption is
for the purposes of clarity: even though adding a cost would lead to a lower use of the policy,
it would not change the main qualitative results that follows.
To model how the shaming penalty affects the decision to pay taxes, we take a signaling approach to social interactions (Cole, Mailath and Postlewaite (1992); Bernheim (1994); Bénabou
and Tirole (2006, 2011)). According to this framework, individuals may avoid anti-social behavior because that may signal untrustworthiness. In our model, taxpayers interact with peers
after deciding whether to pay the tax or not. The individual’s utility from these interactions
depends on her peers’ perception about her financial trustworthiness. This value of reputation
xxi

may be instrumental (e.g., through a higher likelihood of obtaining an invitation, a job/business
opportunity, a romantic/friendly proposal) or purely affective (e.g., social esteem as an hedonic
good). To represent this, we assume that the utility of the individual is a linear function of
her expected financial trustworthiness, from the perspective of her peers: −η · E [Ri |Ii ], where
Ii is the observable information about i and η is a parameter that scales the value of social
interactions. With probability p ∈ [0, 1], Ii includes whether the individual paid her taxes in
the first period.
The expected utility from social interactions can be re-expressed as:

−Ri · di · xi − (1 − xi ) · [qi · F · di + p · η · (E [Ri |xi = 0] − E [Ri |xi = 1])] + η · (1 − p) ·

R+R
2

The term p · η · (E [Ri |xi = 0] − E [Ri |xi = 1]) is the signaling cost from failing to pay taxes
in the first period. That is, increasing the visibility of the decision to pay taxes makes paying on
time more attractive, because failing to pay on time can serve as a bad signal of trustworthiness
and thus result in worse outcomes in social interactions (see for example Gerber et al., 2016).
Note that the key assumption is that peers only care about the individual’s financial health
(Ri ), in which case the value of the non-market good, η, does not vary with the debt amount.
Combining the financial and social incentives, the individual solves the following maximization problem:
max U (xi ; qi , di , Ri ) , with

xi ∈{0,1}

U (xi ; qi , di , Ri ) = −Ri · di · xi − (1 − xi ) · [qi · F · di + p · η · (E [Ri |xi = 0] − E [Ri |xi = 1])] +
+ η · (1 − p) ·

R+R
2

Let the debtor’s optimal response be denoted x∗ (q, d, R) = arg maxx∈{0,1} U (x; q, d, R). This
optimal response can be characterized as a threshold decision:
h

i

x∗ (q, d, R) = 1 R ≤ R̂ (q)

Assuming all taxpayers are responding like this, we can obtain the rational inference from
the perspective of peers:
E [Ri |xi = 1] =

R + R̂
and E [Ri |xi = 0] =
2
xxii

R̂+R
2

Replacing that back into the objective function:

"

#

R−R
R+R
U (xi ; qi , di , Ri ) = −Ri · di · xi − (1 − xi ) · qi · di · F + p · η ·
+ (1 − p) · η ·
2
2
Thus, individual i chooses xi = 1 iff:
R̂ (di , qi ) = qi · F + p ·

η R−R
·
di
2

Which
confirms
our guess that the

optimal response consists of the cutoff decision R̂(q, d) =


max R, min q · F + p ·

η
d

·

R−R
,R
2

. As expected, the proportion of individuals paying in

the first period is decreasing in the financial penalty (F ) and in the shaming penalty (p). The
effect of the financial penalty on the threshold does not change with the debt amount: i.e.,
∂ 2 R̂(d)
= 0. This property arises directly from the fact that the financial penalty is proportional
∂F ∂d
to the debt amount. The social penalty, on the other hand, is decreasing in the debt amount:
2 R̂(d)
i.e., ∂∂p∂d
= − dη2 · R−R
< 0. Intuitively, the cost of obtaining the non-market good (i.e., paying
2
off the debt) is increasing in the debt amount but the benefit of obtaining the non-market
good (η) is constant. This property arises from the assumption that peers only care about the
individual’s financial health (Ri ).

xxiii

